Wednesday, 28 February 2007

(The Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate Gen. Tumwine for a celebrating Heros’ Day, on which he received a lot of publicity.  Congratulations!

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY TO ABIDE BY THE SPIRIT OF THE CESSATION OF HOSTILITIES AGREEMENT AS THEY EXPLORE AVENUES TO RESUME PEACE TALKS

(Debate Continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember yesterday we debated this motion, but we could not pronounce ourselves on it because Government wanted to present a statement by the Minister who is in charge of the talks in Juba.  I wonder whether he is here to make his statement.  

2.45
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I want to apologise, hon. Rugunda is on his way.  As you know Uganda has many problems, including traffic jams.  These are ubiquitous.  So, I ask you to continue with the general debate and I am sure he will be here anytime.  But I want to apologise because he should have anticipated problems, which are very many.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Since I cannot now introduce in another business, I will allow only two contributions, if any, to continue with the debate while we wait for Dr Rugunda.  Is there any Member who wants to make a contribution on the motion?

2.46
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Mr Speaker, I would like to talk for the children of Uganda and specifically for those of Northern Uganda.   When the talks began, we were all excited.  We knew peace was at the doorstep.  But when the talks stopped, we were all baffled and taken aback.  

I remember at the beginning of the Eighth Parliament, the children’s forum- and Mr Speaker, you know it very well- sent a mission to the North.  We visited the IDP camps and talked to the elders of the area. We talked to the district leaders; we also talked to the children in places where they were being looked after.  We went to the World Vision Centre, community centres, schools and visited traditional leaders. They were all crying out for peace.  The parents, especially mothers were crying, “Where are our children who were abducted?” There is an estimated figure of about 20,000 children who were abducted.  

When we went to the North, we were told by the UPDF that they had been able to rescue about 17,000.  Where are the rest, the unaccounted for children?  We all want to know what has happened to our children.  When this kind of scenario happens, we get heartbroken.  

As Ugandans we are all concerned about these children. We are demanding that LRA releases our children, the women and non-converts.  We would like to request those involved, especially the delegations, which are interfacing with Kony group, please deliver this message to them.  Release the children and the mothers; they have suffered a lot.  Enough is enough.  

They may have their own agenda but the children have no agenda.  They have never enjoyed life. They have never been to schools.  We want these children to enjoy their childhood.  When we were young, we used to have the best time in the world. When I sit back and look at the days when I was a child, I really enjoyed my childhood.  I know each one of you here enjoyed his or her childhood.

I would like to request the leader of our delegation to let women also accompany him. We also want to get our voices heard.  Maybe Kony wants to hear women members of Parliament and other women in the civil society talk.  We can organise ourselves and hire a bus to take us to Juba. We shall go –(Interjection)- a colleague here says we can even hire a plane.  I know Parliament can assist us. 

In conclusion, I support the motion.  We would like these talks to be resumed as soon as possible.  Let us be tolerant. Let us all take responsibility as leaders. 

I would like to request, Mr Speaker, if you can allow me to make a short prayer so that the Lord can touch the hearts and the minds of these people who are going to join these negotiations.  Can I please say a short prayer?  Am I allowed?

HON MEMBERS: No.

MS TUMA: Why not -(Laughter)- this is a special prayer for the negotiators to make their minds focused, to make them calm and also the children whose hopes have been shuttered, to be calm, to be expectant that good things are to come.    

THE SPEAKER: As a way of contribution, you can say your prayer. We shall listen.

MS TUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May the Lord bless all of us as we debate this motion. We know everybody is with us and we pray that we have peace and Kony agrees to resume talks. Thank you very much.

2.53
MR MUGARRA KABAGAMBE (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Amongi for this motion.  All through this debate, since yesterday, I heard a number of Members make contributions, and our colleagues on the other side were giving the impression that this side would not support this motion because many who spoke were literary pleading with us to support the motion. Yet I have not heard any dissenting voice from this side.

I support this motion and I would like to propose some amendments. The amendment I am proposing is on the Resolutions. No.1. My understanding is that perhaps this House has not before participated or pronounced itself in support of the peace initiative in Northern Uganda. That is why I would like to add on the word, “Continue to support” so that the sentence reads thus, “This House expresses its continued support” to recognise that earlier efforts had been in place.

I would also like to propose an amendment to No.3. The reports we have are that LRA is the one that has actually abandoned the talks. Government has continued its willingness to talk peace. 

I would, therefore, like to propose that the sentence reads: “This House urges the LRA to resume talks – not parties, because one party has been consistent and it has never changed. 

I would also like to request that this House pronounces itself on the venue because the venue has also been an issue that LRA has talked about. 

I would also like this House to reassert itself in support for Juba as the venue, so that the sentence reads, “This House urges the LRA to resume the talks in Juba.” I beg to move those amendments.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the talks are one sided? I think the talks involve parties.

MR MUGARRA: Yes, Mr Speaker, but this resolution presupposes that – because it says the House urges the parties to resume. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, because they are not talking.

MR MUGARRA: But is it the only party that abandoned -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Well, you have heard the amendments and maybe let me ask the mover. What do you say about these amendments?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not the right time to move an amendment because we are waiting for a statement from the leader of the delegation, and they have indicated that they also have amendments thereafter. So, it would be prudent to continue with the debate and react later.

2.57
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. One time I attended a political rally and the minister who was present then asked what the cost of the war in Northern Uganda was to the people of Uganda. 

We also discovered that a lot of resources that could have been going to meaningful development into the transformation and meeting of the Millennium Development Goals were being diverted to fighting a war that has kept the people of Northern Uganda into abject poverty.

Mr Speaker you recall that in the Sixth Parliament a motion was moved in this House to inquire into the war in Northern Uganda. Mr Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament, you yourself lead a delegation and constituted a delegation that went to find out what was happening in Northern Uganda and this Parliament passed a resolution urging Government that Northern Uganda be declared a disaster area. All this was being done in recognition of the suffering of our people and trying to be part of the solution by urging all parties that were involved into the crisis to find a meaningful solution. 

I want to appreciate the efforts of Government, because given the statements we have been hearing in the past and what it has taken to find that Government accepted to participate into dialogue to find peace in Northern Uganda, it was something that must be appreciated and encouraged.

We also want to thank the head of Government for the magnanimity especially when he went to the extent of flying Kony’s relatives as a way of inducing him to seeing that people of Northern Uganda were suffering and wanted peace -(Applause)

As a Parliament, in principle we cannot do much apart from urging the parties that are participating in these talks to ensure that they do what it takes, to ensure that we restore peace in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, during that visit which you constituted yourself in the Seventh Parliament, we did ask our colleagues: Can you imagine a child in Northern Uganda who is in the camps, that he may be condemned to being nothing but a security guard in the future? And would he be comfortable to guard your own son, a managing director of a corporation? He is only problem is that he was born in Northern Uganda where there was insurgency, so his chances were crippled and your son’s success was because he was born in area where there was no insurgency.

We should take collective care and urge the parties that are responsible and concerned that this world belongs to all of us, and the children of Uganda must be seen to be benefiting and enjoy the prospects of this world and there must be peace everywhere. So, we thank Government for what it has done so far and we urge everybody that we must do what it takes to ensure that peace return to Northern Uganda. I support the motion. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can we get a statement from Dr Rugunda.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.01
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I must apologise that I delayed and I thank you for your indulgence. This is a statement to this august House on the peace talks between the Government of Uganda and the Lords Resistance Army. It is also in pursuit of the motion moved yesterday by hon. Amongi. In a way it is a contribution to the debate.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we recall that the peace talks between Government of Uganda and Lords’ Resistance Army – Mr Speaker, I should also mention that copies are coming and again I seek your indulgence that I make this contribution. I thank you.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, we recall that the peace talks between Government of Uganda and Lords’ Resistance Army opened in the Southern Capital of Juba on 14th of July last year, and His Excellency General Salva Kiir Mayardit, the first Vice President of Sudan and President of the government of Southern Sudan, officiated at the official opening. 

The Government of Southern Sudan appointed a committee of ministers to mediate in the talks and that committee was chaired by His Excellency the Vice President of the government of Southern Sudan, Dr Riek Machar and had other ministers of Government. 

Honourable members, we in addition recall that the talks were being facilitated by a number of organisations especially Pax Christi of Netherlands and St Gideon of Italy and that this process is supported by a number of countries as well, some of which have made financial contributions to support the government of Southern Sudan in its role of hosting the peace talks.  

Mr Speaker, over time the talks have attracted many observers many of them have been to Juba on a number of occasions. The Government delegation has held talks with them. Some of them made presentations during the plenary meeting of the peace talks, and I would like to point out here that in Juba we were extremely delighted that honourable members of this august House came to give support to the process. It was not only one small group, but a diverse one comprising of leaders from the affected areas led by hon. Betty Amongi and a number of other members of Parliament.  

There were also members of the Acholi Parliamentary Group, led by hon. Okello-Okello and there’s was a big contingent comprising of among others the Leader of the Opposition, Prof. Ogenga Latigo, I believe in his double capacity as a Member of the Acholi Parliamentary Group and also as Leader of the Opposition. We had very useful discussions with these groups, and in all those discussions, we all agreed on a common way forward. As I said before, Ugandans spoke with one voice in search for peace in Northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, members will also recall that in order to support the talks, His Excellency President Museveni visited Juba on 21st of October. During his visit, he discussed the peace process with the President of the government of Southern Sudan, Salva Kiir and his Vice Riek Machar and other senior officials. 

President Museveni also addressed both, the Uganda Government and the Lord’s Resistance Army delegations. He in addition addressed a special session of the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly. In all these discussions, he re-stated Uganda Government’s commitment to the peace process.  

Mr Speaker, the talks followed a five item on the agenda, and for purposes of recapitulation the agenda items were: 
1.	Cessation of hostilities; 
2.	Comprehensive solutions; 
3.	Reconciliation and accountability; 
4.	Formal ceasefire agreement; 
5.	Demobilisation, disarmament and re-integration.  

On 26th of August, we disposed off agenda item No.1 when we signed the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. The agreement came into effect on 29 August 2006 and the essential elements of the agreement included: 
1.	The cessation of hostility, including hostile propaganda; 
2.	Surfacing and assembling of all LRA forces in agreed assembly areas, 
3.	Provision of safe passages to Lord’s Resistance Army forces when going to assemble.  
4.	Setting up of a Cessation of Hostilities Monitoring Team and the terms of the monitoring team were also specified. General Odeng of the SPLA led this monitoring team.  
5.	Provision of food and service support to the LRA at the assembly areas; and Caritus of Uganda, an NGO which has been doing a lot of work in Northern Uganda was agreed upon by LRA, ourselves and also the government of Southern Sudan to carry out the supply of food and other essential items, a job which they have done very well.
6.	There was also a provision on review and renewal of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. 
7.	Implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement experienced some problems. 

The problems were that the LRA did not assemble as expected. Actually when we signed the agreement they showed up and linked up with UPDF and even went to the UPDF detaches, churches and other areas. The UPDF and civilian population helped them with provisions.  However, when they reached Sudan, they did not go to the assembly areas as they were expected.

Secondly, there were some people who tried to supply them with food when they were not in assembly areas and that contravened the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.

Mr Speaker, in view of these problems we reviewed the agreement and signed an addendum to the agreement on 1 November 2006 and we called it Addendum 1. The addendum was intended to remedy the weaknesses detected in the implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. 

The main features of Addendum No.1 were as follows:

There should be no supply of food and service support to LRA outside assembly areas, as this would discourage them from going to the assembly areas. 

Definite demarcation of assembly areas and the provision of areas separating the LRA and UPDF buffer zones should be put in place. The buffer zones are under the control of the SPLA.

 We also agreed that there should be strengthening of the Cessation of Hostilities Monitoring Team, and here Mr Speaker, I must commend the UN that provided helicopters and personnel to assist the Cessation of Hostilities Monitoring Team to carry out its work.

On 16 December 2006, the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement was once again reviewed and Addendum No. 2 was signed. AddendumNo.2 reinforces the agreement and Addendum No. 1. In addition, it extended the cessation of hostilities up to the end of February, which happens to be today. Immediately after disposing off agenda item No. 1 we embarked on agenda item No. 2, Comprehensive Solutions. By 22 December 2006, we had virtually completed the discussion of this item. 

Although at the beginning of the peace talks the two delegations were far apart and at times acrimonious in the course of the discussions, we got closer and closer to such an extent that we were able to meet together without the mediator and iron out a number of sticky issues. After that the mediator would then be informed to convene a plenary session at which both delegations would make a joint report on what had been agreed upon for endorsement by the entire plenary session.

The two joint reports that were made to the plenary session were presented by, Mr Ayena Odong of the Lords’ Resistance Army. The Uganda Government delegation was, therefore, surprised when at the last minute the Lords’ Resistance Army refused to sign off agenda item No. 2. They brought back issues that had earlier been disposed off. These included:

1.	They wanted a change in the preamble of the draft agreement and in the preamble they wanted to include the point that there was genocide in Northern Uganda. They also wanted Northern Uganda to be declared a disaster area.

2.	They wanted holding of a national referendum on the Federal System of Government two years after the signature of the final peace agreement in Juba.

3. 	That there should be set up a Bank for the reconstruction of Northern Uganda, that would control a multi-donor trust fund for the North.

4. 	They wanted setting up of an autonomous body for the implementation of the Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda, which would be controlled principally by people that were selected by the Lords’ Resistance Army.

5. 	Last but not least, they called for setting up of a fully-fledged ministry headed by a full cabinet minister from Northern Uganda to oversee the reconstruction of the North. This minister would only be answerable to the President and not the Rt Honourable Prime Minister- (Laughter).

6. The talks went into recess on the 22 December 2006. This was to allow the two delegations to consult their respective principals on the issues that had been mentioned above. We were, therefore, surprised when the Lords’ Resistance Army delegation in early January 2007 announced their rejection of the mediation of Government of Southern Sudan and their wish for the talks to be shifted and taken to Kenya, South Africa and possibly Italy. 

7. Since the announcement by the Lords’ Resistance Army, Uganda Government has exchanged and continues to exchange information on this matter with the government of Southern Sudan and even with the Lords’ Resistance Army. Government’s position is that the talks should continue in Juba under the mediation of the government of Southern Sudan. We are satisfied with the arrangements that have been made by the government of Southern Sudan and the way the talks have been mediated. 

8. 	Government respects the spirit and the terms of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. Consequently, Government will not initiate any attack on the Lords’ Resistance Army. However, if the Lords’ Resistance Army tries to re-enter Uganda to disturb, harass or to attack the people of Uganda, the UPDF will carry out its constitutional responsibility- (Laughter)- of defending the people of Uganda and will decisively deal with such a situation. 

9. Members of the Lord’s Resistance Army, who wish to abandon rebellion and return home and benefit from the Amnesty Law, are encouraged and they are welcomed to do so. They will be accordingly assisted to benefit from the Amnesty Law. 

	Mr Speaker and honourable members, let me assure you and the people of Uganda and indeed the international community that Government is fully committed to the peace talks. We are doing everything possible to ensure an early resumption of the peace talks. We are also working for a quick and peaceful resolution of the insurgency so that people currently living in IDP camps can go back to their villages to resume normal life. 

	We also want the Lord’s Resistance Army to come back and be reintegrated into normal and productive life. This will help to expedite rehabilitation of the affected areas through the Peace Recovery and Development Plan for Northern Uganda and the areas of Eastern Uganda that have been affected by the insurgency.  

10. 	It is true that there is a regional dimension to the insurgency of LRA. The Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Central African Republic are part of this regional situation. The Uganda Government is in contact with all the three countries with a view of securing an amicable solution at the insurgency. We have appealed to Sudan, the DRC and Central African Republic to play a constructive role in the peace process. 

On the issue of ICC, Members may recollect how the 5 members of Lord’s Resistance Army were indicted and warrants of arrest issued by the ICC. The Government of Uganda continues to work closely with ICC to ensure that it fulfils its obligations to the Rome Statue. 

The Government is of the view that when a final peace agreement is signed with Lord’s Resistance Army, Government will work closely with ICC to ensure that the alternative methods of justice, e.g. Mato put are used to address the issue of impunity and justice. 

At the international level, honourable members will recall that His Excellency, Joachim Chisssano was appointed United Nation Secretary General Special Envoy to the LRA affected areas. Coordination of international pressure on LRA for peace is necessary. This coordination action will ensure peace in the region. Government is pleased to note that His Excellency Chissano is carrying out his duties and he is already in this region. We expect him to be in Uganda within the next few days, again in pursuit of peace in the region.  

Paragraph 19, for those who have received the copies of the document - since the peace process began, it has received a lot of support from both the local and international communities. It has united Ugandans irrespective of their political differences. This has been very encouraging to Government and to the other countries.  You will recall, honourable members, that Parliament passed a resolution, supporting the peace process and peace talks. Government is highly appreciative of this, and we salute you for that timely and solid support for the peace process. 

The general population in the country, the civil society, cultural, traditional and religious leaders, and the international community have supported the peace process as I have said. The support has re-assured us that indeed, Government is on the right truck. 

It is true that implementation of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement has not been perfect. The agreement has, however, yielded a number of positive results, which include the surfacing and moving out of Uganda by the LRA operatives who, before the agreement, were hiding in Uganda and terrorising the population.  Since they left, the population has gained more confidence and feel more secure to be able to go back to their villages. As security in the region is consolidated, and as more and more services are re-established, more people will go back to their villages and indeed we encourage them to do so. 

It would not have been easy to get this far without the initiative that was taken by the government of Southern Sudan.  The Government of Southern Sudan has invested financial and human resources and given full support to the process to ensure that there is successful and peaceful conclusion of the talks. The Government and the people of Uganda will always be grateful for the generous gesture of solidarity and support that the people of Southern Sudan have extended to Uganda. 

In conclusion, Government remains committed to expeditious resumption of the peace talks so that the peace agreement can be concluded.  This will enable our people in IDP camps to return to their villages and rebuild their lives. This will further enable the urgently required rehabilitation and development of the insurgency-affected areas of the country to be accelerated. 

Government strongly urges the Lord’s Resistance Army to recommit itself to the peace process by returning to the negotiation table in Juba and resuming the peace talks so that we can conclude the peace agreement.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much honourable Minister for the statement.  Honourable members, the statement does not contradict the gist of the motion. Since I do not see other people wanting to make contributions, is it not proper that I put the question?

3.28
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Having listened to the comprehensive statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs, and since debate on this motion has been formally closed, I, therefore, beg to move amendments to the motion moved by hon. Betty Amongi. 

I am pleased to report to you, Sir, and to the honourable members that I have contacted hon. Amongi and she has expressed full support for my amendments. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My understanding is that, hon. Betty Amongi yesterday read the heading of our motion – I don’t think she read the text of the motion. The text of the motion and the proposed resolutions are not on our records. So I think, procedurally, before the honourable minister stands up to amend what to me is not there, the member should read in detail what she wants to propose, and then the honourable minister can amend.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think she did and concentrated on the last part of the resolutions. But as you may appreciate, the mover herself was aware that there is an amendment coming in, so, if they have agreed, why don’t we hear what they want to fix in and then we continue? Is it the case – because the minister said that he contacted you?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, yesterday I tried to substantially move the content of the motion, but you guided that I justify. So, I still do believe that it would be prudent and procedurally right for me to move the original motion. It is on the basis of the original motion that the amendments can come.

THE SPEAKER: No, the people debated the motion. You moved a motion, they had a copy of the written text of your motion and they debated it. What we should do, since you have your copy, and maybe he has a written one, let us see where he wants to make the amendment and then we shall read it. It is better that way.

MS AMONGI:  Mr Speaker, my only concern is that the text is not in the Hansard, but if I can be assured that the motion will be recorded in the Hansard, there is no problem.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I propose to amend the heading of the motion to read that, “Motion for Resolution of Parliament on the Juba Peace Talks”. 
The justification for this amendment is to make the subject of this resolution broader, rather than limiting it to the concept of Cessation of Hostility Agreement – I seek your guidance, Sir. I don’t know whether to read one amendment at a time or –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You just read your amendments.

MR MWESIGE: Okay. My second amendment is on paragraph one of the preamble. I propose the following amendment: 
“WHEREAS, since July, 2006, the government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army have been negotiating in Juba, Southern Sudan, with the aim of resolving -” I propose to replace the ward “War” with “The insurgency in Northern Uganda through peaceful means”. 

Mr Speaker, our understanding of the conflict in Northern Uganda has not actually been a war, within the meaning of Article 54 of the Constitution. It has been an insurgence. Therefore we thought the right terms should be used in this resolution. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable mover, what do you say about this?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, because it does not substantially alter the substance, I concede. 

MR MWESIGE: I am much obliged, hon. Amongi. My third amendment is on paragraph 4. I propose to amend it as follows: “AWARE that due to the Cessation of Hostility Agreement, LRA with the help of UPDF, local leaders and the population, moved from Northern Uganda into Southern Sudan, which resulted into relative peace in Northern Uganda.” The correction that we wish to make here is that it is not true that the LRA successfully moved to Owiny-Kibul. That is the deletion I wish to make.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, again it does not substantially alter – so, I concede.

MR MWESIGE: I paragraph 6, I propose to amend as follows: “CONCERNED that the cessation of hostilities agreement will expire today -” the original motion was talking of tomorrow, so this is to make the record right. It expires today, 28th February at a time when the negotiations have stalled between the two parties rendering it difficult for the parties to renew the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, and thus creating renewed fear among the people of Uganda. 

The effect of this amendment is to correct the date, but also, we thought the words “Shattering the hope for peace” are too strong for this situation. We thought the words “renewed fear among- not only the people of Northern Uganda but also all the people of Uganda are more appropriate for this paragraph.

THE SPEAKER: You said, “CONCERNED,” is it concern or you are noting the facts on the ground?

 MR MWESIGE: Well, I have no problem with the “CONCERNED,” but I would not have a problem with “NOTING” either.

THE SPEAKER: Because you are noting the fact – it is a fact.

MR MWESIGE: I have no object to your guidance, Sir.

MS AMONGI: I concede to the amendment.

MR MWESIGE: Paragraph 7, I propose to amend it with the following terms: “APPRECIATING that despite the stalemate in the talks, the government of Uganda has remained committed to the peace process and to the resumption of the peace talks, and is engaged in a series of confidence building measures to ensure that the peace talks resume as soon as possible”.

The justification for this amendment is contained in the minister’s statement. He demonstrated that e Uganda Government has remained committed to the peace process, and in fact the Minister has been in Juba several times even after the stalemate began. So, I thought paragraph 7 should be amended in those terms. 

MS AMONGI: I concede to the amendment.

MR MWESIGE: I propose to add three new paragraphs to the text of the motion. Paragraph 8 is to reflect the role of the Government of Southern Sudan in initiating, hosting, mediating and facilitating the peace talks. I beg to move.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Sir. It is an addition and I have no objection.

MR MWESIGE: I also propose to appreciate the role of other governments, the United Nations and civil society organisations. I beg to move.

MS AMONGI: No objection.

MR MWESIGE: I also move that the recently held summit on regional security in Nairobi, which enjoined governments in the region to work for collective collaborative security in the region, be noted. I beg to move.

MR WACHA: Sir, I really do not have any problem with the paragraphs, which the honourable minister is reading, but for my purposes, can he explain to me what paragraph 10 is.

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, sometime this year the regional governments in the Great Lakes Region met and committed themselves to support each other in ending insurgency in the region. The LRA and the Juba peace process was one of the issues, which was discussed in this summit. We thought that this commitment by the regional heads of state at the summit should be noted in this resolution as one of the initiatives aimed at creating lasting peace in Northern Uganda. We found no harm in noting it.  

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, two or three days ago, I read in the press a statement made by the President of DR Congo promising to deal with the LRA by other means. How does this relate to this statement? If the implication of the President’s statement meant that they were going to use forceful means, how does this help the peace process?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, it would have been a good thing for Government to, first of all, brief this House on what transpired in that regional security summit before we can quote it in this motion. We do not know what was really discussed in this summit now. On that note, I beg that paragraph 10 of the additional amendment be deleted.  Thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that recently there was a summit, actually in Nairobi, of regional leaders who were concerned about the turbulence that has tended to dominate the region. One of issues diagnosed was that countries tended to harbour rebels from their neighbouring countries and this caused tension among those countries concerned. 

Among the resolutions they passed was that the countries in the region should collaborate to ensure there is regional security, and they should avoid harbouring each other’s military opponents. This was what was referred to as collective and collaborative security in the region. Hon. Adolf Mwesige is really making reference to this. This improved cooperation in the region, peace process in Northern Uganda and the Juba peace talks. I thank you, Sir. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought the content of such magnitude should be brought in here and we all benefit in a formal procedure, rather than having it smuggled in the content of a motion.  

Two, Government is under obligation to notify Parliament of such important undertakings and commitments so that we are partners in this issue. To have just one sentence come out from a very big undertaking, I think would not be proper. You can imagine, all heads of states in the Great Lakes region were part of this commitment and now we are benefiting from it in just half a sentence. 

The other -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just to give you information, in this very summit there were document, which I personally saw, almost the size of a mini pamphlet. Looking through all the lines of the document at the regional summit on security, by summarily including this issue in the pre-amble, we wonder what value it may add. It may actually serve greatly to undermine the clean hands this Parliament should be having. 

My worry is, do not be surprised to see that in the next LRA meeting in Juba these documents may be used as an authority to find out the national position of all members of Parliament in Uganda. Since the purpose of the regional summit on security was not laid before this Parliament, it becomes very risky to adopt it even if we mean well.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, in the spirit of the consensus we have so far generated, I would not want just one item to paralyse the consensus that we have so far generated. I, therefore, abandon this proposal -(Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, continue with your document.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, honourable members, let us now move to the resolutions. There is no substantial disagreement, but we just want to change the text a little bit. I propose that this Parliament expresses its full support for the spirit –(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I had an amendment to the preamble. I do not know if this is the right time to bring it. I had also informed hon. Betty Amongi about it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. You wanted something else?

MR OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing my interjections. I want to add another preamble, which arises from page 4 of the minister’s statement.  I had given adequate notice to the traditional mover, hon. Betty Amongi. You are saying that Mr Ayena Odongo is the legal mind of the LRA delegation, and with our experience in Juba we also saw the way he handles his issues. So I wanted to move an amendment to the effect that this Parliament urges the NRM party leadership to use its influence over Odongo Ayena. (Laughter) 

Mr Odongo Ayena, who represents the LRA, is a party member. He stood for the NRM primaries in Oyam South for Parliament several times and won, and he is a member of the NRM National Conference. I was wondering if the NRM could use their network to ensure that Ayena brings results, even if he is on the LRA team. (Laughter) I wanted to add that.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, I think we should be able to separate accounts. I know the gentleman you are talking about as a professional. I think you will have to be able to separate professional matters from others. Otherwise, when you mix them then you cause a problem.

MR OTTO: I am most obliged, Mr Speaker, but it is up to NRM to use their necessary network. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You see, once you do that then you will erode the confidence Odongo’s client may have in him. It may be perceived that he does his professional work influenced by the opposite side. We do not want to hurt the interest of our friend, Ayena Odongo.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, in resolution No. 1, I move that this Parliament expresses its full support for the spirit and content of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement signed between the government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army on the 26th of August 2006. I have clarified who the parties are.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member is that okay?

MS AMONGI: Yes, but the honourable member had an amendment on this to include “continued”. I do not know whether he still wants to pursue it or not.

MR KABAGAMBE: I will still propose that it makes a difference if it is added, and it does not harm the resolution. I would like to propose that the word “continued” be put there to recognise the previous pronouncements of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it well placed? I think there is no problem with this one.

MS AMONGI: There is no problem with this one.

MR MWESIGE: In resolution No. 2, I move that this Parliament urges Government to continue with its commitment to the spirit of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and urges the LRA to similarly demonstrate commitment to the spirit of the agreement.

THE SPEAKER: It is a call to both parties. 

MS AMONGI: It is okay.

MR MWESIGE: Resolution No. 3, I beg to move that this Parliament urges the LRA to return to Juba, as the Minister did demonstrate in his statement, for peace talks, to enable the two parties to expeditiously conclude a peaceful settlement. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see from paragraph 13 of the honourable minister’s statement that Government’s position is that talks should continue in Juba under the government of Southern Sudan mediation. I understand the position of the government of Uganda in insisting on Juba, but I was waiting for a statement from the Minister as to why LRA is insisting against going back to Juba. I thought the honourable minister, having given us explanations on a number of areas on the peace talks, would have come and told us why LRA is insisting that they cannot go back to Juba.

MR DOMBO: I do support the spirit under which the government has made this proposal and I support it, but what if Kony offers to come to Kampala for peace talks and yet we have urged him to go to Juba; what will the implications of the proposal be?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think this issue of having talks in Uganda was something that was discarded a long time ago. You are saying, “Why not Kampala?” Definitely you are talking about the impossible. Let us be realistic and address this issue of Juba. The question is: does the Minister know why they do not want to be in Juba?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker, it would benefit this House if the Minister informed us what would hurt Government if the venue of the peace talks would change.

THE SPEAKER: No, anybody would see that. If the venue has been Juba, the logistics are in Juba, so shifting from one place to another would take time and we want this settlement to come as soon as possible. Definitely, it is obvious. If they continue with the venue they have been using for months, this issue will be handled expeditiously. Do you know the reason?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the point raised by my good friend, Ben Wacha, the pressure, in our own assessment that talks should move from Juba to other centres has essentially been from a number of non-governmental organisations. They have given different reasons, for example, better hotel facilities, better communication; a number of reasons have been given. 

As I mentioned before, there are three non-governmental organisations that have been spearheading this. The first one is Pax Christi of Netherlands. They have been spearheading the change of venue. They have even contacted us in Government a number of times and we have told them that they do not have good enough reasons to make Government change its position on Juba. The second group is called Africa Peace Point. This is an NGO based in Kenya. They sent a delegation to Uganda at the beginning of December, a two-man delegation, to persuade us to go to Kenya because of the improved facilities that are available in Nairobi and Mombasa and other centers. We did not think that those were strong enough reasons to change the venue from Juba.  

The third group is another NGO in Kenya, spearheaded by an Italian Priest, Father Kizito. It has also been pushing for talks to move. We do not think it prudent to move from the centre when the government of Southern Sudan is so committed to the talks. It is mediating the talks; it has invested resources in the talks; it has mobilised all the support it can; it has lost people, actually about 4,000 people have been killed by the LRA in southern Sudan. So, it is really very committed to the success of the process. It has put its whole Vice-President and ministers to mediate, and you move from that hospitable environment because you have been called by an NGO in the Netherlands or in Nairobi! We do not consider it prudent enough to be able to move. (Applause)

The point made by Ndugu Dombo about coming to Kampala, well, hon. Dombo we would be the happiest people for the talks to be in Kampala, but we hope that you can use your persuasive capacity to bring Joseph Kony, Vincent Otti and the others to Kampala. It is true there are enough hotel facilities, so we have no problem with the Lord’s Resistance Army agreeing that talks take place in Uganda. It does not have to be Kampala, it can be in Kidepo, Gulu or anywhere else and they will be more than welcome. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you contributing?

MR WACHA: Now that he has given that explanation, especially the last part of his explanation, taking into consideration paragraph 7 of the preamble to the honourable minister’s amendment, where Government is doing everything to build confidence for purposes of the peace talks; if we accept resolution No.3, which essentially closes up all other avenues except Juba, will he not be contradicting the aspect of confidence building for purposes of achieving peace?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we are aware that Government has been engaged in talks with the LRA. We are now getting information that the issue of change of venue is being spearheaded by NGOs, three of which the honourable minister has enlisted here. However, we have also been getting information that the LRA is not comfortable with continuing with the peace talks in Juba as a result of pronouncements of the Presidents of Sudan and Southern Sudan to deal with them and throw them out of Sudan –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: They did not say they are to throw them out now but should the talks fail, they are not going to tolerate them. That was the essence.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, talks involve parties and it is our prayer that the talks should be concluded peacefully. Why we pray for a meaningful conclusion of talks is that you never know the outcome. If one of the parties involved fears to continue with the talks, I thought that amendment that the honourable minister is bringing for this Parliament to pronounce itself on the talks to continue in Juba might be mocking us. Resolution No.3 in the motion as it stands, in my opinion, would probably be much better than us limiting ourselves to the amendment that the Minister is bringing.

THE SPEAKER: You are saying this by the original mover that, “This House urges the parties to resume talks and expeditiously reach a final conclusion with a peaceful settlement,” without dealing with the venue.  

DR EPETAIT: Precisely, Mr Speaker, I think we should not deal with the venue and let us carry resolution No.3 as it is stated in the motion that, “This House urges the parties to resume talks and expeditiously reach a final conclusion with a peaceful settlement.”

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues. There is something that honourable members are omitting. We are all aware that peace talks have been taking place in Juba. We are all aware that there is a group that went to Nairobi, and another one to the Central African Republic. Now the government of Uganda team is here waiting to be recalled by the mediator to resolve whatever issues are there. We now are talking about the expiry of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, which was signed in Juba. We want it to be amended; we want an addendum in Juba. 

Even if the LRA is to bring a motion to change venue, it has to be done in Juba and not in Kampala, Nairobi or the Central African Republic. The Government is urging the LRA to go back to Juba so that they can see what they can do on the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement that has expired. If there is need to change venue, it has to be pointed out in Juba. Currently it is Juba we have to talk about because there is no other venue that has been agreed upon. Therefore, I want to call upon my colleagues to really appreciate this. We cannot call upon the LRA to go to Nairobi, which we have not agreed on. We have to return to Juba to discuss and then agree.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to beg the indulgence of the House that let the people who do not want this paragraph move an amendment and we vote on it so that we can go to the gist of the matter -(Interjection)- yes, because we are talking about something that is expiring today -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: What is happening is this: there is an original motion and I have read that text, which is resolution No. 3; we have agreed on 1 and 2. The question was on 3. The original motion did not talk about any venue. It just kept quiet about it. Now the amendment by the minister, Adolf Mwesige is specific, it is talking about the venue. The thinking is that maybe we do not talk about the venue while we work on the minds of those who want to reject the venue and persuade them to accept Juba. That is how they are reasoning. Without mentioning it does not mean that we shall not go to Juba, but we continue – that is how I see them reasoning. We want to have a consensus.

4.00
THE MINSTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a logic that we should follow because of the situation, which we have gone through and what the Minister, hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, has stated. Juba came to be the place where these talks started. 

But secondly, and I would like this message to go to the LRA themselves, it is not in the interest of the LRA for the venue to change and for the same reason that the LRA are in Sudan. If you antagonise a host who has not only been hosting the talks but also the rebels, you actually incur a very dangerous mistake. Because what it could mean, and I am using my own simple logic is that if you alienate the Southern Sudan Government, and it mobilises its people and forces against LRA, what will happen to the LRA in Southern Sudan? Is it not logical if you are looking for peace that where you are hiding, where you are fighting from remains favourable? So, it is historically illogical for the LRA to want to move out of Juba just in case Southern Sudan were to turn against them.

Secondly, the international community has been seeing Juba; they have contributed to Juba; they have seen a solution coming sooner. If the international community were also to turn against the LRA, where there appears to be even some sympathy that has developed, you are likely to even get into greater trouble. So, to me a message should go to the LRA to tell them that they should keep in Juba for the interest – they should operate in Juba for the conclusion of the talks. 

MR AKENA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the reasons, which the honourable minister gave concerning the venue of Juba, there is one important reason, which was not raised and it is a reason, which has come up quite frequently within the peace talks and that concerns the deployment of the UPDF in Southern Sudan. The LRA have consistently raised concern and this House would benefit from a statement from the side opposite as to the status of the deployment of the UPDF in Sudan. I am not sure but my understanding is that the protocol has not been renewed for some time and that causes a bit of ambiguity on what is happening, which has been a major problem concerning the assembly of the LRA and their return to Juba. So, if the side opposite could make a clarification on that one, we will all benefit. 

4.11
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am one of those citizens of this country who discovered Kony in Garamba –(Laughter) We reported to His Excellency the President about our discovery and he was very grateful. But there are two issues: resuming the peace talks and where to resume them from is our concern. Down there in Northern Uganda; the situation is that we want peace as an immediate outcome. Where the peace talks are held is not the problem. Otherwise the suffering people of Northern Uganda are blaming Government for being tricky because this delay according to the wanaichi down there is based on the military behaviour, which is not very good. This matter has been reported to the President.

I raised that group in Nairobi and Ayena Odongo Chrispus told me that they are not going to accept talking peace in Juba because of two issues: 

One, the UPDF being constantly deployed where the LRA was supposed to assemble and when they complain, nobody listens to them. 

Secondly -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. Recently I was in Yei in Southern Sudan and because of some medical problems I had to run to a UPDF detach close to the airport to ask for medication. While there I met several tribesmen, Ugandans and soldiers in huge numbers at Yei airport. They were not only uncomfortable with an MP asking for medication but they knew that I would do what I am doing right now -(Laughter)- tell Parliament that I found UPDF forces in Yei, Southern Sudan. So, I found them personally -(Laughter)

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto for your information. Mr Speaker, the second issue, which should be addressed seriously, is that when the two parties are negotiating, whether one party is very strong and the other is weak, why is it that we do not listen to what we may think is a weak party when it is complaining about certain conditions, which should be met? That is the reason the LRA are giving for not talking peace in Juba. 

So I think as the motion says, we are urging Government to lower down and accept to talk peace anywhere because we have the capacity, the donor community has the capacity to support us. Unless Uganda is saying we have no finance but the donor community is willing to support peace talks. I do not see the reason why we cannot, in the interest of peace for the people who are suffering, change and be flexible. Unless the donor community has said they are not going to support this move, we must also give the LRA a listening ear. Thank you very much. 

4.16
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I have understood these negotiations to have a mediator, to review issues of contention if they arise and I am wondering whether by discussing going back to Juba, which is an issue now of contention - whether we are not assuming the role of a negotiator. The hon. Minister, Ruth Nankabirwa told us that the government of Uganda and the LRA agreed on the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. I also believe that there are procedures that they follow if there are issues of contention that they need to revise. 

My thinking, therefore, is that we probably by going into the information and the details of a thing that is causing a bit of unease among the two parties in peace negotiations, it is assumed that the LRA and the Uganda Government unfortunately are equal partners. That is the assumption and that is why they come on the table and say they are negotiating. Now that that is the assumption, would we not rather continue to encourage them on areas where they have agreed on and in that case just stick to the text and ask them to devise mechanisms to go back to negotiate, to review the question of the venue if they want it reviewed? The Uganda Government is part of the actors and is an interested party. It is not easy for us now together as Uganda Government to dictate on the venue.

Mr Speaker, the procedural concern I have is whether by delving into the details of Juba we are not deviating from the little we would like to achieve and, therefore, taking sides with one party which will undermine our role as people who want to help in the confidence building process. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we need more debate. The issue is clear; we have agreed on almost 98 percent of the motion and now the issue is on resolution No. 3. One group says we name Juba, others say we keep quiet about the venue. Why do we not pronounce ourselves on this because there are no other arguments anyway?

4.19
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Even when we look at resolution No. 3, in a way of the old resolutions when the House is urging the parties to resume talks, it is in a way also affirming Juba because that is where the talks adjourned. But for emphasis, we should realise that one, we have a Government hosting the talks, we have a mediator mediating the talks and we have a venue, which is just a town. Suppose Juba is worrying everybody, we just mention Southern Sudan where all these three are. Would that not be a fair compromise?

THE SPEAKER: I do not see people moving from their positions. I think you have taken your position; there are those who insist that it must be in Juba, and those who oppose it. Why do we not – are there persuasive arguments?

4.21
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At this very difficult time I want to remind this House that the Rt. hon. Prime Minister yesterday said that this motion was primarily moved in good faith and we have been moving in good faith totally up to 98 percent. We are only disagreed on four letters, Juba, otherwise we shall have agreed unanimously. Why do we create sides by attempting to insert these letters, which are going to be injurious to the entire process? 

I also want to inform this House that we are not only urging the government’s negotiating team; we are only urging the two sides and that is the furthest we can go. We are not here to set new parameters or terms of reference if you like.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would urge my colleagues on the opposite side to agree with a simple amendment of just deleting Juba and we agree unanimously. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to read the resolutions so that we pronounce ourselves on these resolutions. What is going to happen for the mover is that the Hansard will capture your original motion, which you wrote and then it will be subjected to the amendments, which you have accepted. The Hansard will definitely reflect that but now we are going to pronounce ourselves on the three resolutions. As I see, you have agreed unanimously on the two but for formality I put the question on resolution No. 1.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on No. 2.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: On No. 3, there is an amendment to insert the town or capital known as Juba, but the original one did not mention Juba. So, I think we vote on the amendment.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the House - through your guidance - for the progress so far made in the quest for peace in Uganda. I really would like to thank hon. Ruganda and the negotiator for the way in which they have handled this matter; I am worried that if Parliament were the mediator if we would have progressed up to this level. The issue we are debating here is the issue of negotiation; it is a matter, which takes give and take, the spirit of persuasion, it is a matter of concessions. 

Therefore, it would be wrong for Parliament to restrict the negotiators and the mediator. I would, therefore, like to request that we take the earlier hon. Speaker’s position that we as Parliament support the spirit of peace talks but we do not go to the details of restricting –(Interjections)- I would want to request that since we have achieved a lot in as far as the whole text is concerned of the motion, and as far as the two resolutions are concerned, let Parliament support the spirit of the peace talks but we should not lose it by negating the whole intention by just the venue. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should vote.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to be very brief and to state something. Hon. Members of Parliament of Uganda, you are responsible for the people of Uganda and the people of Uganda need peace tomorrow. I want to tell this Parliament that numbers will not bring peace to this country. Consensus will bring peace; that is what I want this House to understand. 

MR BUTIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think even in law, and in the military, you must have an address. If you do not give us an address where these talks when resumed should take place, you will have killed these talks. I really request that the word “Juba” be maintained as an address where these talks are going to be resumed.

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, nobody in this House is trying to even suggest that we change this venue called Juba. At the time this motion was moved, we knew that the peace talks are taking place in Juba. Juba is one of the points of disagreement; there are so many as the Minister was reading and for us to only pick Juba and leave other points of disagreement as hon. Alaso said, we are trying to mingle ourselves in the negotiating team. I request that we do not pronounce ourselves on Juba, but at the back of our mind we know that the peace talks are taking place in Juba.

THE SPEAKER: I think we are moving in a circle. We are just repeating ourselves and the best way is to conclude this matter. I want to put the question that Juba be the venue for the peace talks.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: there are two positive abstentions, 40 negative abstentions, one against and those for are 87. The ayes have it.
             
(Question agreed to.)

MR OCULA: Mr Speaker, this is now my sixth year in this Parliament. We always have those voting for, those against or abstentions. Today, again I have got another term of –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: This is my eleventh year; it is your sixth year. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: I would like to appeal to - at this stage I do not know what stage it is after that amendment, that the decision we have taken will not inflame the initial contacts that are being made so that it is not perceived as a directive by this Parliament to a negotiating part of the team to get -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, please protect me. You are in the Chair and I would like to be protected.

THE SPEAKER: You have my protection 100 percent - an overwhelming protection.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that hon. Rugunda, the chief negotiator for us here knows that some of these things do not need to come out because there is a lot of informal activity that goes on before you arrive at the final outcomes that we celebrate about. My fear is that by seeming to direct we may even undermine the little that is probably being achieved in the informal setting. So, I pray that there be found a way in which this thing will be perceived more like supporting and appealing rather than directing. That is the only plea I make. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my view is that as the Prime Minister yesterday observed - and I want to thank the mover - the mover brought this motion in good faith and it was for a purpose not only to help the parties at negotiation but also to assist millions of our people who are suffering; they do not go to Juba; they will not go to Nairobi but they are suffering in the camps so that peace is restored. 

The message to the parties is that for us we are not so much concerned with Juba or any other venue but what we are concerned with is peace. (Applause) I think they may have subjective things but we are interested in peace for our entire country Uganda and we want them to talk peace not in a year; we want peace in a day or two or a month. Today we had hon. Tuma leading us in prayer; let us pray for the bending of these hearts of some of them so that they go back to negotiate and we get peace.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, having watched what has transpired; I have listened carefully to the statement made by the Leader of the government delegation. He has appreciated the efforts so far made by various parties, but I do understand that the UN Secretary-General also did appoint an envoy and this envoy that is also very high powered - I think it is former President, J. Chissano, has also made an effort to visit this country, Sudan in his effort to make his representation. I have not heard any comments or any reference towards a person of that character. May I be reminded -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It was there.

MR ODIT: Let the leader of the delegation remind me because according to some statement in Nairobi, even this envoy made some reference to the possibility of reviewing the position of the venue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The statement I made has a section on the UN envoy, and in fact the UN envoy, President Chissano is in the region and I did even indicate that he will be visiting Uganda within the next few days. So, the role of President Chissano is regarded as a very important development by Government. Government knows that President Chissano is very experienced leader and negotiator, especially having led Mozambique at the time when RENAMO and FRELIMO were at war but eventually arrived at a peace agreement under his leadership. So, this statement makes specific reference to President Chissano and we know that he is going to play a positive role and he will get maximum support and cooperation from Government. Please, refer to paragraph 18 of the statement that I made.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much.  

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We have voted on the resolutions 1, 2, and 3 of the motion. I was expecting that you would put the question for the House to pronounce itself.

THE SPEAKER: It is not necessary because what matters in the motion are the resolutions that have been passed. I so rule.

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have resolutions 1, 2, 3.  So, I am adding resolution 4.

THE SPEAKER: That will be next time, not now.

MR OKOT OGONG:  Mr Speaker, I have consulted with hon. Adolf Mwesige.

THE SPEAKER: No. You see it never belonged not to him, he was just amending and those are the only amendments we had.

4.46
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a matter of national importance –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: In the middle of a motion?

MS KAMYA: No. It is not in the middle.  Mr Speaker, I hope that when I have finished tabling it, Members will find that it is very important indeed.  But first, I am going to lay on the Table signed testimonies of the 13 PRA suspects, currently resident in Luzira Prison, who state that they are being forced to accept amnesty by the state as the only means through which they will get out of prison. Among the state agents they quote are members and employees of the Amnesty Commission, who include Mr Nathan Twinomugisha, Mariam Nabakoza and Abdulman Aguma, who went to see them on 13th February, and they told them that the only way they can get out of prison will be through accepting amnesty.  

THE SPEAKER: So, those are written complaints?

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, according to the suspects in prison, they are not feeling they are being forced to take amnesty. As far as we know there are only three categories of people according to the Amnesty Act who qualify for amnesty: those that have personally participated in acts of rebellion, those that are collaborators and those that participated in any acts for the furtherance of war and those that assisted in any form in the conduct of the war. These people, Mr Speaker, are before court arguing out their innocence. For the state to convince them to take amnesty defeats the spirit of the amnesty.

THE SPEAKER: Now, those are signed documents?

MS KAMYA: They are signed documents, Mr Speaker. These people are going to appear before court tomorrow, Thursday, 01 March 2007, but their problem is that they fear that a decision has already been taken that they cannot get a court decision because they are being forced to take amnesty. I find this a matter of serious –(Interruptions)- I am laying these documents on the Table. People have signed them; they are saying that the state is forcing them to take amnesty. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Member who claims that they are signed documents has laid them on the Table; it is a complaint against abuse of the Amnesty law. Now that we have got those documents, I direct that the Committee on Internal Affairs, which is in charge of administration of the Amnesty law, take up these documents to examine them and report back promptly.  

4.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. There is an issue that has persistently appeared; it was picked from the press and I would like the record to be corrected in the Hansard.  Because I am the one who convened that caucus meeting and I was present when the President made a statement; I also corrected this statement but it is unfortunate that the Opposition keeps on insisting that the President stated the way it was reported. 

The President did say that seeking amnesty is one of the options for those who want to get out of prison. If they do not want –(Interruptions)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, the hon. Beti Kamya came with documents and made a statement here regarding those documents, which she laid on the Table and at no one time did she mention the presidency. We are surprised that the Government Chief Whip is now coming up with another version. Is she in order to start putting words into the mouth of the hon. Beti Kamya, when she actually mentioned nothing to do with the President?

THE SPEAKER: I thought when she stood she said things that have been appearing in the newspapers even today she wanted to make a correction. That is the basis of the information.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, for your wise ruling. The President never said at anyone moment that the PRA suspects must seek amnesty in order to be released. He said that it was one of the options but if they do not, then the court case would continue.  Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your help.  I suppose the issues being referred to by the government Chief Whip took place in the NRM caucus. We also have our opposition caucus and matters of the opposition caucus have never been made matters of debate on this Floor. Unless if you, Mr Speaker, attended but if you did not, I am wondering how the hon. Princess Kabakumba expects the rest of us here to follow what happened in the NRM caucus when we are not members of the NRM? We have even no idea about the context! I seek your help, Mr Speaker, whether these matters of caucuses are not better left to the caucuses and defended in there?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, just a comment. My sister Beti Kamya has really raised a number of issues. I will just say that if it is forced amnesty, it cannot be amnesty because in the amnesty law, one must voluntarily say, “I accept amnesty” and in fact sign a document to declare that he has accepted. So, if it is forced amnesty it cannot be amnesty.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, my sister Beti has implied that the state has conspired with the Judiciary to say that the only way you can get out is through being forced to take amnesty. There is no such a conspiracy between the state and the Judiciary and I really want to assure colleagues and my sister Beti that the state awaits the decision of the Judiciary and will abide by it.

MS KAMYA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, once again. What I laid on Table is a document signed by the 13 PRA suspects who say that Government sends its operatives and puts pressure on them to sign amnesty. If I had been allowed to continue, I would have said that one of those sessions was actually witnessed by one of the defence lawyers of the suspects who slipped in unnoticed and is willing to testify to that.
  
Mr Speaker, I agree with the honourable minister that amnesty is supposed to be voluntary –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In your wisdom you have ruled on this matter of public importance and committed it to the relevant committee. Is it in order, for hon. Beti Kamya who has tabled this petition to open up a debate on an issue on which you have ruled? We are supposed to be proceeding to a matter of more importance, that is, of Kabale-Kisoro road, which people have been waiting for the last 20 years and yet this is the opportunity for this Parliament to pronounce itself on it. Is she in order?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a document has been received by Parliament and it is going to be used to investigate the claims made therein and any person who has information to assist the committee to which the document has been sent is welcome. They want this matter to be expeditiously handled and a report be made to us. We shall, therefore, revert to this later when we receive a report from the committee on the subject.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA 32,990,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AS A SUPPLEMENTARY LOAN FOR FINANCING KABALE - KISORO/BUNAGANA/KYANIKA ROAD

4.58
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, I previously laid on this Table a motion to authorise Government to borrow UA 32,990,000 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank for financing the Kabale-Kisoro / Bunagana / Kyanika road. The reason for this is that we had previously obtained UA 27.01 million for this road, but it was later found that this amount was not sufficient and so, it became necessary to find additional funds for this very important road. 

During the tendering process, substantive differences were realised between the engineers’ estimates of works and costs as upraised and the lowest evaluated tender prices. Both the government and the African Development Bank have agreed that the tender procedures followed by Government were correct, thorough and fair and there is no evidence of collusion between the tenderers. It is also agreed that the tenders received through the international competitive bidding process are representative of the current prices of similar works. In light of this, we have raised this matter before this House and a committee has deliberated on this matter. Mr Speaker, we beg the House to approve this additional funding so that the road can be started.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Chairperson, but I expect you to summarize.

5.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kadunabbi Lubega): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As usual, I will do the same. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the supplementary loan request from the African Development Bank for financing the road sector project for Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika road. 
 
Mr Speaker, this supplementary loan request was referred to the Committee on National Economy in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 152(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure.

Background: 
This is part of the ten year road sector development programme, which started in 1997 but was revised in 2002 and will run up to 2011. The estimated cost of this road sector development programme is about US$ 2.28 billion. Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika-road is going to be upgraded to paved standards. 

The Committee on National Economy met with the sessional Committee on Infrastructure, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Ministry of Works and Transport, and the Road Agency Formation Unit. 

Mr Speaker, we analysed the following documents: 
•	A brief from the Ministry of Finance, which was given to all of us. 
•	The supplementary loan agreement. 
•	The project implementation plan.
•	The project implementation manual.  
•	The bids/tender documents. 
•	The supplementary loan appraisal for the Road Sector Support Project I.
•	The consultancy agreements. 
•	The Aide-Memoir. 

Mr Speaker, before I proceed I would like to lay these documents on Table:
•	The bids/tender documents for three construction companies: Grinaker-LTA, SBI International Holdings A.G, and Straburg International.  
•	The loan agreement between the Republic of Uganda and the African Development Fund. 
•	The project implementation plan and project implementation manual.  
•	The supplementary loan appraisal consultancy agreement. 
•	The Aide-Memoir, and 
•	The minutes of our committee on the Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika road.  

The Kabale-Kisoro road project was identified under the Preferential Trade Area (PTA) as a feasible and viable road in the region. The economic and feasibility studies were carried out in 1993 to 1996. The studies were later done in 2004 and again it was found to be feasible.  

In April 2002, the development partners endorsed the project. This road links Uganda to Rwanda, Democratic Republic of Congo and Burundi. It will promote inter-regional communication.  

The project is expected to take 36 months. It is a two-lane asphalt concrete road of six metres wide, and 1.5 metres of the shoulder will be constructed.

It will include a component on feasibility and detailed engineering of the 208-kilometre Fort Portal-Ibanda-Nyakahita road. It will also include a detailed engineering report for the rehabilitation of roads in 12 districts in southwestern Uganda. The Road Agency Formation Unit will supervise the project.  

Reasons for the increase in the project cost:  
Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee noted that there was an increase by more than 100 percent in the estimates and the tender prices within a period of two years. The following were given as justifications: 

1.	The adoption of asphaltic concrete surfacing throughout the entire length of the road.

2.	The increase in the duration of the construction period from 30 to 36 months. This resulted from increased costs of time and bills of quantities, items like maintenance of the engineers site.  

3.	There was also considerable increase globally in the prices of the major inputs in road construction such as bitumen, cement and steel. It was also noted that the manufacturing of these inputs highly depend on oil.  

4.	The tenders received were a representative of the current prices for similar projects in the region, for example, in Lesotho Kenya and Rwanda. The unit cost of the road construction in the region was within the revised project cost.

Terms of the supplementary loan:  

The supplementary loan amount is UA 32,900,000. Its maturity period is 50 years including 10 years of grace. There will be a service fee of 0.75 per annum on disbursed and outstanding amounts. The committee considered this a concessional loan and in line with the government enhanced debt strategy. 

Observations

•	Mr Speaker, the committee observed the increase in estimates of more than 100 percent. The lowest quote was US$ 790,000 per kilometre. However, we were informed that it is the same trend in all works tendered during the same period. 

•	For the Dokolo-Lira road, which was a loan from the World Bank, the lowest bidder was US$745,109 per kilometre. 

•	Soroti, Dokolo are the lowest bidder US$640,701 per kilometre.

•	We also noted, Mr Speaker, that the supplementary loan is consistent with the objectives of the original project.

•	The tender procedures followed were correct, thorough and fair with no evidence of collusion by the tenderers.

•	The quotations were a reflection of the regional costing and, therefore, no need for re-tendering because this would not necessarily result into low bidders but rather delays in the project implementation.

•	The road is very strategic because it connects Uganda to two neighbouring countries of Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda, and economically and politically strategic for the Great Lakes Region. 

•	This road serves two important national parks, with rare mountain guerrillas in Mgahinga and Bwindi Impenetrable National Parks. Therefore, there is potential for promoting the tourism sector. 

•	Also, this road traverses the mineral rich area with huge deposits of iron ore in Muko.

•	This road also links to two district headquarters, which will help in the wider inter-district road network.

•	Also as identified by the PTA, it is a potential inter-regional road, which would promote cross border trade and regional integration.

•	The Government of Uganda has set aside funds for compensation and this exercise will commence soon beginning with where construction is expected to start, and construction is expected to start at 50 kilometres going to both sides.

Recommendations

•	This august House should approve this supplementary loan in order to embark on this important project to realise the above benefits and develop the area and the entire region.

•	The committee urges Government to meet her obligation to compensate the affected people in line with the resettlement action plan as promised. 

•	Counterpart funding should be readily available in order to expedite the project implementation.

•	Government should continue to mobilise resources to realise the implementation of the ten-year road development plan across the country.

Conclusion

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee begs this House to adopt this report and approve the supplementary loan. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the minister’s presentation and the committee’s report, justifying why there is a supplementary loan. There was the original loan, and now there is a supplementary loan. He has given reasons why there should be a supplementary loan.

5.14
MR COSMAS BUSIMA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make a correction. I think the loan is from African Development Fund not bank. But I would like to echo what a colleague said here yesterday. He said that in this country, we are improving infrastructure for the other people to come and enjoy. And in particular, he mentioned the Kenyans that you go to the hotels here, the Kenyans are there, while for us we are out. 

I support this supplementary loan to improve that road. I know that road - it is hell! So, if something is done to it, it is very good. But at the same time, we must gain from what we are investing. There are some direct gains we must make and Government must make it possible for us to gain something. What is the use of investing millions when we are not being supported to put up industries to use that road? We need long-term loans; Finance should look for them. Right now, if one wants a loan, you are referred to a commercial banks; interest is between 25 percent and 36 percent. How can a poor man put up a development to use the developed infrastructure at that rate? I am appealing to Finance and to Government; we have reached a stage where we must also support what we call, “Middle class people.”

To me, this road goes as part of “Bonna bagaggawale”. But the “Bonna bagaggawale” will not be realised unless we create a middle class group; people who will be manufacturing things, people who will be using the local materials and local products. And right now, that is not possible for us to do because we do not have long-term loans in this country. 

So, may I ask the Minister in charge of Finance that, what arrangements does Government have for the local entrepreneurs? I know, the other day the minister said that they gave Shs 8.0 billion to work on Munyonyo. Where are those facilities? Some of us want only Shs 1.0 billion to invest and start local industries. Can the honourable minister throw more light on that? Thank you very much.

5.18
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for a report well written, though I will thank the committee with a bit of reservations. I want on the onset to say this is a good project; it is a deserving project and I believe at long last the cry of the people of Kisoro, the cry of the people of Kabale, is going to be answered. It would probably remove one reason for agitation against the Minister of Works.

However, Mr Speaker, as shadow minister of works, I would like this House to examine this particular project in respect of the other projects run in this country and also elsewhere in the region. I would like to lay emphasis especially on the cost element of this project. I heard the Minister of Finance informing us, and I would like to be corrected if I did not hear well, that the motion which has been brought to Parliament today is to enable Government borrow Shs 32.99 million. He also added that previously what was approved for borrowing is in the amounts of Shs 27 million. 

Now, when you look at those two figures, Mr Speaker, the earlier request for borrowing is lower than what is being asked for at supplementary level by about Shs 10 millions. I want to ask the Minister of Works, why are there these amounts of errors? I do not think that the reasons being given for an increased cost are substantial enough to attract such a large amount of additional borrowing. We would like the Minister of Works to justify why they are off target by 130 percent and it is not enough. I am not convinced that the reasons given here are sufficient to cause an increase of 130 percent. 

I also would like to differ from the committee, when they say that they have looked around the region and they are persuaded that the rates of our road works in this country are in tandem with what is going on in the region. It has been well established and I know there are reports upon reports - I will be volunteering some information to the Minister of Works and the Minister of Finance to the effect that our road construction works is the most expensive in the region. 

I want to give just one example. There is a road that was done in Kenya and Tanzania and it is similar terrain to Kabale-Kisoro road. The Arusha-Namaga Athi River road; I have information to the effect that it was done at a cost of US$437,680,000 per kilometre and this was done recently less than 10 years ago. Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, for giving way. Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge, from the East Africa Athi River to Namaga is 240 kilometres. The cost has been US$200 million and the terrain is far much better than that of Kisoro. I think, Mr Speaker, we travelled together from Nairobi to Arusha. You know the place very well; you cannot compare it with Kisoro. So, it is true the rates used to be slightly higher but in the region now, we are almost tallying on the rates. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Nathan Byanyima. I draw this information from an authority and it is a report that was circulated. At an appropriate time, I will bring this information to the House. I am not here to tarnish the name of Government or the Ministry of Works, but I believe our country needs to get value for money.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about quality control on these roads. I would like to inform the House that on a very important road project, there is always going to be material engineers. The function of this engineer is to ensure that there is adherence to the quality that is specified under British standards. 

What has recently happened on some roads in this country, notably Bugiri-Malaba road, is disheartening, and I would want to be the last person to see the Kabale-Kisoro/ Bunagana/ Kyanika road going to such a situation or deteriorating to the level that that new road has deteriorated to. As a matter of fact, the road began to fail before the contractors left the site, and I think that is a waste of taxpayer’s money. If we are going to condone –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: I thank my shadow colleague for giving way. I had wanted to wait and clarify later, but I thought the issue he was raising and the way he was raising it was a serious matter that this House needs to be told the facts on Bugiri-Malaba road. 

First of all, the Bugiri-Malaba road was in a terrible state when we started its rehabilitation. At that time, our development partner in the eastern region was the Germany KFW and they were withdrawing from the road sector. The only balance that was remaining for that support was US$20 million. Instead of losing that money back to Germany, we discussed with them on whether we could use it to at least partially rehabilitate -(Interruption)
 
MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I wish to thank my colleague and to ask him when he next stands up to give an explanation to this House as to why there was almost instant failure on the road especially the left hand side of the road at several points. There was heaving on this side so this was evident failure and it was even before the road had lasted the construction period.

Mr Speaker, permit me at this stage to talk about compensations. We have in this country cases where wanainchi have raised complaints to Government about inadequate compensation as a result of their properties being affected by road construction or no compensation at all. I am sure that the ministry would be interested in ensuring that there is adequate compensation. This being the contribution that the government of Uganda has to make towards road construction, we have found that at times they have no funds for compensation thereby inhibiting progress on the roads.  

My call to Government is to have the money ready because it is this slow pace of work that is going to cause an increase in the cost of road works. This is because the contractor has the right to come around and claim for time lost and for their redundant equipment and we often have to pay.  This has happened on the Kapchorwa road before and it nearly cost the project in terms of it not coming to its logical conclusion.

Mr Speaker, permit me at this stage to raise the issue of road reserves. I know that the Minister in charge of Works and Transport knows very well that his road works throughout the country have been severely encroached upon. This has produced a negative effect especially if a road that we are passing money for today requires expansion. On Entebbe road, for example, there are properties that we know were compensated during the expansion of that road. To our dismay, Mr Speaker and honourable members, buildings of individuals have affected this particular road and some of them are high in the hierarchy of Government who were compensated before. You need to take particular attention to this, Mr minister.

In conclusion, though I have not been privy to the documents that were laid on the Table that the committee used for trying to justify the procurement process of these contractors, I have heard the names of these contractors and a number of them are actually working in Uganda at the moment. We have to overcome the problem on Jinja-Bugiri road -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, my shadow minister, for giving way. I just wanted to inform you that as we talk now, and I suppose the minister is aware, on Entebbe road there is a hotel being constructed at Bwebajja. As you come from Entebbe it is on the right. It is actually on the road reserve and I thought you should know and then we would probably ask the honourable minister to tell us why that is happening.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you. I would like to ask my friend and sister hon. Alice Alaso to accompany me tomorrow and we go and agree on the distance of the road reserve. We will measure the distance from the centre of that road until we have covered the road reserve and see whether Bwebajja is in the road reserve. You are free to come with me because the hotel is off the road reserve. 

MR OTTO: I live on Entebbe road and apart from that hotel whose name I cannot pronounce well and I do not want to risk but that one that you have just mentioned, there is another supermarket just after the Shell Petrol Station on Entebbe road. There is a left turn that can connect you to Makindye and Nsambya. I would also like to join you tomorrow to go and prove if this particular house that belongs to a senior minister in this Government is not on the road reserve. I would be more than willing to join the trip.

THE SPEAKER: This issue of road reserves has been a subject of debate here. There are complications and people imagine that properties are on road reserves but when does the land become a road reserve? That is an issue that people just imagine that because a property is near the road, therefore, it is on a road reserve. There are steps that have to be taken to create a road reserve. You just do not imagine that simply because it is near the road then it is a road reserve. You just do not drive from here to Masaka and think that anything that is near the road is on a road reserve. Road reserves must be owned –(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: My clarification to the Minister of Works is that, he has promised that tomorrow we are going and I will accompany my shadow minister but where do we meet tomorrow?

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, I invited hon. Alice Alaso, I did not invite him. (Laughter) 

MS ALICE ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would not like to be misunderstood by my voters in Soroti. I would like to accept this invitation on condition that I am joined by a few people just in case I am asked to account for the time when I went to do road inspection and the time I got back here. Surely, I should have witnesses.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank my honourable friends for the many pieces of information given to me. One thing is clear, the ministry or Government cannot exonerate themselves from creating road reserves and subsequently administering them. It is a shame that when you look around the East African region, the other countries have done a lot to ensure that there is respect for road reserves. This is not happening in Uganda and I have moved through many roads in the East African region. Where is the agreement even on the land laws in the region?

My point however, Mr Speaker, was on the procurement process and I was making specific reference to the problems that Jinja-Bugiri project ran into. We had a contractor –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Whereas you are free to have a general debate, this is a specific motion on the loan.  I am not saying you cannot bring in other general issues, but let us be specific on this motion about this loan.  

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your guidance. All I was saying is that, I hope the contractor has been selected well and that we are not going to run into problems similar to the ones that we ran into while selecting the contractor for Jinja-Bugiri project.  As a matter of fact, the procurement process that the Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika road went through, is the similar process that Jinja-Bugiri went through in the selection. I do not think it has changed much really because it was open bidding. 

With those remarks, I wish to say again that this is a good thing that should happen to this country and I believe that it is something that is supported by us all and I also know that I am coming with my colleague the minister tomorrow to show him a specific structure that is almost built on the shoulder of Jinja road, just to prove to him what I said earlier. With those few remarks, I support the motion.  

5.40
MR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, we want to appreciate that finally the Kabale-Kisoro/Bunagana/Kyanika road is going to be constructed. For many years, it has been talked about in the national budgets but nothing had been done. Therefore, people from Kigezi appreciate this.

Mr Speaker, the children in Kisoro and Kanungu, were one time asked to write about zebra crossing in an examination and none of them could pass it.  They thought the zebra crossing is an animal called a zebra because they have never seen a tarmac road and, therefore, some of us feel very emotional about this road and we think it has taken a long time. We want to put a question. When are the civil works going to commence? The minister should be specific.

When you look at the justification given for this road, they are the same justifications you could give for the road connecting Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishaka. Similarly, I would like the Minister of Works and Transport also to assure the people of Kanungu who have been in the same bracket with the people of Kisoro - because the Ntungamo-Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishaka road and the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana have been together. So, when are we going to have the Rukungiri-Kanungu road so that we also appreciate how a tarmac road looks like? 

Secondly, part of the money for this loan is for rehabilitation or producing engineering reports for some roads in 12 districts in south western Uganda. I would like the minister to clarify, which are these 12 districts? In the report to Parliament which the Minister of Finance made a few weeks back, No.2 on page 4 stated that part of the loan is for the feasibility and detailed engineering reports for the Fort-Portal – Ibanda – Nyakahita road in south western Uganda. Meaning that according to his definition, southwestern Uganda extends up to Kabarole and Fort Portal.  Therefore, when you say 12 districts south western Uganda, I want to be assured that Kanungu is among those 12 districts because we have had several discussions with the Minister of Works about the status of roads in my district. Therefore, I want him to clarify which 12 districts we are referring to which are going to be part of this loan.

I also want to emphasise that one of the challenges we have is that we approve money for construction of roads, but we do not appropriate enough resources for maintenance of these roads.  In other words, construction is one thing but maintenance is another. So, as we look at construction, we should also be mindful of the need to constantly maintain these roads to avoid the many portholes, which we see these days.

Lastly, I would also like to re-echo the issue of compensation. The minister should clarify if he has quantified and done assessment. Does he know who is going to be compensated, those who are in road reserves for instance? When is this compensation going to be effected? This is a key question, which the people going to be affected ask particularly so since the resources will be provided by the government they want to be sure as it has been the problem for most of the construction of roads in this country. I support the request and I want to urge my honourable colleagues to expeditiously support it and we move on.  Thank you.

MR PEREZ AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I thank those who have made remarks and I want to move a motion that the Speaker puts the question.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The motion is that I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the motion for a resolution to authorise this loan.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, although we have finished, it is good that Kisoro is going to have that road but the minister should have been able to tell us how much money Government has put aside for compensation.

THE SPEAKER: This question can be followed if you are interested in these details. Maybe the minister will come and give us the information.  They want to know how much money is set aside for compensation in respect of this project.

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would like to make a comment that I am very happy that this loan has been approved because the last time I was driving with hon. Ocula on the same road, we got an accident. Northern Uganda is so flat and I could not imagine myself in such a high place and yet down there is very low.  So, I am so delighted and I pray that next time I drive there I find a better road than what we left the other time.  Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. This disposes of that business. There is hon. Odit’s report maybe we deal with that tomorrow.

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I am in total agreement with your guidance but whenever this item is coming on the Order Paper, it is always the last.  I hope tomorrow it will find ample space.

THE SPEAKER: We shall start with it this time.

MR ODIT: Thank you very much, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you. We have been able to handle business at least for today. With this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.48 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 March 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


