Tuesday, 20th February 2001

Parliament met at 3.04p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair

The House was called to order.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MR.PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I ask this oral question regarding Uganda Commercial Bank in which arbitration was conducted in London some time back. The arbitration between the Government of Uganda and Westmont was awarded in favour of Uganda and Uganda Commercial Bank reverted to Uganda Government 100 per cent. Is it Bank of Uganda or the Ministry of Finance, which is now handling Uganda Commercial Bank Limited? Could the Minister inform the House the present status of Uganda Commercial Bank, its operations, its profitability and the proposed date of sale to private investors? Will this be by Bank of Uganda or the Ministry of Finance since the share certificates have been issued back to Uganda Government? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr. Manzi Tumubweine): Mr. Speaker, I want to first apologise that I do not have a written answer. This is because this though the question was written last Thursday and sent to the Ministry of Finance it had not actually reached my desk, which is in charge of privatisation. Nevertheless, I will not back out, I will answer it although in some cases I may not have the exact figures in my head today.

On Thursday, we met the joint Committees on Finance, Economy and Works. We wanted to know the situation on Uganda Commercial Bank. We gave as much as we did and I was requested to carry out a thorough research, write a comprehensive paper, which should be in Parliament within one month. Nevertheless, the same afternoon, the question again was raised before I finished my assignment.

It is true that Westmont bought 49 per cent shares in Uganda Commercial Bank some years back. It is also true that it also got a contract to manage Uganda Commercial Bank. But after about one year, it was discovered that Westmont was mismanaging the bank. So the Government, who was the 51 per cent shareholder on behalf of the people of Uganda, decided to cancel Westmont’s management contract. The management of Uganda Commercial Bank at that time went directly to the Bank of Uganda under the Financial Institution Statute. Uganda Commercial Bank has since then been managed by the Central Bank.  

The second part is that, although Westmont was removed as a manager, Westmont still owned the 49 per cent shares because they had paid for them. And I am told that, that is under the Laws of Uganda Company Act. If somebody has paid for his shares he keeps his shares. It was therefore thought fitting that we should even look at the issue as to whether Westmont should actually have those shares given the mismanagement that was done to the bank. 

We, therefore, as a Government, sued Westmont for mismanagement for a total of Shs.31 billion made up of different elements in the mismanagement. We won the case in the High Court, but Westmont not being a national company, we had to sue from outside in order for us to achieve some compensation. And in the contract there was a provision for arbitration and we therefore, went for arbitration in London hoping that if everything goes well we shall be compensated.

After some time word came to us, not so official, that actually Westmont International was trying to remove certain assets from certain businesses and leaving Westmont Indonesia Bahad almost bankrupt. And therefore, we thought that the best way was to actually convince them to settle out of court. We agreed with them and we settled out of court. The settlement out of court meant that each party would meet its costs. The second part was that Westmont would forfeit all the shares they had paid for. And we thought that given the circumstances and the situation, that was fairer than getting out with nothing.  So Westmont got out of UCB formally and we recovered all the 49 per cent shares, and we are not compensating them any shilling for what they had paid for. That means therefore that UCB is actually, as the question says, now 100 per cent owned by the state. 

When a bank is under statutory management, it has got limited operational capacities and activities. For instance, it does not engage in long-term loans, it does not engage in certain other actions unless it first clears with the Central Bank. So, Uganda Commercial Bank operations are limited to areas as per what is contained in the Financial Institutions Statute.

Profitability: When you look at the profitability of the company, I think Uganda Commercial Bank has been making some reasonable profits. I am not very exact about the figures. I have sent for them; I hope I will get them before we finish. But it has made some significant profitability for the period it has been under statutory management. But it may be partly because its activities have been limited to not giving loans, but trading within the confines of the Central Bank. 

Uganda Commercial Bank, being in class four of the PERD Statute, is supposed to be privatised. However, since we won the case, it has not been returned to the Privatisation Unit. Therefore, I cannot say that it will be privatised. I can only say, that it will be handled under the Bank of Uganda. And therefore, when it will be privatised or sold, what will happen and procedures, will not be part of the PERD Statute, but of the Financial Institution Statute. This means the Governor and his staff will handle the exercise, but not the Minister of Finance. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I beg your indulgence to allow me to make some preamble remarks before I ask my supplementary questions.

The hon. Minister has referred to minutes of last Thursday and this has a long going operation. So for me to articulate my questions, I would like you to permit me to refer to the Financial Act and to give some background.

First, as the Minister has said, Government cancelled the Westmont management – and he should have said, under pressure from Parliament – then the sentence would be complete.

Two, Bank of Uganda, which he is informing us will sell or is due to sell UCBL, does not have authority to sell UCBL under the Financial Instruments Statute. It can only sell an insolvent institution and UCBL is a profitable concern. In September 1999 the Balance Sheet and the Financial Statement jointly signed by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance and Secretary to the Treasury and the chairman of the UCBL indicated that it had in bulk Shs.19.4 billion. This is part of the money that belongs to the people of Uganda since it is now fully owned by the people of Uganda. I have information that by December, Uganda Commercial Bank limited had in bulk Shs.24 billion. 

The minutes of the meeting of last Thursday, which the Minister is referring to, I took extracts from the Committee Clerk and they said:
 
1. Government had already acquired the 49 per cent share certificate of the UCBL, therefore, full 100 per cent ownership. 

2. UCBL, managed by Bank of Uganda, is now in a profitable position but its income is not from a sustainable source; that its main source is Treasury Bills. Therefore, non Treasury Bills income is negligible and that it is insolvent to the tune of Shs.3 billion.’ 

If the Permanent Secretary, who is now the Governor, states this to the meeting and he is the one who signed the Financial Statement, the Balance Sheet showing Shs.19.4 billion in black, how does this insolvency come about? May I state at this stage that we, as Members of Parliament, have no objection to Uganda Commercial Bank being privatised but we would like it to be privatised transparently under the PERD Statute where there will be public tendering and bidding.

Another extract from the minutes says that Government decided to sell Uganda Commercial Bank under the Financial Instrument Statute, 1993 not PERD Statute and that it empowers Bank of Uganda to sell a bank that is insolvent. I will quote the relevant Article, if you will allow me because I have two other points (Interruption). 

THE SPEAKER: And then after you have quoted, ask your question.

MR.PINTO: Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is going to be one question, but it will hinge on these researched facts.

Under the Financial Institute Statute 1993, Article 33 is the one that deals with the powers. Article 33 (3) says; ‘ The Central Bank in making a decision under Subsection (2) of this Section shall take into consideration – several other things among which –
    • the impact on and loss to depositors as a result of liquidation, 
    • the overall impact on public confidence in and the stability of the financial sector in general as a result of acquisition or liquidation.’   

Article 33(5) says, “Where the Central Bank decides to liquidate a Financial Institution, it shall – I would like to go to (5)(d) ‘in winding up the affairs of the insolvent Financial Institution eliminate the interests of the shareholders and may sell or transfer assets in order to recover the maximum amount or probably at a distribution to depositors and the creditors of an insolvent financial institution but an insolvent institution.’  

And finally, - even if I stopped there.  The Bank of Uganda does not have, under this Financial Institution Statute, the authority to sell a profitable concern. But since we agreed in principle that it belongs to PERD and it is in class 4 of privatisation, we would strongly urge Government to sell it through PERD. 

The Governor, in the Thursday meeting, said he was unable to advise on how many shares will be sold when he was asked by the committee, but some shares will be held in trust for eventual disposal to the public. I would like to know whether, with this knowledge and having referred to the Financial Institution Statute, the Minister feels that UBCL is still an insolvent institution and can be disposed of by the Bank of Uganda. Note that the consultant, who is working for Bank of Uganda, is the same person who wrote a report when the bank was insolvent some three years ago. He / she is the one short-listing the same 11 so-called invited bidders, the 11 short-listed banks, and that this matter is not transparent.   I request now the Minister to respond, to provide this House with the report made by that consultant when the bank is insolvent –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have made your preamble remarks. Why do you not ask, for example, whether the Minister is aware that in terms of the Financial Instruments Statute the Bank of Uganda has no powers to sell UCB, which is solvent? I think that seems to narrow it to – The background is definitely good; many of us are educated, but put that specific question to the Minister.

MR.PINTO: I am very grateful to you, Mr. Speaker, and I am sure you are guiding me so that the Parliament and the nation are properly informed. Under the Financial Institution’s Act, does Bank of Uganda have the authority to sell UCB, a solvent institution, which has got profit of Shs.24.4 billion?

LT.COL.MUDOOLA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I am glad that UCB has come to be sold. When the present Minister was behind here, he was advocating for it to be sold, and he convinced us. What I am asking is, you said you decided to settle this case out of Court in Edmond, was it to your advantage or you still paid a lot of money to this company?

MR.ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Speaker, in his statement, the Minister stated that UCBL will be sold off by Bank of Uganda because it had not been recovered from the management of the Central Bank. I think that is what he said. Is it really correct to say that when the Central Bank takes over management of a bank because of some problems in the Bank, it ceases to belong to the owner?  So if it does not, what is this question about returning it? 

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I have two supplementary questions. The first one is with regard to the fact that before UCB was sold to Westmont, Government put in over Shs.70 billion to make it solvent. Could the Minister tell the House what happened to the money, which was sank in UCB to make it solvent?  

My second supplementary question is with regard to the statement attributed to the Governor, Central Bank, which was in the newspaper to the effect that UCB is insolvent by Shs.3 billion. In a developed economy, that statement would have made a run on the Bank. The Bank could have been literally closed if the Governor was quoted correctly. Could the Minister tell the House whether or not that statement is true. If it is true, could he tell us how the country is being informed on the status of UCB, the only financial institution which is offering intermediation in economic management of this country with at least a branch in every district? What has the Minister of Finance done to make it clear to this country the status of the Bank? I thank you.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I think one of the problems of UCB is the Board of Directors. I would like to know what arrangements the Minister has made to balance the composition of the Board of Directors because they are supposed to be six. Three are from the Central, one is from the West, one is the Secretary to the Treasury who is also from the West and then the sixth is the Acting Managing Director. There is no representation from the East and North. Is it fair? 

When Westmont returned the Bank to the current management, there was a loss on record of Shs.17 billion.   That was in September 1998. By April 1999, the current management had reduced this loss to only 1.5 billion. By September 1999, the losses were reduced to 1.4 billion.  According to audited accounts of Uganda Commercial Bank published in the New Vision of January 2001, the losses have been converted into positive profits of 19 billion.  How insolvent is this Bank? As I speak now, there is an additional Shs.5 billion non-audited making Shs.26 billion profits from 17 billion losses in 1998. What are we being told by the Governor of the Central Bank?  

Uganda Commercial Bank is the main lender to commercial banks in this country. The foreign banks here do not bring their money here. They just borrow from UCB and lend to their customers. As of today, they owe UCB Shs.24 billion in inter-bank lending and here is a bank, which is insolvent lending money to other banks. Uganda Commercial Bank has got money – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okello Okello, let us not indulge in debate.  You just ask the Minister specifically.

MR.OKELLO OKELLO: Yes, I want the Minister to confirm that the bank is insolvent because these are the figures. I want the Minister to tell us how the Bank can be insolvent when it has got so much money Shs.75.5 billion in bonds, 157 in Treasury Bills. How can we say the bank is insolvent? I would like the Minister to deny or confirm that there is an international design to get rid of UCB and allow foreign banks to annex our savings and then transfer abroad? In the end we shall go back to the pre-colonial days and keep our money in pots. I thank you Mr. Speaker. 

 MR.OMONGOLE: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Government interest in the enterprises to be invested is vested in the Privatisation Unit. I want to know from the Minister whether he gave a fight to Bank of Uganda when UCB was returned to Government and Bank of Uganda subsequently took it over. I thought UCB, being a Government enterprise, which was in the line of privatisation, should have straight away come back to the Privatisation Unit. Did the Minister make an effort to get it back?

Secondly, the people of Uganda gave a formula to the privatisation of UCB, that is, 49 per cent shares to be sold and 51 remain to the populace of Uganda to be sold later at the stock exchange. What guarantee does the Minister give to this House that this is going to be the case even when Bank of Uganda sells UCB? Thank you. 

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I rise on three issues that I would like the Minister to clarify:

First, I am a little concerned about the process of privatisation and methods of work. The PERD Statute provides for the Minister in charge of Privatisation, to regularly report to this House on the process of privatisation in this Country. As we speak, we have not received a single report in the last quarter, leaving the House and the whole nation asking questions. I am very sure that is why hon. Pinto and other colleagues have risen up to today to present questions that remain unanswered. It would be prudent on the side of Government to present to this House major policy developments in this Country.  

Take the question that has now emerged -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you asking a question?

CAPT.MUKULA: Yes, I am asking a question.

THE SPEAKER: Say, for example, is the Minister aware that for the last how many months, no report has been presented to the House to indicate the status of privatisation, so that the Minister is focused. 

CAPT.MUKULA: I thank you for your guidance Mr. Speaker. In the same light, I am very sure the Minister has taken the content of your contribution. I would also like to add that before the arbitration process, -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: For record purposes, I am not contributing.

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, I take note of that. Before the arbitration and litigation process that took place in London, we were in the process of moving a motion to the effect that 51 per cent of the shares in Uganda Commercial Bank be secured as we had passed earlier on. And the process of privatisation of these institutions of Government should be opened up through the stock exchange.

Through your wise guidance, and I am very sure that the House will indulge in the debate when we present this motion before the House. It would be important at the stage of our political and economical development that Ugandans acquire the shares even if it means – I would like the Minister to guide us  (Interruptions).

THE SPEAKER: Before the hon. Member for Kabarole comes in, I think we are not handling this issue the way we should. You ask a supplementary question bearing in mind what is here and do not drag us into unnecessary debates; we have other businesses to deal with. Let us be focused.  

CAPT.MUKULA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your guidance.  I still would like to prevail and ask the Minister that the 51 per cent that the prevailed on, the Minister or Government will secure those. I would like him to guarantee that the 51 per cent guaranteed for the people of Uganda to buy in the process of privatisation, and that the privatisation process will be as transparent as possible to enable Ugandans to participate.

MS.KIRASO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mine is an information not only to the hon. Capt. Mukula, but even to my other colleagues who are asking supplementary questions I do not want us to go a bit off truck. Please, Mr. Speaker, allow me to give this House information which was given to the Committee on Thursday, last week by the Governor of the Bank of Uganda, in the presence of the Minister in charge of Privatisation, seated here because this House should know the truth.  

When we are talking about privatisation and talking to the Minister, and telling him what we want to see being done, it is important for this House to know that actually the process is not in the hands of this Minister. And he conceded in that meeting that some of the things, which were going on concerning UCB, he did not have that information himself. It is very important for this House to know.

I will clarify what I am talking about. When the Government opted for this case to be settled out of Court and pulled out of the arbitration process, the Government also agreed to forfeit some of the money which would have otherwise been awarded to it as costs. All the money that had been calculated would have amounted to about Shs.31 billion if Uganda had won the case. Then we would have paid about Shs.11 billion to Westmont, which is equivalent to the shares they put in the Bank at that time. But by Uganda accepting to settle this case out of Court, it means we excused ourselves from the complexities of the case, whatever they were, and this money was forfeited. 

I think the Minister has got the details at least on that bit. But the important bit that this House should know is that, Bank of Uganda, under the Financial Institutions Statute is mandated to intervene in an insolvent bank. Because the Government of Uganda was a shareholder together with Westmont, the Government of Uganda had to step aside while the Bank of Uganda managed the Bank. But the day we pulled out of the arbitration case and the Bank reverted to Government by Westmont signing the share sale certificate, then it meant that the Bank is now owned again 100 per cent by the Government of Uganda as it was before the privatisation process started. 

However, the Bank of Uganda Governor went ahead to inform us that as a regulator in the banking industry, they could not again hand over the bank to one of the former shareholders who is Government of Uganda, who must have been party to mismanagement in case that partner mismanages the bank again. I think what Members should look at is whether this is the most prudent, the right decision and the right way we should take. But that is the position and the Minister here was very quiet in the meeting. 

The Bank of Uganda Governor told us how he is going to sell the bank and how he is going to take care of all these sentiments which the Members are talking about including floating some shares on the market for Ugandans to buy.  But I would like to remind you of one thing hon. Members, that Bank of Uganda is autonomous to an extend where we can not interfere in the process the way we would do if it was under the Privatisation Unit. 

Two, something which scared me in the meeting, the Bank of Uganda Governor said they would take the most attractive option of sell depending on what will be very attractive on the market. In other words, if a buyer comes and wants 100 per cent, I guess nobody will come here to say, you know Members this and this happened. If they want 80 per cent it means only 20 per cent will be left for Ugandans. Maybe I should also add that the Financial Institution Statute, although it supersedes the PERD statute, actually the day the Uganda Commercial Bank reverted back to Government it became a parastatal like any other. I thought I should give this information, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Member for your information.

DR.MALLINGA STEPHEN (Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. In the process of answering this question the hon. Minister said that this case was initially taken to court but eventually they decided to avoid arbitration and settle it out of court. However, there were two gentlemen involved in the purchase of Uganda Commercial Bank when it was sold to Westmont. We read their involvement in the Press and the Government has never come out with the position involving these two gentlemen. In the process of arbitration, I think the former manager of Greenland Bank and the brother to the President are supposed to have been involved - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not ask the supplementary question so that those answers can come from the Minister?

DR.MALLINGA: In the process of settling out of court how were these two gentlemen treated in the settlement of this case? What responsibility do they have at the moment, or has Government completely forgotten about their involvement and they have a clean leaf?  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.

MR.ABURA KENE: Thank you Mr. Speaker and I thank my chairperson for the information. I thought the Minister in his answer would touch on those issues but I am surprised he sort of meandered and did not touch them. Will the Minister clarify whether he will still come up with the report after this information?
 
Secondly, is he aware that some of the banks detailed to buy the UCB are also borrowing from the current UCB? (Interjection) - I know it is business, but still if you are buying something which we thought should have been sold, it would be something which you are not be borrowing from.  

Thirdly, is the Minister considering to advice Bank of Uganda, since it is the one going to handle the selling of UCB, to divide it into three departments of; (1) International, (2) Towns, (3) Rural? Considering the role UCB has been playing on the part of the rural population; is he considering to advice Bank of Uganda to divide it into three so that the rural part still remains with the Government to enable the rural population to continue accessing funds for development? Currently we are having problems; the finance institution –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You have finished your questions.

MR.ABURA KENE: Thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR.LUKYAMUNZI: Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. The people I represent greatly value UCB, the people's bank and through me would like the Minister to answer the following questions.  

    1. It is said that part of what led to the fall of Greenland Bank was that it lent out money to Westmont to enable it buy UCB, is that correct hon. Minister? If so, how did the tragedy occur without Government intervention?  
    2. Before UCB was sold to Westmont, it is on record that the President of Uganda first visited Malaysia, which is the home of Westmont and on return he spoke very flowery about the Malaysian financial management programmes. Was it by coincidence that the man who later got involved into the failure of UCB namely Maj. Gen. Salim Saleh happens also to be a brother of the man who praised the economy of Malaysia which forms the framework of Westmont?  
    3. Lastly, it is said, and I want to be more elaborate here than hon. Dr. Mallinga. It is said that arbitration for the bank was concluded in London.  Noting that the fall of UCB has a bearing on the fall of Greenland bank, were the shareholders of Greenland bank represented in the London talks? If not why?

MS.KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, could the Minister inform this House on the status of the report from the Judicial Commission on the closed banks because this House asked the Ministry of Finance to put in place a Judicial Commission of Inquiry. We heard that it was finished. Now that we are talking about a bank, could we also know in case this bank ends up like the other banks?

THE SPEAKER: Is that supplementary?

MS.KIRASO: Yes Sir.

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with UCB.

MR.KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When Bank of Uganda closed some banks including the Co-operative Bank, Parliament urged for the formation of a commission of inquiry which my hon. Sister has just referred to. That was a central bank exercising its power and we in Parliament we were baffled and we moved for a commission for inquiry. 

UCB is not 100 per cent owned, like many Members have said, by Government; it is a parastatal. Is the Minister happy with the step that the Central Bank is taking to sell Uganda Commercial Bank outside the privatisation system, which we streamlined by law in PERD, and which we are sure we can follow and understand? Is he happy with the report received from the commission of inquiry over the way the other banks were sold or dealt with in the process of closing? If he is not happy, what has he done about it and what advice does he give Parliament to do in order to sort that out, and why is he not happy?  If he is happy, why is he happy?

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Members for the great interest they have shown in UCB. I believe if the hon. Members had had the same interest when I moved the motion, things would have been different. I will begin with the question, ‘is this bank insolvent?’ 

We met with the committee last week when this issue was raised, and we agreed with the committee. 

I will now answer the last question, ‘is the report coming?’ Yes, it will come because we agreed with the committee that we go and put together all these figures.  We agreed that within a month I should give them back a report. So, it is true we shall put together these figures and give a clear analysis of what the bank is. 

On whether it is solvent or insolvent, we shall come to you and say this is the position and this is the way it is. 

However, the core-capital of UCB is Shs.5.8 billion and the share capital should have been Shs.9.6 billion. So there is a shortfall between the required capital and the core capital by Shs.3.8 billion. I am sure those who are asking about capital adequacy ratios, risk ratios and insolvency must know the difference between those three.   

Does Bank of Uganda have powers to sell a bank? Yes, it does; read The Financial Institutions Statute, section 31 to 34. 

Which bank does the Bank of Uganda sell? The one which is insolvent. Now, what happens to the shareholders? The shareholders put in a claim to show that it is either solvent or insolvent. The bank has not been sold; the sole shareholder is Government. The Government is putting its case to say whether the bank is insolvent or solvent and the answer is not yet out.

The question that came up from Lt. Col. -(Interruption)

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, at this juncture, the Minister is saying Government being the shareholder, and the question is being put whether the bank is insolvent or solvent and the question has not been answered. So, it is at that stage. If it has not yet been determined that UCB is insolvent, how come the Governor of the Bank of Uganda said he has short-listed 11 banks to sell it to as an insolvent bank?

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, if the Governor of Bank of Uganda has said so, those are his words. But as far as I am aware, he has not written to the Ministry of Finance to clear with it that the bank is insolvent, and that is what I was trying to allude to. Because now that Government is the sole owner, he has got to write to us and say the bank is insolvent and then he explains the insolvency; that is the procedure. We have got to tell the shareholders that their bank is insolvent. 

CAPT.MUKULA: Point of clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let the Minister answer the question then if you have other questions -(Interruption)  

CAPT.MUKULA: Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Minister, which is very pertinent, is that UCB, which is now coming out of the quagmire, may get into a difficult situation if we continue to be a little careless with the statements we are making. You may actually cause a run on this bank. I appeal to my colleagues to be a little careful when they are talking about these financial institutions.
 
MS.KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, the Minister says he does not have some of the information and yet some of the information has been given to the Committee. I think it is my duty to give it to him. If the Governor has not written to the Ministry, I want to inform you hon. Minister that in September last year the Committee had a meeting with the management of UCB and Bank of Uganda. They informed the Committee that right now Uganda Commercial Bank is making a profit of Shs.1.9 billion per month on average. So may be you can reconcile your figures of Shs.5.8 billion and Shs.9.6 billion as far as the capital adequacy ratio is concerned.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Speaker, I appreciate what the chairperson of the Finance Committee is talking about, but there is a difference between making a profit and solvency. If you are coming from a situation where you were completely in deficit, you can still make profits only to reduce the deficit and not necessarily to be positive -(Interruptions)  

THE SPEAKER: Order please. Hon. Ongom and your colleagues; you asked questions and the Minister is answering. It is possible that the way the Minister is answering is not satisfactory. On the other hand, some of the answers may be satisfactory. But why do you not allow him to answer all those questions? - Now, just a moment, you even do not want me to talk! If you do not allow the Chair to talk, I do not know how we are going to end in this place. So, if you listen to the Minister, you will be able to pass judgement on the Minister whether he is telling you the truth or not. But if you do not, then you are going to run into a problem. Please allow him to answer.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you Mr. Speaker. Let me give an example. Suppose you borrowed Shs.50 million and you are in debt of Shs.50 million and you earn in the first month Shs.5 million and you pay back; you will have made – supposing you were in a deficit of Shs.50 million in the company in year one –(Interruptions). Mr. Speaker, can you protect me? Please protect me. In year one, you make a loss of Shs.50 million and the Revenue Authority will not charge you a tax because of the laws. In year two, you make a profit of Shs.5 million. You will have reduced the deficit to Shs.45 million. This is what I said and I stand for it because that is a fact in mathematics, in economics and in accounting. 

The other issue was settlement out of court. I think I explained why we preferred a settlement out of court vis-à-vis continuing with a full-scale arbitration. I said at the beginning that we won the case in the High Court here and we were awarded Shs.31 billion. But we were advised that enforcing that court order from Uganda on a company based in Malaysia would have been extremely difficult. I am sure we were advised rightly. That for us to take a court order from Uganda and serve it on a company based in Malaysia, it would be very difficult to pay. We were therefore, advised that the best thing would be to continue with arbitration on international level where we can now get an order enforceable around the world in order for us to be able to get whatever Westmont would have had in every other country. 

However, I also said that in the course of the arbitration discussions, we also realised – as I said it was even published in one of the newspapers - that the Westmont we were suing was running down itself. It was becoming insolvent and that therefore we could probably win the case, but find that the company did not exist. We would have spent so much and got out nothing. So we felt that probably the best thing was to settle out of court and see what we could salvage rather than going all the way and finding that actually we are dealing with a company which no longer existed.  

Did we lose money? I think one of the issues that the Committee raised was how much we lost and we asked them for some time to add up all the figures to see what we might have lost. Because some of the money that we are suing for was the money that Westmont had lent to a group of Greenland Investment Companies like Uganda Grain Millers, Kampala University, and FIBA Coffee. Now some of these companies are actually paying back some money. So you must have a cut-off date to be able to say, ‘on this date, what actually has not been paid or what actually is going to be lost, is such and such amount’. That is why I said the report to the Committee is coming and it will give all this information to show what the situation is like. 

Hon. Ongom wanted to know why the bank has not returned when UCB has become a parastatal again. As I said, Bank of Uganda intervened under the Financial Institutions Statute and it is convinced that UCB is still not up to a stage where it should be back to the shareholders. It is also true that the Governor said as, hon. Kiraso said; that since the shareholders had mismanaged the bank, they did not deserve to have the bank back.  However, - and my Colleague is here – we have not received a formal letter to say that the bank is insolvent. So I think in the course of writing the report that I have been asked to write, I will be able to give all that information clearly.  

MR.ONGOM: Mr. Speaker, my question was misunderstood.  The Minister referred to a question, which I did not ask.  He attributed it to me and I want to put it correctly. What I asked was, if the Minister said they did not get back UCB from the Central Bank immediately after the arbitration, therefore UCB could sell because they still had possession. Now the question was, when the central bank takes over the management of a bank, does that mean also taking over the ownership? Does the owner cease to own?

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I think I understood the question and actually answered it but he did not understand me. But let me repeat the answer. When a Central Bank takes over a bank, the shareholders and the management are put aside and the running of the bank is done by the Central Bank. It is only when the central bank is satisfied that the bank so held is no longer in danger that it can decide either to return it to the shareholders or to sell it to a new management or to merge it with any other bank. The central bank may also find out what is in the best interest of the country it should do with the bank. All these are provided for in the law. 

I think it was hon. Okumu Ringa who wanted to know where the Shs.70 billion went. We put promissory notes worth Shs.72 billion into the commercial bank but when it had problems, we did not retire the promissory notes. We only allowed the bank to keep earning interest but we kept the promissory notes. So these are not yet retired and the reason why we had put the promissory notes is because they were non-performing assets, which we removed out of the bank. And in order for the bank to continue, we had to replace them with something else. 

The issue of the Board of Directors; are they regionally represented? When the Bank of Uganda took over UCB, it was at a run down stage. The Bank of Uganda put in a management and a board. The Board was not appointed by the Government; but I will find out why they combined them. But that was not Government which normally believes in balancing the regions.

MR.MUSUMBA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. The issue of Uganda Commercial Bank, Bank of Uganda, and Government was discussed, as you have been told, between us as joint committees, the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the Minister of Finance in charge of privatisation only last week. After listening to all sides, we held the firm view that Bank of Uganda, which is owned by Ugandans and paid for by the taxpayers, are the same people who own Uganda Commercial Bank 100 per cent. Ugandans own it, and Government is also sustained by Ugandans. 

Therefore, we said Bank of Uganda should not behave like it operates from Kenya, and they should not deal with UCB like any other commercial bank. It is a bank that has resources of Ugandan taxpayers! There is no reason why the Governor or the Bank of Uganda should come to us, Parliamentarians, who are custodians of the interest of the taxpayers and say they are going to deal with the bank in a manner that has not been a result of a consensus. As representatives of those taxpayers, Government, which is sustained by the same taxpayers, Bank of Uganda, which is sustained by the same taxpayers and UCB, which is owned by the very taxpayers; we said, the method of handling UCB should be slightly different from the way any other commercial bank where shareholders, individuals that we know can go and use the banking licence and get money from depositors and misuse it. 

We also said that the Minister of Finance will come to us with a harmonised position by way of a report, and that we would be able to discuss that report in this House from a position of firm information. The purpose of which would be, - For example, it is true that Government issued bonds worth Shs.70 billion, but Government has also been collecting money through the NPART. How much of it has actually gone back to defray the amount of money that was originally put by the same taxpayers to pay bad debts of the commercial bank? This is information that we must have. 

Similarly, information as to how much as of now or as of date “t”, how much has Government of Uganda lost? How much have the taxpayers lost in the arbitration proceedings that took place?  Because there were losses and we have to know how much of this was –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Minister said here that the committee did not state so and that he is required to come here with the report. Now, it seems you are going through the same scenario, which happened in the committee, which the Minister himself has volunteered here!

MR.MUSUMBA: I am concluding by saying that time is now for the Minister to tell this House when he will bring that information, the basis upon which we will be able to give a firm direction to Government as to where we want them to go. Otherwise, we are perturbed by the stories of 11 international banks being short-listed by the Governor without, even on the Minister’s own admission, firm consultations between the Government and the Minister of Finance!

THE SPEAKER: You see, we have a report that this is a matter which has been discussed at a certain committee level and the chairman of the committee on the economy so admits, and the Minister. The Minister was given one month to come up with a report so that you can debate this matter from a position of information.

MR.PINTO: But knowing as the Minister has said, Bank of Uganda, as guided here by the chairman Committee of Finance, that Bank of Uganda claims its autonomy. Under such circumstances Bank of Uganda is now not under the Minister in charge of Privatisation, because it was not returned to it, which should have been! It is this motion that I intend to move for Government which is the overall responsibility of Bank of Uganda and the Ministry to ensure that there is no sale without having brought this matter for determination, solvency or otherwise – because you have heard the chairman of the Committee of Finance raising doubts; chairman Committee of the Economy raising doubts; the Minister has some inadequacy in the information given to him!  

Consequently, I beg to move this motion with your permission. The motion that – and we are lucky to have here the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.  “That the Government ensures that Uganda Commercial Bank Limited shall not be disposed of by Bank of Uganda, until the report has been brought by the Minister of Finance to the House for debate to determine solvency or otherwise.” It is subject to modification by my colleagues. I beg to move, Mr. Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Just hold on, we are trying to capture it.  Hon. Pinto, let me see if we have captured it correctly, you will modify. “This House resolves that Government ensures that Uganda Commercial Bank Limited shall not be sold or otherwise disposed of by the Bank of Uganda, until the Minister of Finance’s report on the status of UCB has been brought and tabled in this House.” Something like that, you can modify it; I have been trying to fill in – shall I read it again?

MR.ONGOM: “That the report should come before Parliament within the time frame given to the Minister by the Committee.”

THE SPEAKER: “Tabled in this House within the time frame given by the joint Committee of Finance and National Economy.” 

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, that captures the gist unless it is further improved by my colleagues, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

MR.MUSUMBA: I want to add one clarification. That the time -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: First, we want the motion seconded and then you clarify. You want to improve on it? It is seconded.

MR.MUSUMBA: It is seconded. The improvement I want to make is the time frame. We do not want to get into the debate ‘what time frame did the Committees give the Minister?’ We can be specific. The time frame we gave to the Minister one week ago was one month, which is 15th March. So, we can specify by the date of 15th March in the Resolution so that anybody reading the Resolution knows for a fact that it is 15th March. 

THE SPEAKER: Why do we not say, “within one month from today?”

MR.MUSUMBA: No, Sir, because we gave them time earlier.  In fact, when the Minister was asking for one month, we reluctantly accepted because informed the Minister that all this information should be there. A Minister of Finance, well directing himself to his duties, would have a file on his table having an up-date position on all the issues relating to UCB so we thought one month is more than ample. So, 15th March was the agreed date.

THE SPEAKER: We go to the motion. We are trying to ‘panel-beat’ the motion.

MR.OKUMU RINGA: Yes, I would to panel-beat, Mr. Speaker.  The issue of insolvency has been mentioned many times and insolvency can only be determined when an audit report is available. So, I would like to propose that within the Resolution, an aspect of a proper audit report be presented. I thank you.

MR.MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I think they are getting derailed. If you are going to answer for an audit report, you cannot at the same time say, “bring a report in one month.” It is extremely impossible to audit a bank and get the report audited and bring it here in one month. It is impossible.

MR.PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I beg that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we cannot take a decision on this matter because we are not in quorum. You know that. Now, what I can do is I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes and the usual procedure will follow.

(The Proceedings suspended at 4.28p.m due to lack of quorum)

(On resumption at 4.45p.m, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have not been able to raise the necessary quorum in order to take decisions. That definitely will also go to the next business on the Order Paper, namely, consideration of The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. 

By the look of things, it is very doubtful that we will be able to raise a quorum on subsequent days because of what is going on. That being the case, I am going to adjourn the House to Tuesday, 20th March 2001. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.47p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20th March 2001 at 2.30p.m.)
