Thursday, 26 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming the students from Kawaala College School in Lubaga North constituency. They are in the visitor’s gallery. (Applause). We have some other guests but I will introduce them when I get their names. They are also in the gallery. (Mr Awori rose_) Hon. Awori, what is the procedural problem? It should be a procedural problem this time.

2.40
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Madam Speaker, it pertains the Order Paper. Yesterday we passed a momentous, historical and very important resolution. I want to thank the Chair for having conducted the business in such a fashion that we were able to get unanimous resolutions.  

I also take the opportunity to express a concern regarding that resolution. We passed a resolution unanimously and yet this morning I was horrified to hear a statement over the radio - in his own voice - His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, said among other things that Acholi and Langi are used to killing and that they have been killing people from Nile Mansion over the years. When I heard that statement over the BBC, and we have it on tape, I was horrified. 

Having passed such a resolution requesting the Government to set up a commission to look into the situation on the insecurity in the North regarding the welfare of our own citizens, then the Head of State condemns a community and says among other things - emphatically - that they are used to killing since the days of Nile Mansion? Madam Speaker, I wonder! When we make resolutions here, will they have any effect on this government, given that kind of attitude by the Head of State about a certain community in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, I really find myself in some difficulty. First of all, I do not know whether the resolution was transmitted to the President before he went to the radio. But let me ask the Prime Minister to tell us the circumstances under which the statement was made.

2.42
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. As you know I have been grappling with a lot of problems that is why I have come late. So, I found him in the middle of his statement. But it is always safe for us to check what His Excellency is alleged to have said so that we are then in a position to respond. Therefore, I am not in a position to make any formal response to this question until it is thoroughly checked by the relevant sector minister. 

In fact I had asked the Minister of Defence to be ready because I suspect that people would like to know what has happened. So, I had asked him to be here but he has been under pressure and yesterday he was suffering from malaria as you know, and he was sweating a lot. I recommended to him a drug made in China, which appears to have worked well and I should be recommending it to you. I thank you. (Mr Awori rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope it is not on the same matter.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my hon. senior colleague, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, that I have been in a meeting with the Minister of Defence since this morning and the Minister of Defence is right now only five minutes away from here, in a committee meeting. He is very healthy, and I even reminded him that I was going to bring up the matter of security in Lira and Gulu where the tension is still rising and he said he would come. So, he is not suffering from malaria; he is fit, but he is just ignoring us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, if the Minister is within the vicinity of this building, I think we can ask him to come here. Let us not harass the Prime Minister because he is a professor of political science, as you know. (Laughter).

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, the matter, which has been raised is very grave. Yesterday the Minister himself was on the Floor of Parliament saying that people in Lango went to demonstrate and were looking for people from Acholi to kill. This was his statement yesterday, and I wish to give some information. But I want to know whether the Minister is going to come now to make a statement so that I can hold on. If he is not, I seek liberty to go ahead and debate this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I usually prefer that the Minister is notified so that he can give a researched answer. But when you address us, we the civilians do not know what to answer. It is also frustrating when you do not get the right information. Let me send for the Minister of Defence, who has been said to be in the building. I ask the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to ensure the safe arrival of the Minister of Defence, in this chamber.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I am standing here in protest on a matter of procedure. For over four months now I have had a standing question for oral answer on safe industrial production. Every time the Order Paper comes I look forward to seeing that question. It has never featured anywhere and yet as part of parliamentary democracy the people we represent on a number of occasions speak through us using those questions. May I know when my question will feature on the Order Paper, as a matter of seriousness?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you should give credit to the Chair. Several of your motions have either gone before the committees or came before this House. So, some times you have to balance with members who have not had opportunity to ask, but it will come to this House. Really, we have given you a lot of time, including the committee on Natural Resources.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that there is already a Standing Committee of Industrial Relations, which was appointed by the Speaker, and we are handling that matter. It is a select committee, and I think the worries of Mr Lukyamuzi will be addressed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to announce the presence of the SUNY Tanzania team. We have the Country Director, Donna Bugby, those of you who were in the Sixth Parliament know her. She ran the SUNY programme here too. We have Linda Madeleka, Grace Muro and Benedict Kezirahabi. They are the ones sitting there in the visitors’ gallery. You are welcome -(Applause)- Ms Winnie Babihuga, you are also welcome!

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2003

2.49
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Madam Speaker, I know it is not normally the procedure but I only wish to inform you that I have a certificate in respect of three Bills. This is because they are related and they are: the Agriculture Chemicals Control Bill, 2003; the Seeds and Plant Bill, 2003; and the Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2003. 

They are all related to enhancement of safety and health of our crops, and we hope when they are implemented we shall penetrate more markets. I beg to read the Plant Protection and Health Bill for the first time and also the Seeds and Plant Bill, 2003 for the first time and the Agriculture Chemicals Control Bill, 2003 for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you appear to have complied with section 10 of the Budget Act, I now commit those three Bills to the Committee of Agriculture.

MR WACHA: I am finding difficulty in accepting that procedure. How can one certificate be in respect of three Bills? I do not know whether it complies with rule 93(2) of our Rules of Procedure:  “In addition to the explanatory memorandum, the Bill shall be accompanied by a certificate setting out the financial implications (Budget Act 2001) including-  
(a) the specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill;
(b)how those outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of government;
(c) the costs involved and their impact on the budget; 
(d) the proposed or existing method of financing the costs related to the Bill and its feasibility.” 

When they talk about the Bill I have a feeling as a lawyer that it means one particular Bill. How does one certificate relate to three different Bills?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the Minister of Finance explain why this certificate relates to three Bills?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The substance that is required by the law to be covered under the certificate is adequately covered under this certificate we issued for the three Bills. These are related Bills and we found it proper to issue one certificate covering all the three, but when each Bill comes for presentation and debate here, each of them will be accompanied by a different copy of the certificate. 

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, I want some clarification. In our committee we received fake certificates of financial implications. In fact we are thinking of committing the Minister of Finance to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline because of writing fake papers, which do not conform to the law. So, let him read the certificate and we see whether it conforms to the law. We want to know how to proceed because the certificates he has been writing of late do not conform to the law at all.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the requirements under the law, as I know them, are that the certificate should stipulate the objectives of the Bill - when you look at this certificate it says: 

“This is to certify that the Bills entitled Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2003; Seeds and Plant Bill, 2003; and Agriculture Chemical Controls Bill, 2003 have been examined as required under section 10 of the Budget Act and that the Bills have the following objectives…” - and the objectives are set forth. The bills are expected to achieve outputs, which are also clearly set out.
 
The expenditure plan for the major components for the next two years is also set forth.

The funding and budgetary implications of the Bills are mentioned; the expected savings and all revenues to government are also listed, and the reasons are set forth. So, what is wrong with that?

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want from the Minister is that I assume that these Bills are going to be considered separately, each Bill on its merit. So, how do you split up that certificate to conform in each Bill? Supposing one Bill is thrown out, are you going to throw the whole certificate out with it?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the time of debate each Bill will be accompanied by a separate copy of the certificate. But if, Madam Speaker, it is your guidance that we should sever it, fine. We can sever and produce exactly the same certificate with the same wording for each and every Bill. There is no problem with that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall defer the first reading of these three Bills until you have produced three certificates.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, in addition to your ruling the Minister of Finance should be directed to look in detail at the provisions of our rule 93 in respect to these certificates of financial implications. I think what he has been doing is to set out the memoranda of the Bills in what he calls these certificates, and these are simply not enough to satisfy the provisions of our rule 93.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do recollect that we did have some debate on these matters and we did ask the Budget Committee to formulate what they think is an agreeable certificate to be used by the Minister of Finance. I do not know whether you have done that.

MR WACHA: I can confirm, Madam Speaker, that the Chairperson of the Budget Committee did formulate a format for the Certificate of Financial Implications, and it is far different from what the Minister has presently been bringing to this House and to the various committees.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, what I have been reading to you and what we complied with when we prepared this certificate, is exactly in accordance with the guidelines that were given by the chairperson of the committee. I stand to be guided as to where we deviated. To the best of my knowledge we complied with the guidelines that were given. 

That notwithstanding, I undertake that I am going to examine the rule and when we come to present these Bills again, the certificate will be in compliance with the instructions.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT OF THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA), WORLD BANK TO COMPLETE FINANCING UNDER THE SECOND ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PROJECT (EFMP II)

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I beg to present a brief to Parliament on the proposal to borrow from the International Development Association, World Bank, to complete financing under the second Economic and Financial Management Project (EFMP II). I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is hereby committed to the Committee of Finance to peruse and report back to this House.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT 
JULY - DECEMBER 2002

3.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Inspectorate of Government for the period July to December 2002.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will request our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to peruse that report in detail and report back to this House.

PRESENATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES ON DEBTS INCURRED DURING THE NRA BUSH WAR

3.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Tom Kayongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the second report of the Committee on Government Assurances (CGA), on Government’s commitment to settle displaced people from Hoima District and war debts incurred during the NRA Guerilla war. 

On the second page –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, members!

MR KAYONGO: On the second page you will get the abbreviations, and on the third page, the committee would like to acknowledge the tireless efforts and contribution of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa (RIP) towards the success of this report. Page 4 is self-explanatory.

Introduction.

Mandate and functions of the Committee on Government Assurances:

The Committee on Government Assurances is mandated under rule 146 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament to scrutinize assurances, promises and undertakings given by ministers and other agents of government in Parliament from time to time and report on: 

(i) The extent to which those assurances, promises and undertakings had been implemented.

(ii) Where implemented whether the implementation has taken place within the minimum time necessary for the purpose.

Methods of work and activity undertaken:

The committee made a follow-up of the progress made by government to re-settle people displaced from Hoima District. Efforts were made to establish whether the Government had adhered to its commitment to settle war debts incurred during the NRA guerilla war. Under Article 90(3)(d) of the Constitution of Uganda, on 25 September 2003, the committee visited the people who had been evicted from Hoima District and were camped at Lugogo Bypass ground. 

On the same day the committee also visited debt claimants who had camped for more than eight months at Wankulukuku Stadium. Today, Madam Speaker, those people are camped at Kasana playground in Luwero District under terrible conditions.

Objectives of the visit:  

(i) To establish the causes of the continued camping of people evicted from Hoima District in Lugogo Bypass ground.

(ii) To establish whether the eviction was contrary to Article 21(2) and 21(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

(iii) To establish whether the Government had taken any steps to resettle people evicted from Hoima District.

(iv) To establish reasons why the war debt claimants continued camping at Wankulukuku yet the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle was handling their claim cases.

Committee meetings:

The committee held several meetings with parties responsible for verifying and settling war debt claims

Findings from the field visits to Lugogo Bypass and Wankulukuku.

Findings from people evicted from Hoima District:  

The people camped at Lugogo were not willing to be given land and resettled individually, but they wanted to be allocated a block of land, which would accommodate all of them in one area.  

The living conditions were appalling and there was need to address the problem as soon as possible.   

The committee intended to advise government to endeavour to sensitise and re-settle those people individually, but two weeks after its visit to Lugogo, the people were all relocated to Mubende District. Conditions under which they were relocated are yet to be established.

Findings from war debt claimants camped at Wankulukuku: 

Circumstances under which the NRA guerrillas were operating forced them to seek support from civilians among whom they were operating. They solicited material support, food, shelter and security during incursions.

On realizing that the guerrillas’ objectives were a preferred solution to the then insurgency in the country as whole, the people of Luwero Triangle were convinced and they provided support to the guerrillas. Little did the guerrillas know that all the support providers would later require compensation.  

Several committees were set up to ensure that Luwero Triangle war debts were verified and settled. The committees date as far back as when the late Dr Mululu Samson Kisekka (RIP) was Prime Minister of Uganda. Nevertheless, many claimants have never been paid to date.  

The claimants were not happy with the work done by the appointed committees, which had made little effort to address the actual claimant problems The claimants further alleged that the people working with Luwero Triangle, who were not war claimants, paid themselves and deceived the nation that they had paid the actual claimants. Below are some of the people who were allegedly paid. It was also alleged that several of them were from the same family though the committee later discovered that those claims were made on baseless grounds.

Madam Speaker, the list of names of those people can be seen in the report on page 7, and the amount of money they claimed to have paid to them.  

The information obtained from the claimants prompted the committee, under rule 124(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to request the Department of Research Services to establish facts on the same matter from the Ministry responsible.  The research was guided by the following questions and specifications:  

1. A detailed document of claims settled on a yearly basis since the time compensation of war claimants was started.

2. A detailed list of claimants paid, their cheque numbers, the dates on which payments were made and the amounts paid out to each individual.

3. A comprehensive list of all verified claims and all rejected claims.

4. A description of the procedure used to verify, approve or reject a claim.

5. All releases by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to various payment centres.  

Madam speaker, the committee was not satisfied with the scanty information embedded in the report of the Department of Research Services. It was then that Article 94(a) of the Constitution and rule 174(a) of Rules of Procedure were evoked. The Ministers from the Ministry of State for Luwero Triangle; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and State House Controller were requested to appear before the committee to avail it with the necessary information and documents regarding settlement of war debts claims The following were able to appear before the committee:

1. Hon. Prof. Kiwanuka Semakula – Minister of State for Luwero Triangle.

2. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa – Minister of State for Finance (General Duties).

3. Hon. Kiwanda Godfrey – MP Mityana North, Mubende District.

4. Ms Zigiti Zeridah – Desk Officer; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

5. Mr Sengonzi E. Damulira, Private Secretary Welfare to His Excellency the President.

6. Mr Sebuliba M.D.	- Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

7. Mr Alex B. Okello -	Office of the Prime Minister.

8. Mr Byakusaaga Bisobye – Head of Policy and Planning, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

9. Ms Fatmah Walusimbi – Principal Assistant Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister.

10. Luwero Triangle War Debt Verification Committee chaired by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe.

11. Ms Kiwanuka Christine – Office of the Prime Minister. 

12. War claimants camped at Wankulukuku.

In one of its meeting with the above mentioned officers, the War Debt Verification Committee discarded the allegation payments indicated in section 2.2. 

It is also important to note that the Minister of Defence -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. Since the honourable member has given us a copy of what he is presenting, is it in order for him to continue to present it verbatim yet we have the report here with us? Could he not just highlight the main issues in the report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the benefit of the members who have not yet read it, the chairperson should read it.

MR KAYONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The Committee on Government Assurances received and examined documents submitted by the Prime Minister’s Office, the Minister of state for Luwero Triangle, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, State House and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee would like to present its findings.  

Background to the compensation of War Debt claimants.  

The committee learnt that in September 1983, the National Resistance Army came to an understanding with some people in Luwero Triangle for a loan in form of foodstuffs and other items The compensation for the loaned items was to be effected after the successful completion of the struggle. 

The NRM Government started compensating for the loaned items since 1987 to-date. Some of the people who carried out compensation exercises at different times included: Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine, Col Kahinda Otafiire, Col Arthur Musinguzi, Lt Col Frank Guma, Lt Col Jet Mwebaze, Lt Nalumoso, Capt John Kaye, 2nd Lt Timothy Kanyogonya, Mr Fred Mugisha, Lt Gen. David Tinyefuza, Brig. Matayo Kyaligonza, Col Samson Waswa and Col John Mugume. 

Others were Col Elly Kayanja, Lt Col Prossy Nalweyiso, Lt Col Fred Mwesigye, Maj. Mathias Sewankambo, and Capt. Maimuna Nadduli.  

Different centres, namely the Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Office of the President; and State House, carried out the payments.

Observations:

• Most of the problems associated with unpaid war debts emanated from settling claims through different centres. Other problems were a result of un-coordinated instructions and directives from different officials of State House and Ministry of Defence directing the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to pay particular claimants.
  
• Assistance given to individuals by State House because of their special contribution to the bush war led to double payments. The same beneficiaries ended up making compensation claims since many other people had done so.  

• An assessment availed to the committee by the War Debt Verification Committee indicated that some claims were verified but were awaiting payment. Others had already been paid like Ms Kebikomi Scovia, who was paid Uganda Shs 5.4 million; while some claims were dismissed as indicated in Appendix A of this report. 

Madam Speaker, I will be laying on the Table all the appendices afterwards.  

Establishing of War Debts Verification Committees:

In 2001, many claims remained unverified and thus unpaid. In the same year some claimants camped at Parliament Buildings as a way of demonstration against non-payment of their war debt claims This act prompted the President to instruct the Minister for Luwero Triangle then, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, to set up a committee to verify the claims cases. A four-man team was then set up comprising of Mr Mugwanya Stanley (Chairman), Mr Yiga Deogratius (Secretary), Mr Kamoga Bonny, and Mr Lawrence Mukasa as members. All these people hailed from Luwero triangle.
  
On 3 October 2001, the Mugwanya Committee presented a report that recommended Shs 6.7 billion to be paid to 1,378 claimants. The report indicated that there were still some other pending cases, which had not yet been costed. The claims were from Kiwanguzi area. 

The Shs 6.7 billion overwhelmed the President, yet several payments had already been made since 1986. He then directed the Minister of State for Luwero Triangle then, hon. Tim Lwanga, to set up a 20-man committee comprising of senior bush NRA commanders, veterans and contact persons of the NRM. People were selected from different operational areas that constituted Luwero Triangle from which claims originated.  

The committee consisted of Maj. Jacob Asiimwe (Chairman), Mr David Kibirango, Lt Gen. Elly Tumwine, Col Sam Waswa, Col John Mugume, Maj. Gen. David Tinyefuza, Lt Col Fred Mwesigye, Lt Col Elly Kayanja, Lt Col Nalweyiso Proscovia, Maj. Kyamufumba, Mrs Gertrude Njuba, Capt. John Kaye, Lt Sula Serunjogi, Mr Sekamate, Maj. Sewankambo, Rtd Brig. Matayo Kyaligonza, Hajji E. Ssedunga and Capt. Maimuna Nadduli.  

Note that it was clarified that the Shs 6.7 billion to be paid to 1,378 claimants as recommended by the Mugwanya Committee was not released to Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s committee as alleged by some claimants. Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s committee was able to verify claims amounting to only Shs 4 billion.  That committee commenced its work in November 2002 and was tasked to verify all cases that had been considered by the Mugwanya Committee. 

By February 2002, this committee approved 639 claims for payment out of 3,902 that had been verified by the Mugwanya Committee. Most of the claims that had been approved by the Mugwanya Committee were dismissed on the following grounds: 

1. Unauthentic recommendations, 
2. Claims without recommendations, 
3. Ghost claims, 
4. False claims, 
5. Forged claims, 
6. Exaggerated claims and 
7. Multiple claims

Grounds on which claims were rejected.

1. Unauthentic recommendations

Claims were rejected due to unauthenticated recommendations, which included claim letters that bore recommendations from NRA Commanders, LCs and contact persons who were not known to have operated in areas where the claims originated.

2. Claims without recommendations

Claims that had no recommendations to justify their genuineness were also dismissed. 

3. Ghost claims  

The verification committee visited districts in Luwero Triangle and established from the residents and local council authorities that some claimants neither physically existed nor had they ever lived in those areas. Claims for such people were, therefore, dismissed.

4. False claims  

Some claimants lodged in false claims Other claimants demanded for items, which were neither used nor required in the bush war. Such items included a claim by Mr Byenkya of Isimba village, Masindi who claimed for 30 iron sheets, one sofa set, 2 double beds, 4 Banco beds, 2 dining tables, one radio, 4 mattresses and 8 pigs.

5. Forged claims

Meanwhile, forged claims included erasing names of claimants with genuine recommendations and requests and replacing them with fraudulent names to achieve approval. An example cited was that of Mr Karakwende Jackson whose name was erased and replaced by Mr Kasea Mukarangwa. Forgeries also included use of forged stamps and signatures of recommenders. A total of Shs 112,075,000 arising from such claims was dismissed.

6.  Exaggerated claims 

Other claims registered were due to exaggerations. Examples of such claims were when a group of NRA fighters stayed for a few hours in Kitenga on their way to Mubende. The verification committee was surprised to receive the following claims: 

(i) Mr Roland Kizza of Kitenga claimed to have offered 15 acres of cassava, 550 bags of beans, 600 bags of maize flour, 1,750 bags of maize flour, 300 bags of yams, 1,640 bags of Irish potatoes, 12 acres of sweet potatoes, 60 goats, 65 cows, 21 sheep, and 20 pigs.

(ii) Mr Kasozi Lawrence of the same area claimed to have given 1,200 bags of maize grain, 2,150 bags of beans, 5½ acres of cassava, 7 acres of sweet potatoes, 1,750 bags of maize flour, cash worth Shs 700,000, 58 bags of yams, 400 bunches of bananas, one bicycle, 6 head of cattle, 10 goats, one acre of sugarcane, 40 trousers, 56 shirts, 12 torches and 12 boxes of soap.

7. Multiple claims  

It was also learnt that some claims were rejected due to submission of multiple claims Many people who had been compensated between 1986 and 1990 continued to lodge in claims Such claims arose because people took advantage of the ministers and/or new verification committees who were in most cases not very conversant with identifying such dubious claims Multiple claims worth Shs 193,942,500 -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, you asked the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to get the Minister of Defence here as soon as possible, and safely too. I see her going away and she has not reported whether the Minister of Defence is coming or not. How are we going to proceed? There are very urgent issues we want to settle with the Minister of Defence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I was operating under the impression that the Minister of Defence was before the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs in this building. That is why I had asked the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to go and bring him but maybe she could report her findings.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you. I checked in the committee room and the Minister was not there and he is not on phone. So, he is not available now but he will make a statement as soon as he is available. Madam Speaker, I had sent you a note to that effect. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Anang-Odur you will need to restate that problem when the Minister comes because there is nobody to answer it.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I will wait for the Minister but I see the Prime Minister and some other Ministers are here. The matters, which were raised, are of such grave circumstances. They are urgent and I think the nation needs to be informed about the correct situation. I have got some information; I want to be co-operative. If he does not come I request to be given an opportunity to give this information to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. Proceed, chairperson.

MR KAYONGO: Madam Speaker, I had started on the multiple claims, which are on page 13. 

(i) In 1990 Mr Y. Matsiko of Ngoma lodged a claim of 30 cows and was paid for 15 cows. 

(ii) In 2001 he lodged another claim dated 17th May demanding for 30 cows.  

(iii)  In 2003, he lodged another claim dated 18th March for 100 cows.  

(iv) On 25th March, the same year 2003, he lodged in a claim for 85 cows.

The Committee on Government Assurances heard from the verification committee chaired by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe that it was not mandated to handle cases of looted, stolen and destroyed property. Such claims were therefore, rejected. It further learnt that a deadline for submission of claims had been fixed for 28th February 2002 to enable the issue of war debts get closed. 

8. Pending Cases.

There are also pending cases, which the Committee on Government Assurances urges the verification committee to handle quickly.

9. Payment Exercise.

Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s War Debt Verification Committee considered 3,902 claims Six hundred thirty nine (639) were approved out of that lot.

On page 14 there is a table showing the categories, which were approved. Those in A and B have been paid already. That table is also contained in this document, which I am going to lay on the Table thereafter.

Method of Payment.

Members were informed that the verification committee was only charged with approving claims and not effecting payments. The Office of the Minister of State, Luwero Triangle sent the verified claims to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for payment. However, in order to ensure proper accountability, claimants’ cheques were delivered to the respective District Administrative Officers by the Office of the Minister of Luwero Triangle. It was from those offices that the claimants picked their cheques.  

At the district administrative offices claimants received their cheques in the presence of three of the following people, who had to witness on the payment sheet where the payee appended his or her signature acknowledging receipt of payment:

1. Sub-county chiefs. 

2. At least one member of the respective local branches of Luwero Triangle War Veteran Association.

3. Where possible, the Resident District Commission in charge of the area.

4. At least two members of the Local Council III.

It was a prerequisite for two members of the War Debt Verification Committee to be present at the time of payment.  

It was painful and shocking to learn that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had paid out Shs 3 billion without the verification, recommendation and, therefore, knowledge of the Ministry of State for Luwero Triangle, which was charged with that task. These payments were made at the recommendation of various individuals including Lt Gen. Salim Saleh, Col Kahinda Otafiire, and others.

Observation:

The committee observed that the role of the Ministry of State for Luwero Triangle, since it began handling war debts in February 2001, was solely to verify and recommend whom to pay to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The responsibility of settling claims lay with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which controlled the compensation vote; and it is that ministry to which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development directly released funds to settle the war claims

Payments made by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs:

Schedules of payment made by the Ministry of Justice Constitutional Affairs since 1987 in regard to Luwero Triangle war claims were submitted to and scrutinised by the Committee on Government Assurances. Schedule A consisted of foreign and local claims with big sums of money as indicated below (also refer to Appendix B of this report). The table is very clear and you can see the cheques and the amounts involved.  

A breakdown is that Haithar H. Abdi’s goods that were confiscated during the war by the NRA, as the claim was lodged to the Ministry of Defence for compensation, was paid the following.

• Products value 	US $ 325,537.20
• Freight charges	US $ 207,907.40
• Waiting charges	US $ 226,663.32
• Loss of business	US $ 609,300.00
• Lawyers’ fees and costs	 US $ 136,940.00

Observation.

The committee learnt with shock that in the Ministry’s Schedule A, one Haithar H. Abdi had been paid that amount of money, yet the Ministry claimed to lack funds to settle small amounts of local claimants.  

Schedule B consisted of many claims, including Haithar H. Abdi, Rwanda Petrol Gas; the schedule is in part as indicated in the table on page 16. All those payments were made. 

Meanwhile, Schedule C also contained both local and foreign claims in which Rwanda Petrol Gas was paid the amount as indicated on page 16. All those amounts were paid.

Furthermore, Schedule D also had payments made to Haithar H. Abdi and Rwanda Petrol Gas, as it appears in the table. Those were the first set of documents submitted to the Committee on Government Assurances. 

The committee also learnt that some claims in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were still outstanding as indicated in Schedule E (All these schedules are attached herewith in Appendix B).

Observations:

Members were surprised by the recommendations and subsequent payments of huge sums of money to foreign claimants, Haithar H. Abdi and Rwanda Petrol Gas, which payments also overwhelmed the Under Secretary of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, but were beyond his control.

The Inspector General of Government (IGG), Mr Jotham Tumwesigye, had on 22 July 2002 reported to the Attorney General about the alleged irregular payment of US $1,369,407.92 to Haithar H. Abdi being compensation for confiscated cargo during the NRA struggle. 

In the IGG’s letter the following were highlighted:

• That his office had received a complaint alleging that H. Abdi, a Kenyan transporter, had alleged that 12 trucks belonging to his company and carrying fuel products had been impounded and cargo used by the National Resistance Army in 1985. It was further alleged that a sum of US $136,940 had been paid out as legal costs.

• Investigations were carried out and it was found that H. Abdi had submitted a claim for sum US $1,369,407.92 to the Ministry of Defence in 1998. The claim went through the War Debt Committee headed by Col Kahinda Otafiire, which committee approved the claim wholesale. Col Otafiire wrote to the claimant admitting liability for the whole amount, even before the matter was forwarded to the Attorney General for final approval. Later, the Attorney General also approved a payment of 10 percent of the principle claim to Messrs. Bitangaro & Company Advocates as fees. 

• It was further established that after that payment was made to H. Abdi, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released a report by M/S PricewaterhouseCoopers regarding payments by the Ministry of Justice related to all debt claims whereby Abdi’s claim was also audited and recommendations made. Among the findings in that report were that Abdi’s claim was exaggerated and that some of the consignees of the products for which Abdi was claiming had already been compensated for the same product for which Abdi was then being paid.

• Investigations also revealed that claims of consignees of Cargo, (Petrol Gas Rwanda), Fina BP, Burundi and Mobil Oil Rwanda were parallel to the claim of H. Abdi and by paying both consignees and the transporters, government made double payments.

• It was also found that although Hajji Abdi submitted original documents to support his claims, the other parallel claims were approved without any supporting documents.

Issue of concern to the committee:

• Considering the events, the committee agrees with the IGG that the Attorney General’s Chambers handled war debt claims submitted to it as a matter of routine; examining only procedural defects without giving the claims scrutiny they deserve. For this reason even when Messrs PricewaterhouseCoopers pointed out pertinent issues on double payments and exaggerated claims, the chambers made no independent verification of this. 

• It was also sad to learn that the Government could pay huge sums of money and advocates’ fees in cases, which are admittedly ex gratia like it was done in Abdi’s case. It was extremely exceptional, especially that all other cases in the same category were not considered for that type of payment.  

• Members were concerned that a foreigner’s property (Abdi’s) was verified for compensation and part payments were made contrary to the terms of reference of the War Debt Verification Committee. 

• Although the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs claimed that the over Shs 3 billion that was paid without the recommendation of the Verification Committee from the Ministry of Luwero Triangle had been audited, verified and found to be genuine; it was disappointing that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which is supposed to provide legal advice to other ministries, was acting to the contrary. 

• It is a disappointment that even with the existence of the War Debt Verification Committee responsible for verifying, approving and recommending claims for payments, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs still continues to receive and pay big claims from other parties and ignores small claims recommended by the committee responsible.

Note:

Only 17 percent of the claims settled by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was verified and recommended by the Ministry of State for Luwero Triangle under which the War Verification Committee falls. This implies that 83 percent of the settled claims were processed through irregular means.

Other documents examined from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.
In one of the meetings held to cross-examine documents submitted to the committee, contradictory and confusing information was embedded in the documents attached to the letter sent to the committee dated 11 December 2003, Ref. No. FEB/1 signed by Mr Bafaki on behalf of the Solicitor General. Specific reference is made to Annex B also attached herewith.

Observations of the Committee.

A directive had been issued to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in May 2002 by the Permanent Secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister, instructing the Ministry not to pay the Luwero Triangle War claims without referring them to the verification committee chaired by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe.

Despite that letter, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs continued to settle some war claims indicated in Annex A and Annex B without recourse to the Office of the Prime Minister as indicated.  

The Committee on Government Assurances learnt from the same ministry that most of the firms and foreign individuals raised their claims against government in the 1990s, and that that the Ministry accepted as genuine claims and were duly authenticated by the senior officers in NRA, now UPDF, and therefore they became government debts. In the case of the claims that looked doubtful, investigations were carried out by the IGG, one of which is indicated in section 3.5; where after, some claims were accepted and others dropped.

An inquiry from the verification committee on the two annexes revealed that:

1. The claim by East Mengo Growers Co-operative Union had been sufficiently paid with 200 head of cattle, which were valued at Shs 24,000,000 and thereafter dismissed on 11th December 2001. (See Appendix C). The Committee discovered that despite settlement of that claim, the same claimant were again paid 54 million in April 2002.

2. The verification committee had and has never received any claim from both Maj. and Mrs Katafire, which in Annex B of the Ministry of Justice’s submissions (See Appendix B of this report) are indicated as Shs 10,335,000 and Shs 6,671,000 respectively. The verification committee wondered when and how these two people’s contributions to the struggle became a claim.

3. Mr Kaaya’s claim was considered by the then verification committee and the Minister of Luwero Triangle then, hon. Tim Lwanga, who calculated the money, which Mr Kaaya had already been paid. He was convinced that Mr Kaaya had been adequately paid considering what other claims were being paid. The claim was dismissed but the verification committee was surprised to learn that Mr Kaaya was paid Shs 20,833,333; Shs 200,000,000; Shs 121,957,422; Shs 200,000,000; and Shs 100,000,000 over and above what he had been paid.

4. Lt Katonono Willy of Kyankwanzi was paid 85 head of cattle, yet according to the recipients of the war items, no one ever received 85 head of cattle from Kyankwanzi. 

The Committee on Government Assurances (CGA) was concerned and it requests the Solicitor General to avail it with information on the following:

1. A list of all claims that were duly authenticated by senior officers in NRA (UPDF) and, therefore, became government debts.

2. A list of all senior officers in NRA (UPDF) who committed government to paying war debts, with copies of their recommendation letters for each recommended claim attached to that list.

3. A list of all claims that looked doubtful and therefore, investigated by the IGG. Claims that were accepted and those that were dropped giving the basis on which the respective decisions were taken.

4. Copies of all the recommendations of all the people paid under annex B.

The committee made the following findings from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs:

• Annex A, which is attached to this report as Appendix D, was sent to the committee. The document provided some of the Luweero war claims authenticated by NRA (UPDF) and some claims sent by the Ministry of Defence. The information was lacking because it did not contain a list of all senior officers in NRA (UPDF) who committed government to paying war debts, with copies of their recommendation letters for each recommended claim attached to that list.

Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that:

• The community, which contributed directly to the struggle and whose claims have been verified and approved, should be paid first before paying any other claimant.

• Uncoordinated information between all paying centres is the cause of the problems of failing to settle war claims It is hereby recommended that Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s Verification Committee should consider all pending payments that were not verified by his committee before they are paid by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

• There is lack of consistency in payments due to lack of a one-stop centre. The committee recommends that the verification committee in the Ministry of State for Luweero Triangle should be the only one to verify and approve all war claims Thereafter it should send them to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for payment to be effected.

• All other parties that have been recommending claims to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should stop with immediate effect. The War Debt Verification Committee and the Ministry of State for Luweero Triangle should be the one through which all submissions should be made.

• The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release money for all claims approved by Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s verification committee such that those claims can be settled. The Committee on Government Assurances should also get a copy of this list of claimants verified and approved as it is sent to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. This will help us to keep track of those paid and to avoid future confusion and double payments. 

• It is also recommended that the people who claim to have received goods claimed by two sister companies, Haithar H. Abdi and Rwanda Petrol Gas during the war, and the people who verified and recommended payments to those companies’ claims, should be investigated by the IGG.

• On 29th September - Madam Speaker, during our interaction with the people we interfaced with, this cropped up, that is why it is here. So, I beg your indulgence. Hon. Prof. Kiwanuka Semakula in a letter to the committee through the clerk to the committee alleged that hon. Kiwanda Godfrey was sponsoring the war debt claimants camped at Wankulukuku. (See appendix E). 

The committee cautioned the Minister on his allegations, especially that his allegations were based on hearsay from Super FM radio station. The Minister, however, owned up to his words in a letter. 

Hon. Kiwanda, however, denied knowledge of anyone in the group that had camped at Wankulukuku and added that he sympathized with the war claimants who had not been paid, but that he neither had the will nor the financial ability to support them. 

The committee decided to put this matter to rest since it was not within its mandate to investigate such allegations. The committee now recommends that the appropriate Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline takes up the matter, and that punitive measures be taken on the party that will be found guilty.
   
• The committee also recommends that all payments made to all claimants indicated in annexes A and B be investigated by the IGG.  

Madam Speaker, all these appendices and annexes that I have been referring to are contained in this big document, and I pray that I lay it on the Table. Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Hon. Kayongo, before we debate this, the matter also concerns people from Hoima. But since the bulk of your report is based on Luwero, I do not know whether the Hoima part is there.

MR KAYONGO: Madam Speaker, that is what we considered first.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, a Hoima report will be coming too?

MR KAYONGO: No, it is contained here on pages 5 and 6, then we went to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there are recommendations on that one?

MR KAYONGO: Well, the Government had already intervened and they are already settled. So, I do not know –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few minutes ago, my honourable colleague raised a matter of hon. Mbabazi being produced in this House in accordance with the instructions to the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs. We were made to believe that hon. Mbabazi is not available in this building. But I have confirmed with my own eyes, I have talked to him, he is actually here. I even informed him that the Speaker had instructed his colleague the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs to produce him in the chamber, and he said he was not aware. I can confirm this very minute that he is there and he is not coming.  

MR MWANDHA: I think the information being provided by hon. Awori is very serious. If the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, on your instructions, went to see the hon. Amama Mbabazi and she came back and told the House that she had not seen him, and that he is not on telephone when in fact she was told where to find hon. Mbabazi, this is a serious matter on the part of the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs.  

Furthermore, the Rt hon. Prime Minister himself informed the House that he had instructed the Minister of Defence to come here because he anticipated that some of the issues that concern his office are likely to come up. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is in control! If the man is sitting up there and he has refused to come here and the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs comes and gives us false information, I think this is very serious.  

MR AWORI: I talked to the Minister of Defence, hon. Mbabazi, less than six minutes ago. He confirmed that he had actually talked to the Minister of Parliamentary Affairs on his whereabouts. So, I do not understand how the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs can tell the august House, and much more so the Chair, that she is not in touch with him on telephone, when the Minister can confirm that they even talked on telephone.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, where did you meet the Minister six minutes ago? 

MR AWORI: In Committee Room 403 North Wing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he before a committee of this House?

MR AWORI: Yes, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is appearing before a committee of this House?

MR AWORI: The Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a committee of this House. But you know that is also a committee of this House and it is doing some work on our behalf.  

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, for further information to the august House, this matter actually started in the morning. We informed the Minister in charge of Defence that there are certain urgent matters he needs to explain to the Plenary, and they are of major concern to the whole nation. We asked whether he would be available. I even informed the Director of CMI who happens to be a Member of this august House, that we shall demand their presence in this august House to explain the escalating situation in Gulu and Lira towns. And we agreed that by 3 O’clock the matter of the other committee should have ended so that he becomes available to this august House to elucidate on a situation in the North.  

Madam Speaker, I am emphatic on the matter because of yesterday’s resolution. It really requires that the Government should treat this matter seriously otherwise our resolution will be of no consequence whatsoever. I request that the honourable minister, even if he is transacting matters of the committee on our behalf, be produced in this august House so that he can explain on what we consider the welfare and security of our people in the North.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could I ask the clerk to inform the Chairperson of Defence and Internal Affairs Committee to adjourn his meeting for the time being to enable the Minister to come and respond to issues in the House? (Applause).

4.03
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances for this report.  I have been very much touched by the contents of this report. I feel the pain when my people in Wakiso District are crying of poverty and such fraudulent payments are made to people who are after satisfying their own stomachs. I am really disappointed!

We have heard what is in this report and I would like to ask the Government or the Ministers concerned to tell us what they are planning to do about this problem. I understand the IGG’s report has also questioned these fraudulent payments. But what is to be done next? We read the reports; everything is explained on the Floor of Parliament, and that is the end of everything? How are we moving and how are we helping the people? When we come on the Floor of Parliament, we debate, we discuss, we resolve issues and this becomes the end of everything. I think we should come up with solutions to such a problem and they must be implemented. Many things are never implemented. I think something has to be done.

We should take the committee’s recommendations seriously. I want to ask the Minister of Finance to explain to us what he plans to do because he is the one who released these funds to the relevant ministries. And I would also like the Minister of State for Luweero Triangle to explain to us why this has happened like this.  

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the committee’s recommendation 4.1 on page 21, much as I agree with the other recommendations. I do not want to agree with that recommendation, which says we should continue payments to those who have whatever. I would like to recommend that let this programme stop completely. (Applause). Let this money instead go and help the people in the North. Let this money help our poor people. They want the money to continue with their projects, but the money is not available.

We have lost the lives of our people in Luwero Triangle. What have they paid us for the deaths of our people? They continue paying these people fraudulently. When I look at what the chairman has explained about the payments done to Mr Kaaya, I am so surprised. He is paid Shs 200 million, he is paid Shs 500 million, my God! And, Madam Speaker, when we look at what has been paid to this so-called foreign claimant, I am really disappointed! (Applause). I am very disappointed to see that even my honourable colleagues, the Ministers can get involved in this kind of thing because according to the report they recommended these payments.  

On behalf of the people of Wakiso District, I am really disappointed and I would not like my people to read this report because sincerely it is going to be a very big problem to us as government. I must say, to us as government, because I am also part of the Government. I request that the recommendations of this committee should be taken seriously. 

I strongly support recommendation 4.7 of paragraph 2. It is a serious recommendation and I hope the Government is going to take it up. We have said that probably the IGG should go further to investigate this issue. I pray and I hope it is not going to stop on the Floor of this House. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.09
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to my colleagues’ to express my dismay by the information contained in this particular report. It is a very big embarrassment to us all. It indicates the incompetence of some personnel in some ministries that are connected to this kind of affair. It is very unfortunate, it is such a discriminative kind of action that has been depicted in the whole activity towards the payment of those who claim to be people who got involved in the war that liberated this country.  

I want to inform you members that the co-operative movement in this county was at one time booming. It was a composition of the peasants who are supposed to be protected by this government, and they played a very vital role in the war. The Government got lump sums of money and a lot of material assistance during the war. On page 20 East Mengo was paid twice or thrice, it is almost a hundred million. Just one co-operative union! Whereas all the co-operative unions in this country got involved and they are today declared bankrupt under the pretext of saying that the management was cheating the peasants. It is not true! 

When you look at this report, I do not think the peasants are going to take to you kindly, my dear brothers and sisters in the Government –(Interruption)

MS ALISEMERA: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor. I wanted to give you information that Bundibugyo is also part of Luwero Triangle and we are supposed to have benefited from that. But up to today those who lost everything have died before getting anything for their contribution. I do not know whether some areas are supposed to be Luwero Triangle or they are supposed to be just heard by people to know that they ever contributed but they never got what they are supposed to get. We have never come here to demonstrate but the day Bundibugyo gets up, you will know that they also fought. Thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much, for your information. I do not want to give you the list of the co-operatives claiming that they have never been paid. Those who were lucky enough were paid but not even one-third of the total amount of what they were demanding for. It is very unfortunate and I think the Government has to look into this critically because people are complaining. People love their co-operative movement but it is all dead today.  

We are told the Vice-President is trying to revitalise the co-operative movement. But the peasants do not like the approach because it starts from above instead of starting from the grassroots. And they are wondering, are they going to have their co-operative movement flourish as it used to? Are they going to be paid their monies? When they read such a report, how are they going to take government? Is it helping them? Is it pro-peasants who really fought by sacrificing their lives, their daughters and sons who died during the war? 

In addition, those who survived are also complaining because they have not been settled. It is very unfortunate. It is high time the Government looked into this critically to make sure that there is equitable payment done. Thank you.

4.14
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga County East, Kiboga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. We have seen our people camped here and being chased by the Police. We have heard of them in Wankulukuku, now we hear of them in Kasana playground, they are dying there. We have heard also conflicting stories from different ministers. This report is now assisting us to come to grips with the matter. Where did the money go, because since this government came to power claims are purported to have been settled. 

This report has revealed everything; money has gone to Abdi, money has gone to Rwanda Petrol Gas, money has gone to Kaaya, money has gone here, money has gone there. If we peruse those documents, the appendices tabled, we will find that our ordinary people who have been able to access payment have been paid peanuts, Shs 150,000, Shs 20,000, Shs 40,000, and the other people have been paid billions of money under fraudulent arrangements. These are the people who supported the struggle voluntarily.  

Madam Speaker, when you read this report, although there are some small contradictions, but it was out of the people’s conviction that they support the struggle because they expected payment. But after the animal has fallen, when you go to hunt, you expect at least something. But this small something has not come, it has gone to other people. I am not sure because this report is not telling us whether actually these people who are purported to have received the money, the Kaayas and the rest, really received it. It may be said that Kaaya received this and did this yet he never got the money. Because already there is an indication in this report that somebody is reported to have received 85 head of cattle and he testified –(Interruption)

MR LUBOWA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor must have heard that we were recommending that the IGG investigates all those who received the money. Our committee could not work as an investigating body but we recommended that the IGG comes and we establish whether really these people received the money.

CAPT. MATOVU: Thank you, colleague for giving way. I think it is all wasted energy because the IGG you are talking about did his work and the report, which you have just received in this House on page 86, says: “Despite all my beautiful recommendations no action has been taken on all this.” So, it is as bad as that. 

In fact, I am so saddened for the first time I do not want to even participate in this debate. I do not know whether it is allowed –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that related to this particular subject?

CAPT. MATOVU: Yes, the IGG has already done his work and no action has been taken. In fact, I have been shying away from listening to this song: “Abantu beekolera ssente abogera bogere” (people are making money those who want to talk let them talk). I think let us listen to that. People are just making money, you cannot believe it; I am so desperate. I am so disappointed that I do not want even to participate in this debate, Madam Speaker.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank the honourable members for all those clarifications. Madam Speaker, to me the whole exercise was misconceived at the beginning, because there were no guidelines as to how these people should have been identified. There were no guidelines as to who should recommend and who should authenticate. 

When we come to the payment centres, the Ministry of Justice is responsible, the Ministry of Defence is responsible, the RDCs offices are responsible, and the Chairmen of LC IIIs are responsible. This is the problem and there are no records. When the people filled the forms and others wrote applications they were collected by different people, there were no records left anywhere in the field where these things were originating. You cannot find them anywhere. 

These documents were just brought here to the Ministry we do not know, not even to Luweero Triangle department the so-called ministry in charge. That ministry; what does it do? It does only one thing to collect forms and verifying them. What else does it do? Nothing! We do not benefit from it and we question whether it is important to have it there. So, this is the only job it would be doing but it has also failed to do it, others are doing it. 

Not until the verification committee of Maj. Jacob Asiimwe was put in place that all these are being revealed. It is terrible, our people have suffered, they have camped at what they used to call Republic House, they came from the village and this is not the first time they have come here. They came and camped there –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the member for giving way. I want to inform him that Jacob Asiimwe’s Committee was put there by His Excellency, the President. No single minister in any ministry of Uganda could think of that.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I just wanted to inform you that at one time the total number of cows claimed to have been eaten in Luweero was exceeding the population of cows in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR KIWALABYE: So you see the gravity of this matter, Madam Speaker? The whole exercise lacked transparency, people after filling the forms neither knew where to go nor whom to contact. After that they were told the forms were lost and they were given another lot to fill. Others filled several times, five times, six times!

I want to also submit that the peasants do not have the skills, which are used in the exercise of corruption because some of them are completely illiterate. The peasants did not fill these forms themselves, some people brought the forms and filled them for them. They knew what to do with the forms in the first place and they took the forms So, many of these payments may have been made but may not have been received by the intended recipients.  

This is a very serious matter and I think Parliament should do something about this.  Although these recommendations are here, they are not strong enough. All these people, Kahinda Otafiire recommending, others who have been mentioned and others who have not been mentioned must be investigated thoroughly to see that - because other people have a feeling that the Luwero Triangle people have benefited a lot and yet we are the poorest. On record we have benefited but in actual fact we have not benefited. Therefore, thorough investigations should also allay fears that the people who have benefited in this government are those of Luwero Triangle because they brought this government into power. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us try to use just five minutes.

4.25
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very important revelation.  While my colleagues were heavy hearted on listening to this, in no way was I. I know there is still much more under the carpet and I am sure these are some of the practices, some of the actions which now make some of the people in government to even fear their shadows. They have, therefore, to claim for third term as the only avenue to protect them. (Applause).

I am even much more disturbed by the heading of this report “NRA Guerilla War Debts”. Madam Speaker, for the last 18 years this country has been torn in wars. How can we pretend to settle war debts when every other day there is war going on in one part of this country or the other? Who are these people who committed themselves? That time when they were in the bush they were not officers of government, they were bandits. They had no moral authority to commit the people of Uganda. They were terrorists, they were bandits, they were guerillas and that is how they were being described. Therefore, they had no moral authority to incur all these debts, which now we are trying to pay as a government. 

Madam Speaker, that is not the only thing. A lot of pledges have been made since then -(Interruption)

MR YIGA: Madam Speaker, we all know very well the history of this country. We know that the NRA fought a guerilla war and this is the war, which has brought peace to this country. This is the war, which has brought development to this country and many other good –(Applause). Is it in order for him to refer to these gallant sons and daughters of Uganda who sacrificed their lives as bandits, yet what they did has turned out to be the good of this country despite the fact that we have some problems in some parts of the country? Is it in order for him to refer to them as bandits? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know how the committee framed their terms of reference but certainly the committee itself described them as guerillas. That is what is here.  

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling –(Interruption) 

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for any honourable member of this House to imagine that I, Lt Col Katirima, hon. Member of Parliament representing the UPDF in this House, a person who interacted with the wanainchi, some of whom gave us their cows in Luwero, and I committed my signature that after the war we would pay them, and when the war ended we duly authenticated and these people were paid. Is it in order for such people to imagine and even to say to this House that I was a terrorist, and that I should not have contracted those debts, and that I should not have survived on the services of those wanainchi to be able to come to this House and transact business for the security and development of this country?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what the hon. Wadri is asking is that: did you have capacity to enter into these contracts at that time? That is what he is asking.

LT COL KATIRIMA:  Madam Speaker, to the extent that we had faith in the people of Uganda to determine their destiny and we had authority to commit government; that is why government paid.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that the mandate of the Committee on Government Assurances is to make sure that government does what it promised to do. Therefore, I am wondering and I need your help, whether hon. Wadri, in spite of the fact that the freedom he is enjoying was partly contributed to by this effort and he knows what was happening to him personally - he knows it. I would like your guidance as to whether he is not taking this Parliament back to consider whether the war was legitimate or not, when in fact the job of the Committee on Assurances is to find out whether Government has complied with what it contracted to do. (Applause). Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened very carefully to the report, including the recommendations. The first recommendation is that the payments should continue and be completed. Some members have said in fact there should be no further payments. That is the theme the hon. Wadri is developing –(Interjection)- yes, let them speak.

MR WADRI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order, and on a very serious matter, because hon. Wadri Kassiano has called those people who were fighting, terrorists. He has said they are bandits and they are terrorists. 

Madam Speaker, you said that the report calls them guerrillas and as someone who knows this, there is a world of difference between guerillas and terrorists –(Interjection)- I am an orderly citizen of Uganda and a civilized Member of Parliament. Everybody here knows the meaning of the word “terrorist”. The kind of people who do not subscribe to any rule; they do not subscribe to rules at all of any gain, whether war gains or anything. We know what happened in Luwero; we know what the war was about; we know as hon. Kagonyera has said, that we are all beneficiaries of that effort, including hon. Kassiano Wadri. The freedom he is exercising even today is because of that effort. 

Could he, therefore, substantiate the claim that the NRA, which was fighting were terrorists, as we know the meaning of the word terrorist? If he cannot then he should withdraw that statement and apologise. Is he in order, unless he substantiates that claim, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, could you explain where your words came from?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I said earlier on, I am very careful about the selection of my words. I never imported any word, other than the words, which were adduced and stated on the Floor of this House by the committee. I re-affirm my stand on what I said. This is so because of the following: 

At the time when the NRM went to the bush there was a legitimate government and, therefore, the fact that they went to the bush to fight a legitimate government could suffice what I termed and what the committee termed as bandits.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the honourable member on the Floor -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katirima, he has been asked to substantiate.

MR WADRI: No, I have told you I am very careful about selection of my words and I stand by them. I can never make a statement on the Floor of this House, of which I am very unsure. 

We have had colossal sums of money that has gone into bottomless pits. This is all here in this report. The double payments, what more do you expect from the IGG when it is clearly stated that East Mengo Co-operative Growers Union as an organization was double paid. The payment vouchers are there; what more evidence do you need? Why do you not go ahead and recover such kind of payments if the people who are concerned do not have interest in such double payments? You are talking about -(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I had risen on a point of order, and asked for substantiation. I thought you gave hon. Wadri the Floor in order to substantiate his claim that the NRA were terrorists. So, I am rising on that same point. Could he substantiate the claim that the NRA were terrorists, please?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, you have only said that you stand by your word, but can you substantiate it?

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a known fact that during the five-year guerrilla warfare waged by the NRA, a lot of buses and other vessels going to the North were randomly and indiscriminately shot at and burnt, and people killed. Would that not tantamount to - if you are going to indiscriminately kill innocent people how different are you from Osama Bin Laden; how different are you from Kony who is fighting now? That is the point, which makes me say, yes, they also carried out terrorist activities.

MR AWORI: Thank you my honourable colleague for yielding the Floor. I would like to inform the honourable colleague that twice, ambulances, in July 1983, carrying patients from Nakasongola bringing them to Mulago, were blown up by the NRA; a terrorist organization at that time.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was not examining what the nature of the organization was. The report is talking about the claims and whether they should be paid, what should be done to those who were over paid, those exaggerated and those that are forged. Can you concentrate on that?

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you, Madam speaker, and honourable member for giving way. When the honourable member holding the Floor was making his statement, he said that East Mengo Growers were paid twice. I wish he could listen!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Wadri, the honourable minister is asking for clarification. Honourable members, that is un-Parliamentary - no, you speak through the Speaker, hon. Wadri. Yes, Mr Minister.

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, and if I heard the honourable member well, he said that he has proof that East Mengo Growers were paid twice - that is what the report says. The clarification I am seeking is -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Minister, if you look at page 20, paragraph 1, that is where it is stated that East Mengo Growers were paid with 200 head of cattle valued at 24 million and later paid 54 million for the same animals.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  As I said earlier on, I do not come here with my own words.

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, people who have not read the report should not waste the time of the House. A person should stand up knowing very well that he has read the report and understood what he has read. We should not be wasting time over things that are in the report.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As you rightly pointed out on page 20, the double payment to East Mengo Growers Co-operative Society was effected during the time of office of hon. Tim Lwanga who was the Minister then according to what is here; so, he should know.

MR LWANGA: I was seeking clarification in that I disagree with this report. You know why? Because we did a thorough investigation and in fact on the list you will find - which was audited during the time when –(Interruption)

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, the report that is being discussed now has all the contents that members are concerned with. What the Minister is coming up with is explained in the report. If the report is showing that there was double payment, then he should wait for his turn and explain to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether the committee had an opportunity to interview you -(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, the reason I am giving this information, if this was done during my period - and by the way I am a very good bookkeeper. I did bookkeeping. On that list there is no East Mengo Growers. I prepared the list myself and I was not even given a chance to come before this committee. Why was I not called? Why?

MR LUBOWA: Madam Speaker, what does the Minister have to say about Appendix C, which has been referred to here? Maybe the Minister knows what is in Appendix C could confirm what we were saying. That is under No. 1.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page?

MR LUBOWA: That is page 20, No. 1. We have referred to Appendix C, which has some information. I do not know whether he knows it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I would advice is that, if there is anybody who wants to raise issues with the contents of this report, you will be given a chance to speak. Let these members finish then we come to this side. Hon. Wadri, please wind up.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, Ugandans have got all the reason to decry the revelations that have been made in this report. Right now, 52 percent of our national budget is donor driven. Assuming all this amount of money, which has been spent in a bottomless pit, was put to use in the national coffers; how much more would we do in the social services; how much more would we do in all the Universal Primary Education schools; how much more would we do in primary health care? I think there is need for us to re-examine ourselves and see whether these commitments that we have undertaken are of benefit to this country.  

Luwero Triangle goes far beyond Luwero District. All along people have been pitch-camping here at Parliament, when I looked at them and a few of us had a chance of getting concerned to ask where they came from, they were all from Luwero; and yet Masindi District, Hoima District, Kabarole District are all in Luwero Triangle. Luwero Triangle consists of 19 districts. Are we doing the right thing, spending all this amount of money where it has been proved that there has been a lot of forgery, there have been a lot of multiple claims, there have been a lot of double payments and even ghost claims because some of the claimants have been found not to exist? Are we doing the right thing?

I am say this because even commitments were made by government to pay for fishing vessels, which were destroyed in Pakwach and Arua along the River Nile; it is on record. What has happened to those claims? How many times have people lost vehicles and merchandise on the way to Kabarole and on the way to the West Nile, and yet there are documents from government to the effect that, yes, they sympathize with the situation and that they will be able to compensate. These are things, which are clearly seen. And what happened in the East, in Teso; and what is it that is raging in the North? If every other Ugandan is to come forward with a claim, is this something sustainable? Can we sustain it for tomorrow and the next day? I mean, we need to be very realistic because the effect of war in this country has touched each and every part of this country and unless we re-examine, we may never –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much my honourable colleague for giving way. Actually, as you have rightly stated, we are in possession of heaps and heaps of documents that are intended to raise the issue of claims of lost property and lost lives, during the insurgency in Teso. I am listening with keen interest and I know that if the Luwero claims are actually paid, next in line will be those from Teso.

MR WADRI: As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I noticed from this report that there is lack of co-ordination among the various ministries of government. There has not been a one-stop centre from where things – if there was a one-stop centre, how come the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is effecting payment without consulting with the Minister for Luwero Triangle? This is what is reflected in this report, which gives me the feeling that there is lack of co-ordination. And once there is lack of co-ordination, of course what do you expect, you expect things like double payment. One ministry takes payments and effects them on its own without consulting the other. I think for smooth running of government there is need to synchronize efforts and programmes so that this country can be saved from all this mismanagement. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MR CHRISTOPHER MBALIBULHA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just one point; it is about Nyakantonze Growers Co-operative Society. Kasese is part of the Luwero Triangle and some of us have kept quiet. We thought we were sacrificing for the liberation of this country. We did not know that this was an economic activity, but now this report is an eye opener.  

Madam Speaker, our liberators came to us in Kasese. We gave them everything, we trusted them, we thought we were liberating our country and, therefore, there was no claim. I saw them vandalizing Nyakatonze Co-operative Society. All our cars were burnt and turned into government military jeeps and nothing has been given to Nyakatonze. Nyakatonze has collapsed once and for all. 

If we cannot stop this payment, I am putting a claim that Nyakatonze should be paid forthwith. I am going down to Kasese to put in a concrete claim; we must be paid back. This was not an economic activity; you are ashaming us you people. Thank you very much.

4.52
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I have quickly perused through the report and I have some reasonable knowledge because at one point we paid – yes, we ate cows but the owners of these cows, goats, bicycles and cars have been compensated. I have seen many names of very senior prominent Ugandans in today’s government, and I do not know those who are here apart from hon. Mbabazi in the Ministry of Defence. The other people may not quite have intimate knowledge of what was obtained. 

I was in defence and we paid colossal sums of money. Hon. Capt. Byaruhanga gave some information but in a very subtle way, that at one time the cows paid for are more than the cows presumably in the country. Madam Speaker, we were told some time ago, especially before the capture of Kampala in 1986, that NRM accepts right as right and rejects wrong as wrong. If our senior colleagues are to be very honest, they would tell us that the claimants whose property had been taken by the army or eaten by the army or used by the army, these claimants were paid –(Applause)- my brother Sewankambo is here, these claimants were paid. 

If we are to be honest we must put a stop to some of these things and we go out there and explain to the supporters of the NRM. This thing will never end, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

4.54
DR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Committee on Government Assurances for their report. I want to thank the committee for at least they have brought out the issue of the people who had camped first at Parliament and later at Lugogo, and at least they have brought out the issue that these people were from Hoima District and not Kibaale as the press had hyped. Everybody at that time was from Kibaale; they said the people of Kibaale were so tribalistic, that they had sent away people and so forth. 

I want to thank the committee that they have brought it out so well that these people actually were not from Kibaale. What they have not brought out is that these people had actually encroached on someone’s land and this man Prince Herbert Kimera used legal means to chase them away. He went to court and court ordered their eviction. I wish it had come out very clearly that these people were not maliciously evicted.  

However, Madam Speaker, what is interesting is their revelation on 2(1), which reads that: “The people camped at Lugogo were not willing to be given land and resettled individually, but they wanted to be allocated a block of land, which would accommodate all of them in one area.” I wish the committee had gone ahead to get the reason why these gentlemen wanted to be taken to a block of land. Possibly it would give us more insights, especially we people in Kibaale. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that I presented a petition in this Parliament, which petition unfortunately has been misplaced by this very Parliament. My petition cannot be found anywhere, and I am very surprised that a petition I presented and laid on the Table on the 17th December cannot be found; something must be done! That also means that government must come up with a resettlement policy very fast. We have been informed that the resettlement policy is in the offing, but we do not see the end of the tunnel and yet we are waiting for it and we want it to come soon and it must come.  

I was really ashamed by some of the revelations in this report, especially me coming from Kibaale, which is part of the Luwero Triangle. I am quite ashamed that certain things are happening and many of the cadres of the Movement are associated with wrong doings according to what has come out. These veterans, whether they made claims falsely or not, to me a letter written by the Minister of State for Luwero that one Member of Parliament was seen talking to them or could have given them a few handouts, that is tantamount to madness. That is very unfortunate.  

I do not know whether he did not see me, because I was among the people who were there. I knew some of them and I gave them some money. I think you would have even written that Kasirivu gave these people money. Madam Speaker, the Minister responsible for a certain sector should have talked to them and disproved what they were saying. But, one day I saw on television, he was haranguing them. I think that is a very poor work method. Members of the front bench should not encourage it. 

The behaviour of the Minister of Finance in this report must be seriously looked at, because I am sure the members of staff, beginning with a political leadership in the Ministry of Finance, are so careful with money releases.  

You are aware that many ministries have been crying that Finance is very stingy with their money and so forth. So, when I get such reports revealing this, then I know certain people in the Ministry of Finance have a big hand in –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the member for giving way. The previous speaker, I think it was hon. Wadri Kassiano, said that it seems these ministries work in an uncoordinated manner. I wanted to give this information to him but he was quick to sit down and now hon. Kasirivu has brought it back. There are no uncoordinated troops within these ministries, it is really intended within the ministries, and this is the project of eating money within the ministries.  

Madam Speaker, I am a Munyakore, we have got a saying in our Runyakore that when you see a mad person saying that there is trouble behind and you intend to neglect it –(Interjection)- “omugwi wiraro taranga omubisha” –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Hansard will not record it in Runyankore, say it in English.

MR BYABAGAMBI: At one time hon. Awori - I am not offending you hon. Aggrey Awori - but we know you as a Multipartyist, a former member of FOBA and what have you. One day, hon. Awori brought a serious issue here and he said that there is a clandestine move within the Ministries of Justice and Finance over paying the claims We all kept quiet and after two week, there appeared an article in the newspaper that SWIPCO was overpaid by $20 million and that ISO was investigating. How did Aggrey Awori come to get that information before our intelligence system? (Laughter). So, there is no coordinated movement of trips within the ministries; it is a project meant to eat government money.

That is why I told you one day, Madam Speaker, that the civil servants own 60 percent of the projects within Kampala; the technocrats –(Interruption)  

MR SEBALU: You see, hon. Aggrey Awori was also in the bush some day and some transactions had to be made to get him out, maybe he was overpaid also.

REV. SSEMPANGI: Madam Speaker, hon. Guma has just said that those whose things were eaten were paid, yet this paper says the people in Luwero were giving these things: cows, whatever, in good faith and guerrillas - so-called here - were not expecting to pay compensation. So, on which basis then were these compensations made? 

MR AWORI: I would like to add supplementary information regarding my comrades or my colleague here that I was also once in the bush. But I would like to inform the august House that I am yet to receive my cheque. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Atwooki, wind up. 

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members for the information you have given. I was talking of the behaviour of the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance, the political leadership at least knows that we have got laws and we have enacted laws in this Parliament, which require certain procedures to be followed while paying monies. One time when we were talking about the payment of Makerere University Business School, you saw how the Ministers came up that they had not received this request, they have not done this, therefore, they have not acted. I got the impression that things were in control. Now such a report makes me lose confidence in all of them.  

Therefore - and I am about to bring another petition. This time I do not think it will get lost -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I handed over the petition to the Clerk; how can it be lost?  

DR KASIRIVU: It is lost.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, can you produce that petition so that it is attended to?

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, thank you for that order. As I was saying, I am about to bring another petition. In Bugangaizi County there are Ugandans who were evicted from Mpokya. They sued government and the court awarded them damages. Monies have been released from the Ministry of Finance and the people are not receiving their money. The money is between the Ministry of Finance and that of Justice and some lawyers in town. I am about to bring a petition because they have told me to bring one.

So, I am compelled to request this Parliament at a certain time that we may have to request government to restructure the Ministry of Finance so that its only job is resource mobilisation, especially now that we have the National Planning Authority (NPA). The issue of planning and community development should go to NPA so that they only deal with financial mobilisation and then Parliament allocates money whenever we want. 

Madam Speaker, unless this super Ministry of Finance is worked on now and not tomorrow, we are going to have a big problem. Big names in the Ministry are always mentioned whenever such big transactions are revealed. I thank you. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is after 5.00 p.m. You directed that the Minister of Defence come to this chamber because of the request of members, and indeed some members here were saying that if the Minister is not coming, would you give us the opportunity to make our own statements on the terrible situation in the North as it unfolds in Lira? I am wondering when you will give the Minister the opportunity to make a statement or even give the opportunity to the member who wanted to make a statement so that he can make the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, when I make these directives I know what I am doing. I want us to finish this matter of the war debts then we handle the question of Lira. We cannot go mixing things; and the Minister is a Member of this House, he is going to remain here until we leave.

5.09
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and the IGG for his initial report, which is being debated. 

I sympathize with people of Luwero Triangle and particularly those in Luwero. During the six-year guerrilla war, if we can call it, these people suffered. Many lost their lives, property and definitely they are helpless. And for sure, if somebody is desperate somewhere in the bush and you have assisted him or her with some cassava to eat, and later the person is in power and eating butter and bread, can you not come to remind him that, “what about my cassava you ate when you were suffering?” 

I think the people of Luwero deserve their compensation, and for sure people cannot stay in Lugogo, in Parliament, and now in Wankulukuku for a year for nothing. It means their properties have been taken. We were making fun when somebody said 15 acres of cassava were eaten, and a number of cows. It could be true. For these five years, what do you think they were eating? That person could have been growing cassava year in, year out, to feed the guerrillas that time, and he really deserves to get back what he gave out.  

The problem actually has come up with corruption, which has infiltrated every human heart in Uganda right from those who are claming. They exaggerate so that they get more money. Those who were giving out the compensation add on so that they get the difference. Even those who were making the reports can cover some so that their names cannot come out. So, that is the problem. How do you address this issue of corruption so that the people of Luwero get what they deserve?  

The report has made clear who has been giving out this money. Let us identify these culprits; let them pay back this money so that we give it to the Luwero people who are suffering. They are there in the report: millions and millions of money. 

If you consider those multiple payments - definitely if you have paid somebody once, twice and even the third time, you will realise the mistake. But they continue to pay; I am sure that was intentionally done. So, please Members of Parliament, we need to sympathise with people of Luwero. Let us not completely rule out the compensation because some people never had it. Yes, some people must not have got it at all; that is why they want it. 

If you say that things such as sofa sets and bicycles were not used, how do you know? During wartime, anything is useful. That person’s house might have been broken down because people were hiding there. That person’s bicycle was taken because they had to take a message across. That is why they want it. So, I support the report but I would like those who really are not compensated, we have to go through the payment method, better assessment so that those people get what they deserve.

My next point is on those who lost parts of the body during the war. In the crossfire they lost their limbs, they lost their sight, they lost their eyes, or they died. Where is the compensation for them in the report? I have seen very many disabled people crawling around waiting for their compensation. Are you going to compensate their limbs, where is their part? 

As a person representing people with disabilities, I would like also all those persons who became disabled during this guerrilla war to be compensated for their parts. Surely, if we are asking for money, we are asking for money for maybe vehicles, we are also asking for our parts which were lost so that we can use that money to support them in their daily activities. Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

5.13
MR WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee for its report, which has brought out a number of salient issues that need to be addressed. 

However, right from the beginning I would like to make it clear that this report should not create an impression that payments only started in 2001. On the contrary, war debts started to be paid in the year 1986. This started very well with compensation of the herdsmen from Ngoma who actually ended up getting a lot of cattle and soon they found that they could not even stay in Ngoma where they originally stayed. So they had to be transferred to Kanyaryeru in Mbarara District where there was more land, which was degazetted from a national park. That shows you that already some people had received a lot more animals than they had owned before the war. 

Madam Speaker, it should not be surprising that these problems are being unearthed now. Yes, the guerrillas had a right to come into government, and they did. Unfortunately, when it came to paying those debts, they were not subjected to the normal procedure of government in paying for goods and services. It is very well known that once the procurement is faulty, then definitely the payment will also be faulty because there was no documentation, there were no LPOs. What is said to be verification depended on the integrity of the senior officer who would vouch and acknowledge having received those goods. 

Whereas a lot of cows were alleged to have been eaten, there are combatants who hardly tasted meat during the days of combat; but that is history. What I am saying is that already there was a problem in ascertaining these claims in the fact that there had been no systematic ways of requisitioning for these goods. I think the right thing would have been, first of all, to subject all of them to audit before payment started. But the moment payment started, even those who had not given goods and services thought they had an opportunity to “okulembeka” and they also put in their claims Besides, the method of payment going through the so-called leaders of the war veterans association also got infected with the virus of corruption.  

The committee has noted one case of a family of Mr Wasswa Sekamate – who works with Senunga’s office. Senunga is a Presidential Advisor on war veterans’ affairs. Sekamate got paid Shs 40 million; Nakiganda Magdalene, the wife of Wasswa Sekamate got paid Shs 2 million. But is it possible that in one home the wife, a husband, daughter, the son, the grandchild had separate sources of material to be able to contribute to these war efforts? 

The committee notes that the chairman misappropriated Shs 60 million –(Interruption)

MR TIM LWANGA: Thank you honourable member for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. I know Sekamate very well and I was in charge when he worked on this committee. I do not remember, unless somebody can quote a cheque number, Sekamate getting Shs 40 million. I do not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the matter that the member was raising was that in one family all the members received compensation. Do you know about it?

MR LWANGA: Madam, there must have been probably a claim that Sekamate got the Shs 40 million, but I believe this committee did a good job and I believe it must have found out that he never got the money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, if you see page 7, it is in the report.  Anyway, we shall give you a chance later.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Since the Minister had an opportunity to head the department, he will have a chance to make his statement. But I will appreciate - it will be recalled that when the Entandikwa Scheme started, it was initially meant for the Luwero Triangle, but this later one became a national programme. What is worth noting is that the recipients of the Entandikwa money took it as money paid to them to thank them for supporting the war effort. 

It would appear that once government started paying genuine claimants, a lot of other people also thought that that was the time to get money from government for having supported the war effort. I think that is most unfortunate. If this is to be put on course, then payments must follow the established procedure. The power to pay, in this case, has been taken away from the accounting officers. It is now senior military officers who are giving directives on who should be paid. Which means, therefore, that those who authorised the payments, which are doubtful, should also be subjected to the same regulations that govern accounting officers.  

I am surprised that the committee has not recommended any stern action against those officers, who even gave instructions contrary to the arrangement agreed upon to have a pre-verification by the Ministry in charge of Luwero Triangle, before directing the Ministry of Justice to pay. The moment you have multiple sources of instructions to pay, then definitely you are laying the ground for possible fraud.

Madam Speaker, I hope that this committee and the Committee on Economy will also take interest to know the quantum of the war debts that have been settled so far. I think the country would like to know what the war effort in Luwero cost us, at least for comparative purposes. We should be able to know whether the cost of a five-year war in Luwero is more than the 18-year war in the North or whether they compare; then we shall know whether the accounts have been properly handled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sometimes I really wish you could help the committee by making concrete suggestions about things that they can do. When you just say things were bad, you do not help the committee. Please, suggest some solutions.

5.23
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to greatly complement the committee for their elaborate report. It is a masterpiece, and I will sleep well, because for a long time I have been articulating the concerns of those poor people that volunteered to uphold the wishes of the Movement Government. They have been ignored, but time has come for their wishes to come to light.

Madam Speaker, William Shakespeare in his book called “Julius Caesar,” in one scene, when Brutus killed the King, every one went crazy; everything went out of control. Do not be surprised now to see why the Movement is at crossroads; things are not moving well. The dead, including the Lutamaguzis, and the living, who are suffering because they were not paid, are shedding tears and are calling upon God, and when they talk to God, they can force so many things to happen.  

In light of that, as we speak now the Movement, which used to jubilate because of so many achievements - everyone is now shaking his or her head because things are not moving well. It is partially because of having ignored the spirits of the dead and the spirits of those who are living, much as they contributed immensely towards the success of the Movement Government.

Madam Speaker, the crux of my argument lies on page 19. It says, under the issues of concern that only 17 percent of the claimants settled by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were verified and recommended by the Ministry of State for Luwero. The rest, the 83 percent settled claims, were processed through irregular means. What a shame! I expected the Government, after receiving this report, to apologise to all those who are offended. In the same vein the Government should apologize to Parliament; the President should apologise for having appointed wrong ministers to the Luwero Ministry. We have never had any sanctity related to the performance of the Luwero ministers; minister after minister has been acting like that.  

In my domain, which is Wankulukuku, at one time when the Luwero people camped at Wankulukuku they spent some time there under the guidance of His Majesty’s Government, which owns the stadium, and partially under my own commitment to assist the people who were helpless. Madam Speaker, what is so funny, we struggled to invite the Minister in charge of Luwero in the names of Prof. Kiwanuka Semakula. When he found time to call, the people were jubilant, they were very happy waiting to see their Minister; they rose up and started singing the National Anthem and Ekitiibwa kya Buganda. He said, “No, that is not what brought me, I did not come to listen to the songs. I came to hear what you are saying. Why are you here? Go to Luwero, you are not supposed to be here,” as if those people are not Ugandans. 

They are free to stay anywhere and protest because they have a right to protest if they are offended. Is that a minister, a former Ambassador to the United Nations, a person who would value international affairs? I do not know where we are going! Right here I have a petition from those people. At an appropriate time I will bring it to your notice so that I present it. 

The money fraudulently paid out should be recovered. Speaker after speaker - I have been listening to the previous speakers, they have not been serious about these public monies. The money should be recovered because the people who are likely to have eaten the money are there; the suspects are there. I do not need to mention the suspects, but they are there moving about at large. Can I mention some of them?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Minister who was in charge in the Ministry of Justice, Bitangaro, Minister Kahinda Otafiire, Minister Tim Lwanga; all these are suspects, they should explain where the money went –(Interjections)- I said they are suspects; they are not thieves but suspects.

MR LWANGA: You know, Madam Speaker, when integrity is put before gain, nations crumble. But when integrity is put before a political gain, you realise how foolish some of us are, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to come to this House and tell this august House that some Ministers are suspect in eating money from Luwero Triangle? Is he in order? Can he substantiate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, with regard to hon. Tim Lwanga, he has not been mentioned at all in this report. So, hon. Lukyamuzi, you cannot import hon. Tim Lwanga into this report. The Ministers who have been implicated have been named and you should concentrate on those. Do not import other ministers into this report. So, you are out of order.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I can substantiate - yes, seriously.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On hon. Tim Lwanga?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, if you go on to page 20, No.3, the sum of Shs 650 million was arbitrarily paid to one Mr Kaaya –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi in fact it is hon. Tim Lwanga who said this man has already been paid, and that they should not pay him any more.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am saying the circumstances under which he was paid were prevailing under his ministerial leadership.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the committee report is very clear. The particular section that my colleague hon. Lukyamuzi is referring to categorically states that the hon. Tim Lwanga stood between government’s money and people who wanted to eat it. Is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to import his own understanding into the report of the committee with the intention of discrediting hon. Tim Lwanga?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: One of the reasons I insisted that the report should be read in full was to ensure that everybody listens carefully and understands the content. Hon. Lukyamuzi, please do not import hon. Tim Lwanga into this matter. He is the one who blocked the payment to Mr Kaaya.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged. I will not indulge in that after your advice, although I had a very strong –(interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Lukyamuzi. I have made my ruling; do not go round it, please.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Sorry, Madam Speaker. In light of that ,I would like to appreciate all the members of that committee who have dug up all the possible information to ensure that the Members of Parliament know exactly what has been going on.  

Madam Speaker in the same vein, let me thank some people here namely, His Eminence Cardinal Wamala. When these people were being tortured, they were chased away from this place and taken to Central Police Station and later on brought before a Magistrate at KCC. The Magistrate found these people innocent then they went to the Cathedral at Lubaga. When they reached Lubaga, reliable information was prevailing that if the Cardinal kept them there the place would be in danger. So the poor man gave them money for medical treatment and they went down to Wankulukuku Stadium from where I also attempted to assist them. They were being chased away by Police using tear gas as if they were thieves! 

And yet the committee observed on page 19 that among the people that were not paid, the proper people to have been paid are those poor people who volunteered to assist the regime and when the regime won they are totally ignored. I would like to thank all those people who have been assisting these people tirelessly.

Madam Speaker, let me give an example of the leader of that group, one Kazigo. He was expecting a sum of about Shs 55 million from government. He told us openly that he was given only Shs 3 million out of the Shs 55 million. Since then no money has ever been received. As we speak now five of the poor people that were languishing in Kasana Stadium have died because of the ill conditions.

I call upon the Government of Uganda to rescue them on humanitarian grounds as we make arrangements for them to be paid. Many of them are in their 70s and 80s, and because of being brave or sticking to what they know, they are insisting on dying in the open.

MR LWANGA: Thank you very much hon. Ken Lukyamuzi for giving way. Madam Speaker, in November 2002, Mr Kazigo was fully paid and he signed that he was paid.

MR LUKYAMUZI: I have already given data about the person he is talking about. He is demanding for Shs 55 million, but he received only Shs 3 million. What is Shs 3 million compared to Shs 55 million? Peanuts! So, I urge the Government of Uganda that as we arrange for those people to be properly paid, let them be given some humanitarian assistance so that they do not die in the open in Luwero. It would be a shame for those people to die like the five people, who have already died. I expect our Prof. Kiwanuka Semakula by now to have taken trouble to assist them. If you were doing what you are supposed to do, you should know that the Luwero portfolio should not have been there if there was nothing to be done. But the impression I am getting is that minister after minister in charge of Luwero does not know that they were appointed to look into Luwero affairs. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very interesting to be a Member of Parliament, because when you read the report eventually we all realise that English is a foreign language and sometimes very hard to understand.  

I must thank the members of the committee for having written a good report but having been the immediate past Minister of Luwero Triangle, I might be useful in probably putting a few things right in this report. 

On page 11 there is a note, call it paragraph 2, which says that Maj. Jacob Asiimwe’s Committee was able to verify claims amounting to only Shs 4 billion. I want to tell you that this figure was about Shs 2.2 billion made up of the first group, which was Shs 54 million, which we paid when I was Minister of State for Luwero; then Shs 500 million for group B; and about Shs 1.4 billion in the C group. Then we had appeals, which were around 500, 530. It came up to about Shs 2.2 billion and not Shs 4 billion.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Speaker, in this report the committee tells us they summoned the Minister in charge of Luwero and I imagined that when one minister leaves, there are files, which are given to the subsequent minister. Is it possible that this information was in those files and overlooked, what happened? Because, when a minister leaves a ministry and another one takes over, don’t we assume that the one who takes over takes all the files, all documents, all the assets, and all the liabilities?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, did you interview the Minister of State for Luwero and all the other ministers?

MR KAYONGO: Madam Speaker, we interviewed hon. Semakula, who is the current Minister of State for Luwero Triangle. I am sure when hon. Tim Lwanga vacated he handed over, and we got these figures from the reports and files that are available.  

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, I thought it would be useful, and the Minister seems to agree with me, that we are working on real figures. On reading this report, there are quite a few disappointing things. When I became Minister of State for Luwero Triangle, we had to create a system because there was no clear system on how payments should be handled. We did create a system and the first thing we did was to write, through the Prime Minister, to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs instructing them not to pay anybody without first clearing with the verification committee. 

I am, therefore, disappointed to find on page 15 that Abdi was paid Shs 1.4 billion. On page 16, Rwanda Petrol, whom we said that these people do not have proof that they provided anything that could be verified, was paid so much more. It is really bad! 

I went to that office when there was a mess and I did tell Mr Bafaki not to pay anybody. I understand that the information they have is that Mr Bafaki is not aware that this should never have been done. He is just unlucky that I am the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. I agree with the recommendation of the committee; we are going to investigate him. We will get to the bottom of this.

Madam Speaker, when you get to page 20, I did give information previously about East Mengo Growers.  These people came before the committee and we found out that they had been paid Shs 24 million, and in my simple way of calculating I thought they had been paid enough. We did reject the application for the Shs 54 million. The President has got the information because the report we made went to him, it went to the Minister of Finance, it went the Minister of Justice and it went to the Prime Minister. The question is, who paid the Shs 54 million? 

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for giving way. As we are getting revelations from the different presenters, it seems the committee concentrated on the people who were camping in Wankulukuku because that is basically where they based their findings. There is nothing said about people in Mukono and Kayunga but they are also part of Luwero Triangle. Many of these people had to be interviewed by this committee.  

But since a good number of people were not covered in this report, I wanted to suggest that we put in place a select committee to at least give a concrete report covering all these areas. Because when I look at the recommendations here, say recommendation 4.1 is saying that the findings of this committee should be implemented. I feel that some areas will not be covered as you have been hearing from the members. Recommendations 4.4 and 4.8, if they are carried out now, many areas will be left out. That is why I would like to suggest that we put a select committee in place to go into further detail, looking into the matters affecting the people in Luwero Triangle. 

MR LWANGA: Madam Speaker, may I help? I will give her information to show that actually all has been done. When I went to Luwero there was a book this big. It had been prepared since 1986. We went through that book and put all the information on computer. It covered everybody who had ever claimed and probably about two or three cases of new applications because there was overwhelming evidence that they have never been paid and they were supposed to claim and they had not claimed. 

So, Mukono was handled and I know in category A, a lot of people from Mukono were paid. The book is there, it is this big, and we have a diskette to show that everybody who did put in a claim was considered. Not only that, we went through 3,902 files. It took us about four months, it was pure audit work. We set out an audit programme; we had criteria on which to base our decisions and they were not one-person’s decisions. It was a team of 20 people, including former commanders who were in the bush, including contact persons who were in the bush, including people who were keeping some records like hon. Asiimwe.  

So really, Madam Speaker, whatever has been done so far, much as in the past there must have been problems, I think we are on the right track. And we know who is owed money because we produced a final list of who is owed what. There are no more claimants and the interesting bit is that people were being paid from Kampala and we insisted we go to the villages –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in discussing this matter for a possibility of a select committee, first we should find out: were there commitments made to pay everybody who intends to claim? Once you put there a select committee, you are going to invite everybody and I do not know where it will end because there are claimants in Kamuli, there are claimants in Iganga.

MR MWANDHA: I think, Madam Speaker, there are a number of aspects to this problem. Apart from the fact that there were so many claimants, there is the issue as to whether there is adequate legal framework for doing this. I know when we were either the NRC or the Sixth Parliament; we begged government to come up with a law. It would actually help us to know how people would claim, how they would be verified, how these offences would be determined and so forth, but that was never done. As a result a lot of faults have been committed and this report is implicating colleagues of this House. Those colleagues must be given the opportunity to clear their names. 

Therefore, it is important that we have a select committee but we have to come up with strict terms of reference, so that we do not open the third gate for every Tom, Dick and Harry to come up and begin putting in claims to the select committee.  

Hon. Lwanga has already mentioned that there is a lot of work that has been done. One of the terms of reference would be for this committee to look at that work. Madam Speaker, you have heard that the IGG is frustrated because all his recommendations have been ignored, and it is only Parliament that can take action on this. Otherwise, if we leave this House having no specific action taken on this, the IGG will think that we are not serious. So, I would like to support the hon. Member for Mukono that indeed we should take over the responsibility and probe into these matters and we actually restrict the element of any new claimants coming before the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the Committee on Government Assurances is a Standing Committee of this House. It can continue its normal course of duties to look into this matter.

Secondly, the Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs, where this Luwero Triangle falls, also has the capacity to look into this matter. I do not think we should now create excitement to the population that you can now go and lodge your claims to a new select committee.

MR LWANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I may continue. Where you see these figures, which were paid to Mr Kaaya, when we found that he had been paid this, which is shown here and we compared that with what he was still asking for, the Shs 1.3 billion, we did a computation and agreed that this was enough. So, this is not extra - if my memory serves me right.  

As I said before, a system was put in place in the Prime Minister’s Office. This system seems to have been ignored by officers who paid money to other people outside the Prime Minister’s Office. I want us to strengthen the recommendations of – I think there is a recommendation about the IGG that is 4.8, where it says: “The committee also recommends that all payments made to all claimants indicated in Annex A and B be investigated by the IGG.” 

What we should say is that any payments, which were made outside the authority of the Prime Minister’s Office through the office of Luweero Triangle and the committee, should be committed to the IGG for investigation. This is what I think we should do to modify and also that those officers found to have flouted the instructions of the Prime Minister in this respect be prosecuted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was hoping that we would conclude debate on this matter today but it seems that a lot of people still want to speak. So, I would like to differ further debate on this one until next week so that we can give time to handle the issue of Lira which hon. Anang-Odur has been trying to raise. So, this particular debate is put off until next week. Let us have hon. Anang-Odur on the Lira matter.

5.53
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us an opportunity to review events in the Lango sub-region and particularly today on what happened in Lira yesterday. 

Yesterday on the Floor of this Parliament the Minister of Defence briefly touched on the matter and he said something to the effect that when the people of Lango came to Lira yesterday to demonstrate against the massacres and brutalities of Kony, they started looking for the people from Acholi to kill them. I thought it necessary that we compare notes on this very important issue because to us from Lango, that was a very serious statement to make on the Floor of Parliament and perhaps prematurely. I was able to talk to the Bishop of Lango Diocese yesterday and today, in fact a few hours ago, I have talked to Dr Okulo Epak who has been able to rush there to find out what happened and this is the information I got from them.

Yesterday, according to that information, people converged in Lira for a peace match, which was authorised by the Police after duly convening meetings between the Lango religious leaders and other leaders, and the police officers. Unfortunately, when some sections of the demonstrators reached the Catholic cathedral towards the venue, they met one young man who apparently said something, which was not palatable to them. This caused unease and it caused some problems, and in fact this young man was killed. The others went on to the venue.

There was a lot of tension and there was firing by the Police officers. The information we got was that from that firing, two other people were killed. In total I was told five people were killed. One of them is said to be an Amuka boy and the other one has not been quite identified. 

Madam Speaker, my information is that one of those killed is in fact from my constituency Twabwongomor, Kwania County. Another one is from Otuke County represented by hon. Omara Atubo. Another one is Amuka who obviously must be from Lango. They have not been able to identify the origins of the other two. The information, which we got yesterday seems to portray a situation where the people of Lango were in Lira looking for people from Acholi to kill. What happened seems not to verify that information. 

There was no attack on any institutions of learning and also staff, nobody went to look for anybody in any institution. There was a delegation from Acholi who were in the White House in Lira, there was a conference there, nobody went there to look for them, or to lynch them. But understandably there was a lot of tension and people who are from Acholi who found themselves in Lira at that time were worried and understandably shocked. So, they made a lot of telephone calls. They were very worried about their safety. Some of them contacted security officers who were able to respond - I am happy to report - to make sure that they were secure.  

We the leadership of Lango do not want to tribalise this war because we know the dangers to this country of such a situation. And I think all the people in Lango who are in their right senses would not like to tribalise this war. Already this war is costing us a lot as a country! Yesterday we were told we spend US $1.3 billion every year. We have nearly 40,000 people who have already perished in this war. We have nearly 1.5 million people in Northern and Eastern Uganda who are in camps in terrible conditions. They are in rags, they are hungry, they are dehumanised, and they live in fear and despair because of insecurity. This to us is already bad enough.

To me the most important issue at hand is, what is the cause of this situation? (Interjection)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anang-Odur, I am now at a loss to understand what you want because the matters you are talking about were adequately handled yesterday by the motion. Do you want to re-open that debate? I thought you wanted the Minister to explain to you about the Lango and the Acholi fighting. Is that not what you want to know? 

MR ANANG-ODUR: Yes, Madam Speaker, I want the Minister to do that. I also want the Minister, if he can, to explain his statement on the Floor of this Parliament, which I have alluded to. 

I also want the Minister and maybe the Prime Minister if he can - I know he talked about it this morning - to make a comment and to assure us of what the President meant when he said the people who are killing people in Lango were those who were killing people in Nile Mansion.  

I wanted to know whether those people who were demonstrating yesterday in Lira were indeed the people who were in Nile Mansion killing people. I wanted to know whether it is the people in Lango who went to Mukula and roasted the people to death, whether they are the ones who went to Bucoro and buried people alive. I wanted to know because, Madam Speaker, to us these are serious matters. We do not want to be misunderstood. 

We as Lango Parliamentary Group wanted partnership with government to make sure that we get rid of this problem. And yesterday you heard here what we agreed on was not followed. Amuka was not supported whenever there was need; they were under-deployed, they were not given support weapons and these are things, which have caused these problems And I want to say that in fact it is because of the failure of government to do what we agreed on to be done with the President himself that we are now getting this sort of situation. But now it seems we stand accused for failures of others who should have done something, which they did not do. I think it is fair to have a fair comment on this matter.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister should confine himself to the question of the rioting in Lira yesterday, and whether the Langi were killings the Acholi. But these other matters, we have talked about them many times and they were said yesterday and wrapped up in a resolution, which I think everybody was happy with. Let us not re-open that debate.  

6.01
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not sure that I fully understand what I am required to do. Yesterday, I gave news to the House that there was a situation that had developed in Lango. I said that the Police had been informed about a desire by people in Lira to demonstrate, to show their outrage against the brutality of the terrorists that had committed the crime in Ogur sub-county. 

I said that the police did not see any problem with that, but that in the course of demonstration, rioting developed and that sentiments were expressed against the Acholi people being blamed for the killing in Ogur. I said further that roadblocks had been erected, one from Lira to Kitgum and the other - the report at that time I had was that even at Minakulu, there had been another roadblock. I stated that the Police had tried to arrest the situation but the situation seemed to be beyond the ability of the Police to manage, and we had decided that the Army would intervene to calm down the situation and open the routes. To the best of my knowledge, that is what I stated. 

I do not know what the honourable member wants me to explain now, because I have re-stated that that is what I had yesterday and that is what I gave to this Parliament.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister for giving way. Yesterday I sat at my place here and when this matter came up I was very alert. I restrained myself from responding to what the Minister was talking about. But I remember very clearly him saying that the people now who came to Lira yesterday, started looking for people from Acholi to kill. I heard it here. I want to get clarification as to whether he is now changing that statement. That is what I heard and that is the point of my concern.  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I do not think I want to engage in the debate because the Hansard can also verify what I said. So, maybe we can wait for the Hansard to come and then we can come back and talk about it. 

But it is true that I brought it in the context of the motion before Parliament and in reference particularly to paragraph - I think it was nine, which was calling for national mourning. I was cautioning Parliament that whereas that proposal was a good one, we should think of the timing. I said, we should be careful about the timing so that no section of our society interprets the action of Parliament to be in any way favouring one section and not another. You know we have had these problems in so many places, so we need to be careful how we bring it out so that the mourning is national, for all these crimes against humanity that have happened in Uganda.

All I was doing was giving Parliament a statement of the reports I heard about the situation in Lira. I felt, it was my duty as Minister of Defence who had that information to inform you. Of course, I could have kept quiet so that you get informed by the newspapers. I did not in any way intend to imply the leadership in Lango or anything like that, was mobilising people on a tribal basis – Langi against Acholi. I did not mean that. So, my suggestion on this matter is that if it is really a question of establishing fact, then let us wait for the facts to come out when we have the Hansard.

On the question of His Excellency, the President’s statement, I heard this on BBC this morning. The President was asked - again I may not be exact in terms of the words that were used in the question and the answer. I will give you what I remember, maybe some of you listened as well but I think the question was: The BBC journalist told His Excellency the President that he did not appear to be outraged by the massacre in Ogur. So, the President said: “I am very annoyed, in fact, extremely annoyed. How do you want me to show my outrage? I am very annoyed that is why I have even acted against the commanders.” 

He then added that he is a hardened man because he has seen these killings over a long time. He said the guys who had killed the people in Ogur, are the remnants of the guys who one time had political power and they were killing Ugandans from Nile Mansions. That is what I heard. When you say that one should explain the President’s statement that people killing in Lango are the same as those who killed in Nile Mansions - now, that is what he said.  

Let me tell you that I have said many times that this war in the North is deterrent of the wars we have been fighting in this country for a very long time. Some of these fighters are the remnants of the forces we had been fighting all along. That is a fact and if anyone wants to dispute it and wants to challenge me on it, I stand to be challenged. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, now, honourable members –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has sat down.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is nobody on the Floor, hon. Awori –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: This is for the benefit of the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not my wish to go back to the debate regarding the previous motion, but I wanted to bring out two points to inform my honourable colleague. Point No. 1, his version of the alleged presidential statement is totally inaccurate. I would confirm this, if we had the time. Within the next one hour, we were going to have a transcript from BBC and somebody from BBC read it to me an hour ago, and it is not exactly what my honourable colleague in charge of Defence is saying –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Awori, really, in the absence of the transcript, how do you expect us to determine who said what and who did not? It would be better if you got the transcript, laid it on the Table, we cause it to be heard and say, “Minister you made a mistake”. Yes, and really honourable members, I would like to encourage you not to highlight some of these press reports, and then we spend the whole day here when nobody can confirm what has been said.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think you are actually right in your ruling on the matter. We cannot start comparing whose version is what.  However, what I have been pressing for the whole afternoon is: what is the status of the Acholi people and others around Lake Kyoga in Maruzi county? There was a concern since last night that they are being harassed in absence of security to guarantee their safety. I just wanted to know whether the honourable minister with his colleague in Internal Affairs have deployed enough people to maintain security in areas where there is some kind of unrest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you should help those people who are in Maruzi. You should have reported early in the morning that there is something brewing because now it is 6 O’clock, we do not know what has happened in Maruzi. You should be helpful to the population and report early enough. But, Mr Minister I hope you have heard, you can take the necessary action.

I have a small announcement for the Women Members of Parliament who will be going to Jinja tomorrow. There will be transport outside Parliament at 7.30 in the morning to take you to Jinja. Otherwise, this is the end of today’s proceedings. We adjourn to Tuesday next week at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 March 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

