Wednesday, 20 February 2002

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery this afternoon are six parliamentarians from the National Assembly of the Republic of Kenya, who are in Uganda on a three-day visit to the Parliament of Uganda - (Applause). They are a delegation from the Kenya Parliamentary Service Commission, and are here to share experience with you on how the Parliamentary Commission manages its affairs and those of Parliament. They will also tour different facilities that the Parliamentary Commission provides you, hon. Members.

The Kenya Parliamentary Commissioners are: Hon. P.O. Aringo, Hon. A. Badawy, Hon. D.L. Khamasi, Hon. Dr A. Ali, Hon. E. Morogo, Hon. G.W. Ngure, Miss A.K. Thuranira, an official from the National Assembly of Kenya; she is the Secretary to the delegation.

Our colleagues from Kenya, you are most welcome to the 7th Parliament of Uganda, and I wish you a fruitful visit. (Applause).

I also want to inform you that there is a training session for Members of Parliament on the implementation of the Budget Act, 2001. The Parliamentary Budget Office, in conjunction with the OPPD and SUNY have organised the above training session to take place on Monday, 25 February beginning at 9.00a.m. An understanding of the provision of the Budget Act will determine the achieved effectiveness of the 7th Parliament as far as the oversight functions are concerned.  Therefore, you are informed about this one.  So please, try to attend. The venue will be in Parliament here.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, yesterday I raised a question with respect to the cancellation of primary school examination results for some schools in Uganda, and you rightly advised that the answer to my question would be given when the Minister for Education in Charge of Primary Education is available. I see on the Front Bench, Ministers of Education present. I request that you ask the Minister to give us a reply to that question.

THE SPEAKER: I did not say that. What I said was that you posed a question to the Minister of Education.  Unfortunately, when you did that, the Minister of Education was not in the House; she joined later, and I said it would not be fair to ask her to answer a question she had not heard, and I advised that she would be informed about this question and then maybe prepare an answer. But I would rather advise that you make a formal question in writing so that the answer which will be given to you will be full of information that will be useful, not only to you or the Parliament, but to the entire country. I think she will respond. Do that today and you will get the answer next week.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE INSPECTORATE OF GOVERNMENT REPORT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Matembe): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to lay on the table, the report on the Inspectorate of Government for the period January to June, 2001.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) US $ 2,950,000 FOR THE PURPOSES OF CO-FINANCING THE RURAL MICRO-FINANCE SUPPORT PROJECT (RMSP)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa-Rukutana): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay on the table, papers for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow from the Islamic Development Bank US$2,950,000 for the purposes of co-financing the Rural Micro-finance Support Project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: These papers should be handled by the appropriate committee for necessary action.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA), US$9,410,000 FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING A PROJECT FOR WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION IN SMALL TOWNS

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Mwesigwa-Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the table, papers for a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa, the sum of US$9,410,000 for the purposes of financing a project for water supply and sanitation in small towns. (Applause). I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Let the appropriate committee handle this and make a report to us.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, my statement has been circulated.  

HON. MEMBERS:  No!

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, we supplied 95 copies to the Clerk to Parliament. The Solicitor General himself brought these copies and as I was rushing from Cabinet, I expected that the Clerk had circulated them. So, I beg the House to bear with me.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Electoral Commission was established under Article 60 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995.  It is mandated to organise, conduct and supervise regular and fair elections in accordance with Article 61 of the Constitution, and section 12(1) of the Electoral Commission Act, 1997.  

I want to handle the preparation of the electoral process.  As members of the House will remember, due to the shortcomings of the manual voters’ register during presidential and parliamentary elections, Government decided that the computerisation of the voter register must be completed prior to local Government elections. 

Fresh registration of voters was undertaken during the month of August and October 2001, under the photographic voter registration and identification system project (PVRC). The objectives for fresh registration under the PVRC were: 

· Allowing all eligible voters to register afresh and only once. 

· Collecting additional bio-data about registered voters. 

· Ensuring that no person votes in the names of another person. 

· Producing a register devoid of ghost voters. 

· Producing a register free of multiple registrations.

· Producing a register free of non-eligible voters.  

At the end of the registration exercise, the Commission registered 8,200,000 voters only, as opposed to the previous 10,700,000 for the presidential elections in March 2001, and parliamentary elections in June 2001.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, as you are aware, even some of us, colleagues, did not register. There are many other Ugandans who did not turn up for registration, but the Constitution is very clear that there will be an update until the cut-off point. Anybody who did not register under this project will have the opportunity to register through the continuous registration process.  

The aforementioned reduction could either be because a number of eligible voters did not turn up for registration or because the system could have eliminated multiple registrations. 

The Commission used the said photographic voter registration and identification system to produce the registers used during the sub-county, town and municipal, and city division elections, and district and city local Government elections.  

The Commission decided to try out the photographic voter registration in Kampala. Originally, it had decided that we should have photographic registers in the 18 municipalities of Uganda, but on second thoughts, we realised that it is only Kampala that is going to elect one person, so we could pilot it within the municipalities because all of them would be voting for one mayor. 

What would have happened if we had photographic registers in the districts? The municipalities would have a photographic register when the rest of the district had the bio-data register. So, we chose the district of Kampala.

Problems encountered in the modernisation of the voter register:
  
1. Delay of Funds 

The release of funds to the Electoral Commission to procure the relevant materials, computers and equipment for the commencement of the computerisation exercise was late and piecemeal due to the budgetary financial constraints of Government. 

The exercise started in August 2001. While the consultancy had indicated that the exercise would be finished by 15 February 2002, the Electoral Commission had a constitutional obligation to conduct elections latest by the 5th of January 2002. Given the complexities involved, it was really an uphill task to transform the manual voter registers into computerised voter registers by December 2001. Clearly, the photographic voter registration and identification system was an ambitious one. 

2. New System 

This kind of undertaking was also new in the region. A photo-bearing register and card is extremely new in Africa. And being pioneers, this had its own hardships and problems, which were not anticipated, which cropped up resulting in the delay of the production of the national voter register for display.

3. Creation of new administrative units 

The Local Governments Act, 1997 does not provide a cut-off date for the creation of new administrative units. Some local Governments created new administrative units after the registration exercise, without informing the Electoral Commission. This had the effect of splitting some polling stations or merging others. When this was discovered, during the display exercise, the Commission had to revisit the otherwise completed voter register to rectify the situation. This not only delayed the work of the Commission, but some voters also ended up not finding their particulars at polling stations where they were originally expected to vote.  

4. Amendment of the Local Governments Act: 

The procurement of election materials delayed because the budget, which was approved by Parliament on 31 October 2001, did not include funds for the procurement of the materials for the election of women councillors by secret ballot. 

The funds had not been included in the budgetary estimates of the financial year 2001/2002 due to the fact that the law had not been amended. Subsequent to the amendment, the Electoral Commission submitted a budget for the said elections to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the said Ministry approved the release of Shs7.5 billion for the conduct of the said elections on 5 November 2001.  

After the approval of the funds to procure the electoral materials, the Electoral Commission had to follow the Government procurement procedures to select the supplier. Government bureaucratic procedures led to the late printing and delivery of election materials.

Funds for sub-county, town and municipal division elections were inadequate and released piecemeal. This led to the following: 

i. Some allowances for election officials have not been paid; 

ii. Some allowances were revised downwards, which demoralised the field election officials resulting in recruiting of low calibre personnel; 

iii. Delayed procurement of materials and equipment, which   required international tendering;

iv. Some elections such as the youth council, persons with disability and women council elections and committees were deferred.  

Section 25(1) of the Electoral Commission Act provides that before any election is held, the Commission shall display the voter roll for each parish throughout the country for public scrutiny for a period of not less than 21 days. 

However, realising that there was a constitutional deadline as provided for under Article 181(5) of the Constitution, namely to hold elections latest by 5 January 2002, the Commission could not display the register for 21 days.  Therefore, in order to meet the said deadline, the Commission requested Government to amend the said Act to reduce the period of display from the mandatory 21 days to not less than 10 days. And I am grateful to Parliament for your understanding because you passed that bill on time.  

Accordingly, the register for the whole country was displayed for 10 days, from 17th to 26th of December 2001; and the photo-bearing card for Kampala was displayed from 28 January to 6 February 2002.  The latter was for district/ city local Government council (LCV) elections.  

vii. The other problem was cleaning of the register after the display exercise.  It was not done because it was feared that there would be a lot of changes to be effected.  Instead, M/S I.T trends were contracted to strengthen the capacity of the data processing department to produce the register using the hard copy - that is the form that you filled.  

viii. 1,102 extra temporary staff were recruited to edit the register manually to ensure completeness.  Members of staff worked overtime in shifts and on public holidays to ensure that the register is produced.  

Mr Speaker and hon. members, I now turn to nomination and campaigns.
  
Nomination of candidates: 

Candidates for village councils - that is LC I - were nominated and elected on the same day, that is 4 November 2001.  Nomination of candidates for sub-county, town municipal divisions, municipalities and city divisions was successfully conducted from 20th to 23rd November 2001, while nominations for district city candidates were conducted on 12 and 13 December 2001.  166 persons were nominated as candidates for the district chairpersons; six of these were declared unopposed as follows: 
 
i. Mr Ibabaza Fred Kamugira of Mbarara district
 
ii. Mr Baligeya Kalori of Kamuli District 

iii. Mr Kakooza Joseph of Mubende District 

iv. Mr Ekesu Victor of Kaberamaido District
 
v. Mrs Kasya Josephine of Kanungu District;
the first woman district chairperson in Uganda, and; 

vi. Mr Kaija William of Kyenjojo District.  

Out of 2,671 candidates nominated to contest for directly elected district councilors, 117 were unopposed, and 130 out of the 1,285 district women councilors were also nominated unopposed.  

Yesterday, Mr Speaker and colleagues, there was the issue of Mr Ahamed Kawooya of Kamuli.  Mr Ahamed Kawooya had originally been nominated for Kamuli district chairperson.  Later, his nomination was challenged for lack of qualifications.  UNEB as the Authority on these matters nullified his qualifications, and his nomination was therefore revoked.  One candidate nominated for the district chairperson in Rukungiri district was killed after nomination.  

Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, I do not know whether it is in our Rules of Procedure, but I would beg for a minute of silence for this Ugandan. 

(The Members stood and  observed a minute of silence).

MRS MUKWAYA: May his Soul rest in eternal peace.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that honour.  

Consequently, elections for Rukungiri district chairperson were deferred.  Fresh nominations were conducted on 4 and 5 February 2002 for candidates to replace the deceased.  Nominations were conducted in all the electoral areas as follows:  

•  District/City chairpersons - 166 were nominated and five were returned unopposed.  

• Directly elected councilors - 2,671 were nominated, 115 were unopposed. 

• Women councilors - 1,285 were nominated and 134 were returned unopposed.  

Electoral areas did not return candidates for women councilors for the following reasons: 

• nomination fees were prohibitive.
  
• lack of interest and apathy and intimidation from their spouses or other cultural inhibitions. 

• the campaign period.  

The Commission appointed and gazetted 17 December 2001 to 2 January 2002, as the campaign period for sub-county, town/ municipal and city divisions, while the campaign period for district chairpersons and councilors was appointed and gazetted for the period 18 January to 12 February 2002.  

The campaigns were jointly conducted in accordance with the Local Governments Act, 1997.  During the campaigns, the commission received a number of complaints, which included:
 
(a) Ferrying of supporters from one venue to another, 
 
(b) Interference and involvement of other people rather than the candidates themselves, 

(c) Intimidation of voters and candidates, 

(d) Election related violence and malpractice,

(e)  Mudslinging, use of abusive and unacceptable language, disagreement on campaign timetable, venues and refusal of some of the candidates to participate in joint candidates’ meeting.  

These complaints were received from the districts of Gulu, Mbale, Kabale, Kapchorwa, Kiboga, Kibaale and Kampala.  In general, the Commission, through the district returning officers, appealed to all candidates to keep law and order, and adhere to the provisions of the law and control their supporters.  The Commission also appealed to all the security organs to play their role.  The latter rendered maximum cooperation.

Mr Speaker, I have read in the papers, but most importantly, yesterday, I listened to members of Parliament about the recent and past election violence.  My sympathy goes to all those people who have suffered this violence.  I am glad to inform this Parliament that Government shares the concerns of this Parliament and the entire country, and has therefore agreed to constitute a judicial commission of inquiry immediately into this matter.  

Mr Speaker, all of us are party because we support one candidate or the other, and we have participated.  I think you will agree with me that an independent judicial commission of inquiry would be the best for all of us.  I want you to support me on this. (Applause).   

Mr Speaker, polling day activities and election materials for the village elections were packed and dispatched in time to all districts.  For the first time, the elections at the village level were conducted by universal adult suffrage through secret ballot. Elections at sub-county and town/municipal divisions were generally successfully conducted.

Overall, 84 per cent of the sub-county chairpersons were elected, 95 per cent of directly elected sub-county councilors were elected, and 94 per cent of the women councilors were successfully elected. Municipality, city and division elections were also held successfully.  Out of the 18 chairpersons, it was only Fort Portal, which did not successfully elect their chairperson.  Of the 125 directly elected councilors, only 10 were not elected; and 11 Women councilors out of 100 remain to be elected.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I want to lay this paper on this table to be kept centrally where people can go and view it.  This document will inform Members of Parliament about sub-county, town, municipal and division level areas where elections did not take place.
  
Addendum 2. 

Local Council elections at sub-county, town, municipal, division levels, electoral areas where no candidate was duly nominated or candidates did not turn up by the end of the nomination days.  

Document C. 

Local Council Elections at Sub-County, Town, Municipal, and Division Levels: electoral areas where no candidate was duly nominated or candidates did not turn up by the end of the nominations.  These are directly elected councilors.
 
Document D. 

Electoral areas where no candidate was duly nominated or candidates did not turn up by the end of the nomination days. This is for women councilors.  

Elections at district/city were held successfully on 14 February 2002. Results for 43 districts were declared on Saturday, 16 February 2002.  Tororo and Kabale districts have not yet submitted their full results, while six chairpersons were unopposed as already mentioned above.  There were no elections for chairpersons of the districts of Mukono and Sironko due to court injunctions. Furthermore, all nominated candidates for Nebbi district were disqualified for failure to fulfil the legal requirements for the elections.  

Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission considers some of these to be their achievements in the electoral process: 

1. Fresh registration of voters eliminated the following: ghost voters, multiple registration and impersonation.

Mr Speaker, I want to provide this file to be kept in a central place for Members to view people who went through the system, who have registered more than once, and Members can judge whether those are duplicates or not.  There are many, but these are samples.  

As a result of the above, the voter population was reduced from 10.7 million as of March and June 2001 elections to about 8.2 million, though there could be eligible voters who might not have turned up for registration.

2. Fulfillment of the mandate.  

In accordance with its constitutional and legal mandate, the Commission organized, conducted and supervised local council elections by producing the register for the village local council elections; organizing and holding the sub-county, town, municipal divisions, LC III elections on 4 January; organized and held the municipal/city division local government elections on 10 January; organized the holding and held district and city local government council elections on 14 February 2002.  

Mr Speaker, yesterday I promised that I shall show Parliament some of the photographic registers for Kampala.  I have here Kawempe South Division, Bwaise II - that is their register; Kawempe South Division, Makerere University, Muluka IV, Kampala Central, Kisenyi III, Sapoba Makindye Division East, and Nsambya Estates, as samples.  The said elections went on smoothly despite minor incidents.

2. The Commission collected additional bio-data on all voters countrywide.

3. A fairly accurate text register for the entire country has been produced.  

4. A photo-bearing voter register for Kampala District was produced and was used for voting.

5. Nominations were successfully conducted in most electoral areas where candidates turned up.

6. Campaigns were fairly successfully held.

7. Most election materials were procured in time, save for ballot papers for the sub-county, town, municipal division local government council elections.

8. The Commission acquired new technology, which is a national asset and can be used by other government institutions and agencies for further production of a national identity card, driving licence, producing ballot papers locally here, if we have security papers.

The way forward:

The Electoral Commission remains with the processing of the photograph bearing register for the entire country, and this will continue, and the Commission has already embarked on duplicate analysis for the entire 8.2 million voters minus 500,000 of Kampala.  

In order to produce the photograph bearing voters’ register and cards, a sum of Shs 8.7 billion to cater for consultancy fees, materials, taxes, allowances, insuring the equipment, production of voter cards and re-take of photographs is required.  

In order to improve the voters’ register, the Commission will undertake continuous registration in the districts, using the district registrars.  

The Commission will continue handling election petitions as and when they are received.  By-elections will be conducted as they arise.  

The Commission is under obligation to hold elections in areas where elections did not take place for one reason or another.  The elections will take place on 5 March 2002, which date is within the stipulated constitutional period of 60 days.  A list of LC III areas where voting did not take place is attached.  I have already placed it on the table as Addendum 2.

Mr Speaker, yesterday my colleague, hon. Winnie Banyima, raised concern that there was rigging of elections in Mbuya. Kampala district returns showing UPDF polling stations are attached and the same are shaded. 

I want to inform this House that Mayor Ssebaana Kizito bought registers for the Army in all their polling stations so he has the registers, but he also bought registers for the entire district of Kampala; so did Ziritwawula. The list of areas where LC III elections did not take place is already in display in Parliament, samples of photographic national registers of some areas in Kampala have already been supplied – Kawempe sub-county, etcetera. Duplicate analysis file for photographs has been placed. So, I invite you to go to Kampala district returns, as signed - and not disputed by Mayor Ssebaana Kizito - by the district returning officer, Gordon Mwesigye. 

When you go to page one, there is Summit View Barracks - Mayor Ssebaana Kizito got zero and Ziritwawula got 314 - (Laughter). The total number of ballot papers counted tally with what is there - 314 and zero - (Interjections). 

When you go to Summit View Barracks W-Z, there was zero for Mayor Ssebaana Kizito, 427 for Ziritwawula. So, Mr Speaker - you can go there to see, because the contested area is Mbuya. Mbuya is on page 5 and it is an electoral area called Polling Station 91, having different boxes, and this record shows what my colleague said - six polling stations. 91 - one, 92 - two, 93 - three, 94 - four, 95 - five, 96 – six. So we concur on the polling stations. So, the votes - Mr Speaker, I want to request hon. Felix to add for me, because this is one polling station. 

If there was rigging, we go to the totals – (Interjection) yes! - to the total of the nine polling stations, whether the ballot papers that went there, the spoilt ones and whether the numbers for Ssebaana tally, whether the numbers for Ziritwawula tally and the entire total. So, -(Interjection)- yes, I want him to tally and see! In Upper Mbuya, there is 1,012 plus 475 plus 1,745 –(Interruption)

MS BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, I was going to take this with a smile and lightly if she did it once, but now I want to rise on a point of order. 

Is it in order for the hon. Minister to deliberately mislead this House about how results are collected at stations and recorded, and begin to total the results for individual polling stations - to total the result of a centre when there is no such a thing in the Electoral Commission, even a form where you total results of a polling centre? 

Is it in order for her to mislead this House when you can see clearly that in the case of Upper Mbuya L – M, where candidate Ssebaana got one vote and candidate Ziritwawula got 1,011 votes, you can see at the end of the table that the number of males and females ticked on the register has not been recorded, yet we sat there, and the Irish Ambassador and I recorded it, and it was 774 ticks on the register and now you have in the box 1,012? 

This is the rigging I am talking about, that at each box there were more votes cast than the registered voters are! And she comes here to mislead the House and do totals of a polling centre! Is she in order to mislead this House deliberately?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding of the exercise we are going through with the Minister in respect of Mbuya 1 is to see how many votes were cast, and compare them with the declared number of registered voters. I think that is the exercise she is trying to go through. So, let her add up the votes cast, then we shall look at the number of voters declared in the registers bought by Ziritwawula and Ssebaana, and see whether there is a difference. Let us allow her to proceed.
 
MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am not Gordon Mwesigye, I am not a returning officer, I am not the chairperson of the Electoral Commission, but I am the minister in charge, and the mayor has not challenged this record that I am reading. If the mayor was contesting this election, he would have gone to court -(Interruption)- yes! The law is very clear. Yes! -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: As I have said, your exercise is to prove to us that the votes cast are not more than the voters are. (Applause).  

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling, because this table shows you the packing list and voters who were registered at every polling station with a percentage increase of five.  So, the purpose of my record is to show how many soldiers registered in Mbuya; how many ballot papers were supplied, how many were used; whether they are more than the registered voters or not.  That was the contention. If there are more contentions, I will go back and crosscheck.  But as of yesterday -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, proceed and then show us!

MRS MUKWAYA:  Yes!  Polling Station 93 - 1745; polling station 94 - 338; polling station 95 – 264 and polling station 96 - 443.  Then you add the invalid - there is none, and no spoilt votes - (Interruption)- yes, yes! And that is the total.  

So, Mr Speaker, I want to thank Parliament for their support and mobilisation of the population, because the voter turn up was good.  I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But are the votes tallying with the voters on the register, because that was the point?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, the total number of the registered voters is 4,277, and there was no spoilt ballot paper and every -(Laughter)- yes, but as the members discuss, we can send someone to the Electoral Commission to bring the total registered numbers and we crosscheck with what we have, because this is the record that I have been given!

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, no doubt the statement of the hon. minister has brought about a number of contentious and disputable information. Under our Rules of Procedure 37, sub clause (b), we can only ask elucidatory questions, and I do not believe that will be proper treatment of this statement, given the facts, which, as I said, are contentious and disputable.  

Mr Speaker, would you permit us to waive the rules or you give us another day to debate this matter.  I believe there are a lot of things - for instance, I know the whole exercise was fraudulent for the following reasons, which I would want the minister to elaborate - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  You see, hon. member, you have asked me a question to answer, but I do not think really you can ask me a question like, ‘will you allow us to waive the rules’?  I cannot really act like that.  If it is your intention that we suspend rules, it is up to you really to move a motion for that and the House will decide on that, not the Speaker.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule No.8, I beg to move that we suspend the rules to allow this House to debate exhaustively the statement of the hon. Minister.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, is the motion seconded?  Well, do you want to justify?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity.  I will be as brief as possible.  As I said in the preamble, this matter that has been brought before the House is contentious and disputable in every aspect.  We feel in this House that we should be given more time to express our concern on why we feel that the statement of the hon. Minister does not satisfy our concern.  We have been expressing these concerns since yesterday.  

As I was about to say a few minutes ago, we know that the ministry, for whatever reason, has fathered, mothered and allowed the breeding of corruption in the Electoral Commission, and I have reasons to say so.  Mr Speaker, the tender system for the printing of the ballot papers showed a very high level of corruption.  This matter was disputed by the IGG, that the matter of tendering be subjected - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, would you like to justify why you want to suspend the rules, so that - (Interruption)

MR AWORI: The rule that I am seeking to waive, Mr Speaker, that is Rule No.37 sub-clause (2), cannot give adequate time for us to examine thoroughly this statement and give our opinion.  Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You see, when you say that we suspend, what do we put in the gap created by the suspended rule?  I think that is what we want to know.  Otherwise, if you say we suspend, then what do I do?  

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I am simply saying, once we have suspended Rule No.37 sub clause (2), it will give us an opportunity to debate the matter, but as it is now, Mr Speaker, you see this matter has come under Rule 37.

THE SPEAKER: When you say that we suspend the rule does it not bar us from debating? That is what members need to know and then decide.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I always rely on your wise wisdom and guidance, and in this matter, it is most appreciated. I take your guidance.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I stand to second and support the motion of hon. Aggrey Awori, and I do urge my colleagues, including the minister responsible for elections, to support this motion.  

An election is a very important exercise in the life of a country, and although we know that the election has taken place, yet it is timely - and I use the word ‘timely’ - it is extremely timely that we members of Parliament do direct our minds to the issue of these elections which have just taken place. Where there are problems, especially where the Minister has exhaustively given us the report, we may contribute to have corrective measures also put in place and assist the country.

As I said, an election is a very important exercise. It contributes to the stability of a country, and above all, it gives credibility and legitimacy to a government. Therefore, for us as Members of Parliament, one of the most important organs of the state, it is only proper that we have a full debate to see how best we can contribute to how much we love this country. And we should see that we put in corrective measures so that elections, which will take place in future, are held properly. 

This is not a condemnation, Mr Speaker.  It is purely an exercise by this Parliament to ensure that where there are mistakes, we correct, and where the Electoral Commission has done well, we commend them. Therefore, I believe that we shall all support this motion. Thank you.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi) Thank you, Mr Speaker. The task before us is to find the most efficacious method of discovering the fundamental causes of violence, intimidation and other forms of wrongdoing. Government yesterday listened to you, and Government has made it clear that it is also concerned about these persistent problems which undermine the democratic process. Government has therefore decided to institute a judicial inquiry and you will be free to testify.  Furthermore –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure.  There has been a motion moved on the Floor of the House as to whether we should suspend the rules so that we enable the House to fully debate the statement by the Minister. I thought the Prime Minister was standing up to talk about the motion. He is now talking about a commission of inquiry. Mr Speaker, on what are we proceeding; is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion moved by hon. Aggrey Awori was to suspend part of the rule that does not allow us to debate the statement made by the Minister on elections. So, it would mean that if we agree with the motion, members will debate the statement made by the Minister, including the proposal for a judicial inquiry or otherwise. That is why we need your views and then we decide on that. Once we decide on that, one way or the other, then we shall see how we proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance.  Accordingly, I oppose the motion since the other approach will be much more efficacious.  I thank you.

DR JOHNNY RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Mr Speaker, there is an earnest cause for members to want to debate this in detail. But in such a Parliament where we have more than 300 people, very many of us will not have a chance to say what is on our minds, unless it is likely to be prolonged for a very long time.  

Since there is a chance for a commission where this Parliament can be represented, and the people who will represent us will be answerable to Parliament, I will on those grounds oppose the suspension and emphasize the adoption of Members of Parliament to the commission. In this way we shall not have bogged down Parliament, and at the same time, we shall be able to discuss our grievances in detail in the commission. Thank you.

MR KASSIANO WADRI (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion on the Floor, which I highly support.

Yesterday we were all here and we did hear the manner in which the violence that has characterized the election process in this country has affected each and everyone of us. We also do appreciate that having a smooth election process is the pride of a civilized or democratic country, which we would like to be part of. 

Having said that, you will also appreciate that the issue at hand is a very timely one, which needs quick action. In this report that we have just received, there are still a number of constituencies, if I may call them that, which have not conducted elections. And if we are looking at a smooth electioneering process, the more reason for us to move very swiftly and salvage those other Ugandans who are in that political arena.  

I would also like to say that even when we are talking about the fair-minded judicial commission of inquiry, when you read this report, there is no mention of a judicial commission of inquiry in black and white. It was only in passing that it was made mention of. How can we take Government seriously? 

We have had a number of commissions of inquiry in this country: the Kanungu incident was there where thousands of people were killed. A commission of inquiry was instituted.  Has it ever sat? (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are not going into the details. This is about whether we support opening up the debate. So, your contribution should be restricted to the motion by hon. Aggrey Awori. Once we decide one way or the other, then we shall proceed.

MR WACHA: Sir, I move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: The question is that we suspend part of rule 37 so that we can debate the statement by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE (Igara West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We now have time to exercise our minds on the electoral process in addition to what was said yesterday. I want to use this extra time to look at three aspects. One aspect is the history of elections in this country.  

If from 1900 when the British signed the Buganda Agreement we were having elections every five years, this chaos we are talking about would not be there. We would already have had a hundred years of experience. If after Independence we had elections every five years, even now we would be better off than we are. So, what we are experiencing is an experiment that has started seriously in the last fifteen years or so. 

We have had the method of elections by voters lining up behind their candidates. We had fewer problems then, in my experience from my researches, than we have had now with the so-called secret ballot. Those elections were simpler. They were cheaper and they delivered democracy.  In my studies, I never found out that people were injured and that there was shooting. This is contained in a book.  

Since we became formal, the more formalised we have been with the whole experience, the more we have become confused. So, secrecy has been at the expense of democracy, if you look at what has happened. During election time, there is a threat to peace. 

Do you think if people lined up there would be as much confusion as there is? I am not so sure, but we have taken the form and, therefore, that form has created its own problems in our society. That form requires a certain amount of effectiveness and efficiency, which has not yet been attained. It demands certain procedures and that is why this voters’ register with photographs, even with these elements already put on the Table, is likely to help us get closer to avoiding duplication, to avoid certain weaknesses.  

My third point is on this question of violence. I was a victim of violence in 1980, and I ran and hid in Kabale.  I have said this before on the Floor of this House. Now we are getting to that point again where people get shot, where people fight, where Ministers get boxed and where candidates box other people – (Laughter)- and it is becoming too common a problem. Is this going to affect our democracy, which is based on elections? Elections are very central to democracy because that is how you choose your leaders.

Therefore, in this debate, my own view is that we have got to look at the very root of this problem – the growth of violence in our elections.  But how do we do it?  The Minister has proposed a judicial inquiry, and the reaction that has come is that judicial commissions of inquiry are toothless and their recommendations are never implemented. Let us recognise that and put that aside –(Interjections)- could my neighbour here be an orderly Member of the House?  Let us look at what has been wrong and demand of government, and continue to demand loudly, that judicial commissions of inquiry must be respected. Their findings must be seen to be implemented. The public demands that, and Parliament enforces that. There has been a proposal – (Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker, when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stood up and talked about the commission of inquiry, my mind started wondering as to whom he was fooling. You will remember very well the famous Sebutinde Commission into the Police. This House has never had the benefit of getting that report. There is the recent one in the – (Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I hope I heard hon. John Kazoora correctly.  If I did not, I beg your indulgence. I heard him wonder whom the Prime Minister was fooling in this House – (Interruption)- Fooling! Is it in order for hon. Kazoora, a respectable member of the House, to use un-parliamentary language? – (Laughter) 

I would like the Hansard to be read to us. I heard him say, “wonder whom the Prime Minister was fooling”. I am saying what I heard. Therefore, is the hon. Member in order to use un-parliamentary language and claim that the Prime Minister could afford to be fooling the House? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if the term ‘fooling’ was used, it is un-parliamentary and, at the same time, it indicates improper motives. If you come here to fool, it is an improper motive and one should not impute improper motives to another honourable Member.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that we have had a number of commissions of inquiry, including the former Sebutinde Commission into the Police, and I thought that when the hon. Kagonyera stood up, he was going to put me in order and say that actually that report was received by this House.  I expected that, but he has not done that. And the recent one into the helicopter scandal - at least that one of Police leaked to the press – we do not know what happened. 
 
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, the Government in view of the IGG survey and the outcry on corruption in the police, instituted a judicial commission of inquiry, which was completely and effectively public. And Her Lordship Justice Sebutinde produced a report in line with the law that established the commission, and handed it over to the responsible minister. 

The responsible minister took necessary action and came out with a draft Government white paper, which was discussed by Government –(Interjection). Yes, Government has to work! Government discussed it, and the recommendations were endorsed and the implementation started effectively by an appointment reform, actually, of the Police. We got new chiefs of the Police who have been doing a fantastic job by arresting robbers, doing a very good job, and the whole public has been informed and this report was made public and everybody who wanted acquired it. 

Mr Speaker, is it really correct - instead of hon. Kazoora giving some appreciation that at least the Government started implementing the first ever, by the way, recommendations of a commission of inquiry in this Government, is it really proper to do this kind of thing?  That is the first information. The Government is continuously implementing the Sebutinde recommendations, for instance, salaries and allowances of the police were increased and the technical institutions are being reformed.  These things are going on very effectively.  

The second one which he is raising - you know the famous helicopter matter - attracted in fact three inquiries: The first one under Aronda, no satisfaction. The next one, in fact, this very House – (Interjection) - the Sixth Parliament - moreover where hon. Kazoora was effectively sitting - constituted its own committee. They even went to London. You remember when I made a comment about it, they wanted to censure me because I talked of their spending in London. They came back; I do not know what happened even to their findings.

When there continued to be an outcry on this matter, the Government instituted a judicial commission of inquiry under, again, Her Lordship Justice Sebutinde, and it was also open and inquiries were made and they submitted a report to the Ministry of Defence, and it was publicly submitted, and even the press reported.  After that, the minister presented this to the cabinet, which decided that a white paper should be made on the recommendations and the Minister of Defence – since I am of Integrity and we work in collaboration, and I do not see him here, I can report that he is in the process of tabling this white paper very soon before cabinet, and we shall start the implementation of the recommendations.  

I can assure you, these are the things we are doing, and therefore, at least we should be appreciated for that.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, I do not understand what is happening in the cabinet today, because it seems they do not understand what I am saying!  The Prime Minister tried, he went off target on my question; hon. Matembe is doing the same, just as the hon. Kagonyera did.  Why are they dodging the question?  Who owned the commission of inquiry?  We are saying this House did not own that and did not follow it! And indeed when she was explaining, you could see people were clapping because they were the people who received it. 

We are saying these commissions of inquiry, Mr Speaker, which do not come from this Parliament, do not respect the recommendations, even of Parliament.  She has conveniently kept quiet about Kanungu – I thought she would continue and finish all these commissions.  Why is she being selective?  (Laughter) 

Mr Speaker, I was only informing the hon. Kabwegyere and I am sure he has got my information.  I thank you.

PROF. EDWARD RUGUMAYO:  Mr Speaker, I think it is clearly laid out in the Constitution the roles of the Executive, the judiciary and this august House.  A commission of inquiry set up by Government reports to Government, and for the hon. Members to demand that this report should be laid before the House is really – and I think let this demarcation be made clear.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the central point in the contribution or information which was being given by hon. Kazoora - I think he was directing this on the decision of Government to appoint a commission of inquiry.  But I think he was saying where is this commission going to report?  Will Parliament be able to know the findings?  I think that is where the debate has to be directed, in that, if the commission is there, shall we know?  Then the minister has said the commission reports to the appointing authority.  The question here was how would Parliament know what the commission has? I think that was the central issue.

MR BEN WACHA: Mr Speaker, I am happy with the contribution made by hon. Prof. Rugumayo.  It is the first time since I entered this House - and I have been here for fairly long - that Government is coming to inform this House about a possible appointment of a commission of inquiry. What I want to know from you, Sir, need Government come to ask if they want to appoint a commission of inquiry?  What do they want from us?  Why do they not go ahead and appoint their commission since the commission reports to the Government, and we go and do our own things?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member wanted clarification from the Chair.  I do not know what clarification I can make on that!  This statement was contained in a statement, which was made by the minister. So she made that statement here as part of her speech.  So I cannot answer whether she should inform us or not. 

PROF NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We had to inform you that we responded to your concerns.  So it was propitious that we should tell you that we have responded.  May I finally point out that when the report is completed, we shall request you to testify before the commission, and it will be laid before Parliament. I thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up because you have taken a lot of time.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The point that brought a lot of debate was the question of the relationship between Parliament and Government with specific reference to judicial reports or the commissions of inquiry reports.  I think that here the Prime Minister has pointed to some area, which shows an improvement.  

It is certainly a justifiable ground for Parliament to demand that when inquiries take place, the findings should be known and be recorded in one form or another through this House.  Now that the Prime Minister has said that a judicial inquiry will produce a report and the report will be laid on the Table of this House, to me, it will make it more hopeful.  

The reason why I think a judicial inquiry is important is that a judge chairs it and therefore the other arm of the state is involved in identifying the weaknesses, either in the law or in procedures or in practices.  

Secondly, I believe that a judicial inquiry, rather than a select committee of parliament, is better because the judicial inquiry will have a longer time; it will have more space and scope, whereas if you have Members of Parliament involved, it will be difficult on their own to share the time between Parliament and the inquiry.  

Lastly, as a final point on that one, I think the task is to study how we can improve the procedures of elections; how we can remove violence in particular, and how we could eliminate the apparent involvement of the army in the process of elections, because that is extremely dangerous.  You are not denying a soldier to vote but not be used.  If there is need, we should have another law.  

But, I also do not agree, nor even respect that a Member of Parliament should go around with foreign diplomats as if they are his or her bodyguards in this process.    I do not believe we need to be re-enforced from outside to oversee our process.  That is why I am for the judicial commission of inquiry, to make sure that all is exposed.  Thank you.

MR EKANYA GEOFREY:  Point of order!

THE SPEAKER: Hon. members, these points of order are coming now and then.  But I think the chair will be insisting that, when one raises a point of order, he must quote the rule that has been breached.  You can proceed!

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I find it un-parliamentary for a Member of Parliament to refer to a diplomat monitoring election as a bodyguard, and yet the government of Uganda invited and accredited international observers under the NEM group.  They have observed relevant elections from 1980, and this year they observed the presidential and parliamentary elections.  

Mr Speaker, for purposes of good co-operation, is it in order for a Member of Parliament to use such a language referring to a diplomat associating with a Member of Parliament to be his or her bodyguard?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the point was that he was wondering whether the diplomat was acting as the bodyguard of the Member of Parliament. 

MS  ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Since yesterday the House has been discussing about the uncomfortable developments that took place during the elections.  This is not a debate that started yesterday.  I recall we have been concerned about the election process problems right from the time of presidential and parliamentary elections. Up to this point when we have held the local council elections, we were still asking ourselves a number of questions.  

One of the things that the Electoral Commission at one point said was that the blame was partly attributed to this House. I am happy that the honourable minister came up on the floor of the House and told us that the bill was passed on time and the monies were allocated on time.  

Mr Speaker, that being the case and yet we know at one point this House was being blamed for the failures of the electoral process, I would like to pursue the idea that this House takes charge of the process of seeing that the electoral process in this country is properly streamlined.  I am also concerned, especially going by what the hon. Minister of Ethics has just told us, that commissions were put in place and when they were put in place in the timing of about three years, is when implementation of recommendations is being done.  I therefore find it very inconvenient to have a judicial commission of inquiry, given the fact that by the time we begin implementing their recommendations, it will be the year 2006.   So most likely, we will have a problematic electoral process.

Lastly, there is a way I found the report rather down-playing some of the issues that were raised.  The minister did say that there were minor incidents, including a minister being caught with 18 ballot boxes.  Is that a minor incident? Guards of ministers shooting, intimidating, candidates and we call those minor incidents!  

To Ugandans, these are the very, very big issues, and I therefore wish to ask this House to save its face and look into the oversight function that it is supposed to pursue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR JAMES BUTURO NSABA (Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. May I join you in congratulating those who recently won, and also commiserate with those who did not win. And in doing so, I think it is incumbent upon this House to cultivate a culture of tolerance to the extent that those who have lost do not feel that they are not part of the governance equation that we all want to see for our country. 

I am encouraged that the hon. Minister has accepted the incidences of violence and irregularities that took place; that is something we all accept. But my view is that none of us has been a monopolist of violence and irregularities.  

I read, the other day, that one of the ministers was punched. Hon. Alaso has cited cases of irregularities, which must be regretted. This House has a very fundamental historic opportunity, like the founders of the American constitution had 200 years ago, to make sure that this country is premised on a democratic foundation. I think all of us, regardless of our persuasions, would accept that view that we must premise our country on those democratic foundations.  

I am not quite sure whether we have an option between having a judicial commission of inquiry and a select committee. I heard my colleague, hon. Alaso, talking about the select committee, and so I am bound to look at these two options. I think if we were to have a select committee, and this is in reference to hon. Alaso’s view, it would seem to me that Members of this House are the complainants - which we are as a matter of fact - are the jury at the same time, and the judge. 

In my view, that would prejudice what would normally be the outcome if it were an independent judicial commission of inquiry undertaking this task. (Applause). I accept concerns raised by hon. Kazoora, Mr Speaker – (Interruption)  

MRS ZZIWA: I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member on the Floor. When he states that this House would be the complainant and the judge, who would express the pains of all the people out there - Ugandans who have undergone this kind of election malpractice? Who would, other than this House? 

DR BUTURO: Mr Speaker, I am surprised that my colleague is raising that point given her experience with regard to the commissions of inquiry that have existed over the years. I have seen her once or twice attending, in her private capacity, those commissions of inquiry. I would take it, therefore, that members of the public would feel free to attend this commission of inquiry.  

I now go back to the point I was making that we are the complainants and we all have legitimate complaints to make about the conduct of these elections. Given that fact, I cannot imagine that a fair outcome would result if we were the jury and the judge at the same time. 

I have great respect for our judiciary, and I know that over the years they have acquainted themselves very well. What may have happened is that the findings have not been given to us in time, and this has brought about concerns and suspicions. But that is not to say that if a high court judge was commissioned with a task of looking at these matters, we would not be able to get to the bottom of the concerns we have. 

In view of the concerns hon. Kazoora raised, we would make sure, with the Executive’s assistance, that this commission of inquiry is given sufficient funds, a time frame within which the task should be made so that we have that commitment, and as soon as possible we are reported to. I join those who oppose the motion and support the view that a commission of inquiry is the right way forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JACK SABIITI: Mr Speaker, having listened to the statement of the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and to the hon. Members, it is clear that the Minister has generally agreed that there was electoral malpractice, election violence, and election mismanagement. This can easily be seen on page 10 of her statement. With this, Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence to move a motion that this House institutes a select committee of Parliament to look into the affairs of this election violence. (Applause). 

THE SPEAKER: Well, they have said they are appointing a judicial commission of inquiry, and are you saying that we have two parallel -(Interruption) - I am raising this so that you know, because they have said they are appointing a judicial commission of inquiry – (Interjection) - they are saying so and you are saying we should have a select committee. So, are we going to have two?

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The subject of discussion, which has resulted in this motion, was the statement by the honourable Minister for Constitutional Affairs.  And when you look at the whole of her statement, you discover that the issue of instituting a judicial commission of inquiry is, by the way, not even a subject of this statement. I would, therefore, move that we, as a Parliament -(Mrs Mukwaya rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Is it a point of order or information?  Because you may be giving information.  

MRS MUKWAYA: No, I am saying it is out of order for him to say that –(Interjections and Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The point he made was that the question of a judicial commission of inquiry was an after thought; it was never part of your statement.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, my statement, which I have here, has an addendum. Why? This statement was ready yesterday for dispatch. Today is Wednesday, and I have just reported to cabinet what was discussed in the House. In the morning, I was with the Committee on Parliamentary and Legal Affairs. I went to cabinet, I reported your concern, Government concurred and so I was reporting. That is why it is not part of my main statement. It was reported. The sequence of events is that I had to report from the cabinet.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The only proposal I am putting forward is that this House should not be precluded from executing its duties as prescribed by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure, in anticipation of a commission whose setting up is not within our mandate. 

An honourable minister has just told us here that the commission, even if it is set up, reports to the appointing authority and Parliament has no question about what it is doing.  So, from that perspective, I would rather that Parliament proceed according to the law and we execute our duties as was prescribed by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure.  I wish to move.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, let us not waste time.  A motion was moved by hon. Sabiiti. I do not know whether it was seconded. If it was seconded, then let hon. Sabiiti justify his motion then we shall proceed.  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, I thought you had raised a point that was slightly mooted, but I thought it was important in the work of Parliament and the Executive. You were asking us, ‘what do you think about this situation in which the Executive has come up with a proposal for a judicial commission of inquiry and Parliament is thinking of a select committee?’ I thought this was a very valid point, and you had sought opinion on this. 

In that regard, if we are all working for the interest of this country and we are not suspicious of each other, what we want here is an investigation. And as the Speaker who is in charge of this House, and as the third highest ranking person in this country, I think you are right to say that if the Executive is serious - which I doubt - about a judicial commission of inquiry, and we in Parliament now are serious about the select committee, is there a way by which we could make our interests coincide. If so, where?  

I thought possibly you could guide us in this line, and this is really the line I wanted to pursue. If we could go to that and we harmonize our position - because there is a weakness in the commission of inquiry and hon. Edward Rugumayo has pointed this out. 

I am acquainted with the Commission of Inquiry Act because the Minister who appoints the commissions of inquiry is the appointing authority.  He is the one who gives terms of reference; he or she is the one who appoints those who constitute the commission of inquiry and gives them the period within which to report.  The appointing authority is the one who receives the report and plays about with it, takes it to cabinet, has a white paper or a green paper or a red paper - whatever you want, and then it stops there.  

Governments, including Amin’s government, have tactically used commissions of inquiry. There was a commission of inquiry into the deaths of the American journalists, commission of inquiry into Uganda Airlines; the Executive has used all these.  

In our case, we are concerned about something, which is hot, and it is here now. What we want is that in this inquiry, by whatever name you call it, Parliament is involved in seeing who is appointed. Parliament is involved in seeing its terms of reference. And once that commission completes its work, we do not want it to be handled like the Sebutinde Commissions.  We want it to come here and it is fully debated. The question is how do we succeed?  How do we put our approaches together? I really think this is the fundamental point which, Mr Speaker, you could possibly guide this House to arrive at.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard hon. Omara Atubo.  In a sense he says that what we are interested in is an effective investigation that will bring all the facts to light, and maybe suggest a solution.  He has said that the Government has suggested a commission of inquiry and there is a motion for a select committee.  He is asking, how can both of us work together and at the same time receive what we want to receive, namely, an effective, thorough inquiry? I think that is the question he has posed. The question is, ‘how do we come together?’

DR NKUUHE: I agree with hon. Omara Atubo.  We are two arms of Government, but unfortunately, whereas they attend all our proceedings, we do not attend theirs - (Laughter)- Mr Speaker, have you ever been invited to the Cabinet?  When we have a business meeting to discuss the agenda of Parliament, they are invited and are very effectively represented. In committees, they are invited. In this House, they are fully represented. But how many of you have ever been invited to cabinet? In other words, we are dealing with an asymmetry – (Ms Akello rose_)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I think my colleague has forgotten that we are also Members of Parliament, and when we are here attending to Parliament, your proceedings, we are actually attending our proceedings as mandated by the people who voted for us as well. I think you have forgotten that.  

DR NKUUHE: That is exactly what I said. Whereas we invite you into our kitchen and our bedroom, for us you do not even invite us in the sitting room – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, could we really first pursue hon. Omara Atubo’s suggestion? Can we get contributions on that?

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to commend the hon. Omara Atubo for identifying the way forward, except for his suspicion of the Executive.  

I would like to say that, ordinarily when the Government or when the Executive sets up a commission of inquiry to investigate a matter, it is true the report would be handed to the minister who appointed the commission, and the minister would obviously table the report in Parliament to seek the views of his/her colleagues and of Government generally. It is true that what would normally come out of the cabinet discussion would be a Government position described as a ‘white paper’, and that white paper would be the Government position on how to implement the recommendations of the inquiry.  It really depends on how Government views the contributions of other organs of Government.  

In this particular case, for example, the Government could go public and publish the report and at the same time publish its own views about how the recommendations in the report will be implemented.  Now, this would be for the public to read.  

Therefore, taking from the hon. Omara Atubo, I would propose, Mr Speaker, all that this House should require of the Executive is whether or not Government is going to have a position on the recommendations of the commission of inquiry to be appointed.  That is up to the Government, but the House should require the report to be published as presented to the Government. Then you will be able to know the results of the investigations.  

In other words, once the report is published as it is, then it will come to Parliament and it is up to you to take it from there.  But Government would still have its own position on the recommendations of the inquiry in its white paper, and can even publish both the report and the white paper. I think that should bring us really close.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible for Parliament to be a partner with the Executive in setting up a judicial commission of inquiry? (Interjection)- I am asking, is it possible?  I think this is what he is saying.  Can Parliament not sit with the minister to discuss this issue and set up the team?  Is it really practically impossible? 

In the judicial commission of inquiry, some legal people are chosen to make an inquiry following certain provisions of the law. If it is a select committee, it will be us constituting the select committee; and if it is a judicial commission of inquiry, it will be other people outside, that is judges, lawyers and so forth, to form the team.  I am only asking the Attorney-General, is it possible to do that?  Must the Executive appoint it all the time or we can now sit together and constitute that commission?

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, as to the first question, I have an obvious yes, because what you really need to be sure of is the terms of reference, and therefore, the extent to which the commission can investigate.  That is the first point, and I see no problem in the minister, who will represent the Executive, in consulting and agreeing on terms of reference with Parliament.  

As to the second question, I also do not think there is a problem because if you are to go by the Commission of Inquiry Act, it would be only one person to do the appointing and that would be the minister. In the process of this consultation, I am sure that some Members of Parliament would like to be on the commission to –(Interjection)- well, some Members whom they wish to be on the commission, through the process of consultation, they can be on the commission!  I really do not see any problem. There is nothing legalistic about this.  Yes, there is separation of powers, but the process of consultation is still part and parcel of how Governments are run. 

The Minister, in the process of consulting on the membership of the commission, can consult as widely as possible, and if there are members of the public that the Members of Parliament would wish to serve, then they can make a proposal to the minister as part of the consultation.  Those are my answers.

MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I think this question of elections is now a very serious matter, and I think it is high time all the arms of Government got involved in investigating this problem.  That is why, if you talk of a judicial commission of inquiry, at least you have a judge there. 

What I would request is that in appointing that commission, we should insist - now that the matter has been brought to this House - that whoever is the appointing authority should consult the Speaker of this House, or an appointed committee of this House, either to ensure that Members of Parliament sit on that commission or that the terms of reference that are going to be made include those that may be recommendations from this House. Eventually, when that report is made, it will be submitted to this House for debate.  That combination will be useful because at least when you have got a judicial commission, the funding of the commission is extremely important. 

You are talking about a select committee of this House.   We have ever had select committees of this House, and you have known what happens after debating the issue. It also remains in the balance. But I would want to make sure that at this time whatever comes out has a follow-up and is implemented by all the arms of Government.  So, I think that combination will help to bring everybody on board.

MRS DORAH BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two major concerns.  First and foremost, I would like to add the fact that not only do we want an effective committee, we also want one which will deliver in a timely manner, because two concerns have been raised.  When things happen, these Commissions take three years to deliver.  This in effect means justice has been delayed, and therefore, denied. 

The second point I would like to raise is that when Government appoints its commission and then the commission reports to Government, Government in effect becomes a judge in its own case, and this is against legal principles.  Therefore, in light of all this, it may also be apparent that there is also lack of good faith.  I think it may be better for Parliament to use its mandate to have a select committee, then the Executive, which must also do its job, could have its own committee so that eventually all these committees could come together and compare notes and propose a way forward.  This is my recommendation.  Thank you.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I also want to thank hon. Omara Atubo and hon. John Kawanga, both of whom are very experienced lawyers, and certainly politicians with good reputation. Therefore, in my view, I would like to plead with the House that we listen to them and know very well on which side they are, with regard to Government -(Laughter)- and, therefore, in my view, Mr Speaker, we should listen to them and take their wise counsel.  

Secondly, I would like to say that when it comes to matters to do with elections and what have you, I think the judiciary has come off extremely well in handling matters pertaining to the elections.  Therefore, in my opinion, it would be unfortunate of this House not to have the confidence in our judiciary.  

Mr Speaker, we can say everything we would like to say, but I must contend that members of this House, in one way or another, are interested parties.  Talk about violence, talk about ballot boxes - and by the way, if you listen carefully, you can clearly discern some of them.  

Therefore, in my view, we have three organs of Government which are essential to one another. Some members have pointed to the Executive, and the Executive is saying, ‘but Parliament, your job we also know’!  Now here is a third organ of government that we in the Executive have said have no interest. They have not participated in election violence, they have not participated in rigging, and they have no allegations that they mismanaged any cases that have gone to court. Let us go to them and ask them to help us identify where the real problem is-  (Interruption)- can I be allowed to finish, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. members, why don’t we do this?  We select some members from the House; they sit together with the minister, discuss this particular issue and come back to us and make a report.  Why don’t we do that? We are trying to find a way forward.

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Mr Speaker, you have allowed me, I am on the floor.  We have been consulting here, even with the people who have been supporting the judicial commission and the select committee, and my proposal is that rather than appoint four, five people here, we have a committee of Parliament which is responsible for election laws and this is the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. I would propose that this committee sits with the responsible minister representing the Executive, they harmonise the terms of reference and the people to be appointed and they report back to Parliament next week on Tuesday.  

THE SPEAKER:  And the duration?

MR OMARA ATUBO: The duration and all these will be put together, and it is not the first time we have done it.  In fact Dick Nyai’s motion for the commission of inquiry into the banks was moved when we were in the conference centre, and it was moved by the Parliament. The Executive accepted it, we harmonised our position, we sat together and that instrument came out with the full acceptance of Parliament.  I do not see why we cannot do it in this case. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Sabiiti, you are the mover of the motion, please say something.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, I wanted your clarification, or possibly your guidance before the mover of the motion.

THE SPEAKER:  Clarification from hon. Atubo?

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: From you, Mr Speaker. I have heard members giving reasons why they are not in favour of a judicial commission of inquiry, that it reports to the appointing authority and so on and so forth, which I think is true for all commissions we have had and I have known they do report to the appointing authority.  I have not heard a reason given against a select committee of Parliament, why it cannot be given the mandate.  The way it is being resisted -(Interruption)- hon. Kagonyera just excuse me.  I want to know whether this House is not an enemy of the state.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. member, you are a member, you have a right to contribute, you made your contribution, other members made their contribution - (Interruption). Hold on! There was hon. Nsaba Buturo, who was for a judicial commission of inquiry and hon. Omara Atubo suggested the way forward. This is what we are trying to find out; whether we can have a compromise on the judicial commission of inquiry, but we own it. This is what is being done and there is nothing really wrong with that.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, I am developing some arguments, and I want your guidance and your clarification.  Hon. Omara Atubo has proposed what he has, I have heard it, and I may have a problem with it or may not have a problem with it, but I still want your guidance on what I want to say, that this Parliament is not an enemy of the state, and a proposed committee of Parliament cannot by any standards or by any measure be against the government.  

I thought this Parliament in partnership with the Executive all want harmony, stability and an electoral process free of all what has been talked about, and all what we know.  So, Mr Speaker, what are the reasons for one saying a select committee of Parliament alone without involvement of the Executive? What are the reasons against it?  

Two, I want to say that to me I had the idea of a select committee being in the corridors of this building, and I want to contend that the honourable minister must have heard about it as I have done.  That is why it is not reflected in her report to this House, so why all this dishonesty?  Why not say we do not want a select committee of Parliament and reasons are given -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. members, when we opened this debate, there was a general debate until hon. Sabiiti moved a motion proposing the formation of a select committee. As he was doing that, hon. Omara Atubo rose up also to make his contribution and he has finished his contribution. I was now actually asking hon. Sabiiti, the mover of the motion, to say something and then you interfered. Why don’t you allow hon. Sabiiti to make his contribution so that - (Interjection)- I want hon. Sabiiti to make his contribution.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, the problem has arisen because I did seek your indulgence to move a motion.  I was not given a chance to justify and the whole motion was taken over by the other honourable members of Parliament. That was generally good, but surely, I should have been given a chance to properly articulate what I wanted to put across.  

Mr Speaker, now that two views have arisen - some Members of Parliament are saying that they have authority and the law, the act of Parliament and the rules to set up a select committee. On the other side, the Executive has the Executive powers to establish the commission of inquiry.  Hon. Guma was saying, ‘what is the reason behind the refusal of the establishment of this committee’? - I would request that since some of the problems that did arise along the electoral process were partly as a result of the interference of the state organs, it will be difficult and in my opinion as a representative of Rukiga county, I feel that the commission of inquiry they are talking about will not be fair to the people of this country and the electoral process will continue being manipulated. I was therefore requesting that a select committee of Parliament is instituted, and if the Executive so wishes, it can also go and institute a commission of inquiry.  Thank you Mr Speaker.

MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): Mr Speaker. With utmost respect to the Attorney General and my learned colleagues, John Kawanga and Omara Atubo, I have many difficulties in appreciating their position. They are proposing that Members of this Parliament go and sit on a commission of inquiry appointed by the minister, report to the minister and then report to the House (-Mr Francis Ayume rose_)

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I would not like to be quoted out of context.  I never said that members of this House would go and sit on that commission; I could never have said so.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, you can check in the Hansard. The Attorney General said, ‘if members of this House feel they should sit on that commission…’ that is what you said, hon. Attorney General, but anyway, you can see the position.  What we are doing now is to have Parliament not abscond from its responsibility; we have a duty to do. We are mandated by the rules, let us do our duty.

The issue of Parliament being a judge in this does not arise; we are only doing our work to investigate and advise government on what to do, so there is no contradiction.  I propose we go ahead and establish the select committee of Parliament to investigate this matter, then we shall debate.  I do not see where the worry is. What is the problem with it? I do not see it, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (Capt. Michael Mukula) Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.  I would like honourable colleagues to examine the presentations that have been made and really look at the way forward for the good of this country. 
We are all looking at ways and means of sanitizing the political atmosphere, so that we can be able to have fair and clean elections.  It is also important for us to note that this same Parliament passed an act of Parliament, which was then given to government to implement.  

The same Parliament also looked at ways and means of passing the budget in order to enable the same government implement the electoral process of this country, as it were.  It is important for us to examine the whole thing and look at the vision of this country in view of the fact that we need to put on ground an effective law, an effective administration, an effective ways and means of ensuring that - (Mr Emmanuel Dombo rose_)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I very much agree with the honourable minister that there is every need for us to sanitize the political situation in this country.  I however want to seek clarification from the hon. minister. 

On two occasions, the Judiciary has made a decision in this country and the Executive has lambasted it.  The first one was during the referendum act, when the Judiciary made a decision and the Executive came up strongly to attack the Judiciary for a job well done. The second one was during the presidential petition, when the Executive questioned which two judges ruled contrary.  

Now, if they are going to set up a judicial commission and report to the Executive with these sentiments in the background, how sure are we that we shall get the real report?  That is why we should have the select committee of Parliament.  I thank you.

CAPT MUKULA: I thank my honourable colleague for his presentation and wonderful articulation, but Mr Speaker, we cannot be judges of our own cases.  It is important for us to note one thing that we need to ensure that within the constitutional framework, the separation of powers is observed by all means.  There is no better arbiter now in this matter than the Judiciary. Mr Speaker -(Maj. Kazoora rose_)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you very much, hon. Mukula, for giving way, and for giving a good example of allowing people from the backbench to give information.  

I agree with you that we cannot be our own judges.  Here with me I have an extract from the ruling of the Supreme Court in the case of Kizza Besigye v. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the Electoral Commission.  Now, this is what the lordship said: 

“The said election was conducted partially in accordance with the principles laid down in the said act, but in some areas of the country, the principle of free and fair election was compromised. In the special polling stations for soldiers, the principle of transparency was not applied and there was evidence that in a significant number of polling stations there was cheating.”  

This is the Judiciary, and this is what hon. Kagonyera was saying that the Judiciary is impartial.  What else do you want them to say? (Laughter)

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, I thank hon. Kazoora for the information he has been able to irrigate the House with.  I am happy to note that hon. Kazoora is reading a judicial submission and he believes in the judicial submission.  Rightfully, that is why the Executive is of the view that the Judiciary is the best arbiter in a matter where both the executive arm of government and the legislative arm of government which passes the enabling laws, both instruments were exercised -(Mr Katuntu rose_) Mr Speaker, I would wish that maybe I am allowed to proceed.  

MR KATUNTU: I am seeking clarification from hon. Mukula.  He is talking of an arbiter, which means there should be some arbitration.  Which are the two conflicting sides on this matter? 

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, there is no doubt that from my honourable colleagues’ presentations, it is quite clear that we are all trying to find a solution to problems that have obtained to the uncertainties that continue to surround the electoral process of this country. 

Now, there are presentations that are being made by honourable members of Parliament, and it is quite clear, as it has already been placed, that a number of us have been involved in an election of either LC I or LC V in one way or the other, if we are honest with each other.  Let us be honest because if we want to be sincere to this country, if we want to be forward-looking and not mismanage the political future of this country, it is important that we who have participated in the electoral process of this country do not stand to judge our own cases.  (Mr Ogwel Loote rose-)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Thank you honourable Minister Mukula for giving way.  I would like to seek clarification because I am very concerned.  When you said that we must be honest to this country, I do believe that all of us are Ugandans and we are accountable to this country, and we are responsible to what is happening in this country and we want this country to achieve the best that we want. Who in this House is not honest to this country?  

CAPT. MUKULA:  Mr Speaker, there is no way in my presentation I have alluded or pointed out anybody in this House who is not honest.  I have only said and put it on record that we must be honest to each other and to ourselves and to this nation.  Now, if I have said that, where have I in any way alluded to the fact that one Member of Parliament or the other is not honest to this country?  What are you talking about?

Mr Speaker, I would only like to move this way.  In order to see that we can be able to get political harmony, it is important that if we are to look at a select committee, we must also examine many other factors and these include the budget implications, the time and the professionalism in which this select committee is going to function. 

On the other hand, if we had a judicial commission of inquiry, it would have three judges and these judges would be given the terms of reference.  These terms of reference would enable these judges to go round this country assembling information from various constituencies.  Because, as we talk right now, we do not know the number of constituencies that have a lot of these irregularities that have in one way or the other curtailed the whole electoral process.  

My view, therefore, is that if we are to have a vision for this country as honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to really pray to you that let us give this judicial commission of inquiry the opportunity to be able to function. Mr Speaker, I am very sure that once this judicial commission of inquiry has concluded its findings, it can be able to present these findings in their raw form to you.  It is from there that if Members of Parliament feel that the information that has been placed before this House is not conclusive, there would be no reason for the House not to put into place a select committee of Parliament to be able to put in and conclude any unfinished business. 

I would want us to look at this process for the good of our children, for the good of this country and for the prosperity of this nation.  I thank you.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibaale County, Kamwenge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am worried about the trend of the debate. First of all, the Rules of Procedure give this House the powers to form that committee.  The worry of the minister is not clear.  Putting up a select committee of the House, does it stop the minister from appointing a judicial commission of inquiry?  Let us have it this way.  If I am a Police officer and there is a case I am following up, when I use CID, it does not stop me from using Special Branch.   If I want to achieve the results quickly, I use both branches.  Why are we worried?  

The select committee of Parliament will be investigating the election violence and report to Parliament; the judicial commission of inquiry the minister will put up, will report to cabinet on the same topic.  We can meet and harmonise.  What is the worry?  Why is there strong opposition? 

The next thing she will tell us is that the commission of inquiry is not within the budget. When will it start? The Kanungu Commission was put up in 2000, but it has never started because there is no money in the budget. When will you start this commission? Are you putting the money in the next budget or it will start next week? You tell us so that we keep our worries cool.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, hon. colleague, for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I am privy to information of investigations by our returning officers. Some of us members who are seated here have participated in what we want to investigate.  Definitely, let us be really fair to ourselves. Some of us have fought with election officials and others have fought at polling stations. So, really, is it fair? Are we doing justice to our country? 

What are we going to investigate? I think the concern is right from the presidential and parliamentary elections, and we have been candidates and we have participated in the elections. I do not think that all of us have been clean in these elections. That is why the Executive, looking at all this, felt that a judicial commission of inquiry would have people who never participated in an election and, after all, they are the people who have been judging us when we have petitions! (Interjections) 

As a Member of Parliament, I am not in for a select committee. Why? We are constrained by the budget. You know very well that the Parliament has problems with liquidity, and these members on the committee will want money to traverse the whole country to do this job, and rightly so. 

Members of Parliament have requested that they should thoroughly debate the budget through the Budget Act, and we have three important Bills before this House. I would really hate a situation when the Political Organizations Bill is on the Floor for debate and members are outside the country doing a job that could be done by somebody else. 

We are really responsible to our constituencies. We should sit here, do our job, legislate and let these bills get out of the way. Let us have a budget for our country. I want you to support me, and I hope that my submission will convince all of us to support an independent person.

I was about to stand up and support the Attorney General when he said that there is no problem with the Legal and Parliamentary Committee sitting with the Minister to look at the terms of reference because we talk the same language. I have not seen a Government that admits that they have made some mistakes, but in my submission, we have admitted that there were some problems that should be acknowledged. So, if I have acknowledged that there were problems, what is it that I am going to hide anyway?  

I would concede to the proposal of having Parliament participate in the terms of reference. You can even propose names because all these are going to be Ugandans. And people have been concerned about the timeframe, we can give eight months. It is the Government that has decided –(Interjections)- yes, what is the problem?  Government has decided in its wisdom. We can even cut Parliament money, because this is our money, and put it into this commission of inquiry for efficiency, and we get the report early. What is the problem?

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful because of what is happening. I am happy about this discussion. I see how we have moved from where we were, at strong loggerheads, and now we seem to be moving to where we are looking for a solution.  

I want to start by thanking hon. Omara Atubo for his contribution and Government for theirs. There are many situations that have taken place, and sometimes Government takes so long to act or to react. On this point, I think Government has acted very fast.

I have also been in this Parliament since 1986. Whenever we are on heat –(Laughter)- whenever we have something strong –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, people are taking things lightly. Whenever we are charged, if you want me to use another word, whichever way you take it, it is being charged, it is being on a strong point; whenever we want to make a point either to a particular individual, to Government or to a Member of Parliament, we have sometimes resolved issues, but sometimes delayed issues instead of making them move faster.

What I want to propose is that in whatever we are doing, there should be an element of trust. That is the only point where I do not agree with hon. Atubo, when he said he does not trust the Government. We have every reason to push our Government to do what we want them to do, and we have the opportunity of having these microphones. We are now engaged in that push, and we have pushed Government on many times to do what we think is right.  

On this particular point, I cannot find a better approach where the Members of Parliament have expressed concern.  But this is a matter for thorough and serious investigation, and we are looking for the best method.

As I said, I have been on a number of select committees.  The main point is, what is the end result? At the end of a select committee, we come and make recommendations here - to whom? We make them to Government again. We come and make recommendations and we say Government should implement this and implement the other. It still depends on the confidence and determination of Government to do something - for them to do it. 

Instead of spending a long time, even if we have lost the battle, as long as we do not lose the campaign, even if it takes sometime and Government perhaps does not act as we want, we reserve the right as Parliament to say, ‘you pledged to put up an independent judicial commission; where is it?’ 

When we made the law for the commissions of inquiry, we debated this and we put the responsibility on our Government, which we actually sometimes push, but which is our Government. I wanted to support hon. Atubo’s proposal that with an eminent trust of Parliament, Government and an independent Judiciary, if we do not trust each other in any negotiation, then the base for working together and moving forward is removed. And I would like to use the experience we have had in this Parliament.  

We have not had Government implementing the results of an inquiry faster than the one from the Sebutinde commission; this is because the judicial commission of inquiry came up with recommendations for Government to act on.  So Government will implement the recommendations of a select committee.   

So in that whole course, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that those supporting the select committee have good reasons; they would want to investigate the matter, but how independent are we?  I therefore would like to request those who are pushing for the select committee that it is wrong to push Government since they have committed themselves, and that will be smart partnership for the three of them.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I thought we had started very well when we discussed this matter at the beginning, because with your own guidance, it was clear to everybody that commissions of inquiry are set up by the Executive and the commissions of inquiry will report to the Executive. And the Minister of Industry reinforced that guidance.  

We as Parliament are empowered by our own constitution to evaluate the activities of Government.  Now, holding and managing elections is an activity of Government, and we know, Government knows, Parliament knows, and every Ugandan knows that the elections have been badly managed and conducted.  There is no disagreement on this and we would like to do our own work and we are empowered by the constitution to set up our own committees to facilitate our work.  I therefore cannot see any reason why the Government should argue that because they are going to set up their own commission of inquiry we should not do our own work of evaluating the activities of Government.  

The minister is talking about the cost; I am surprised that she is talking about the cost because one of the reasons why a commission in her own ministry is not working is because she cannot provide the money.  Now, where is she going to get the money for this judicial commission of inquiry which she wants to set up?  

I want to inform the minister that when Members of Parliament are doing their work, they will not claim any extra allowances, which allowances you will be paying to outsiders who will be appointed to carry out the inquiry.  Therefore it is obvious that it is cheaper for Parliament to do this work than the minister to set up a committee of inquiry to investigate this matter.  

Mr Speaker, setting up a commission of inquiry, we know, is one method Government uses to cover up issues and that happens every time. You get commission of inquiry into this, commission of inquiry into that one, and at the end of the day, you do not know what has been reported, and at the end of the day you do not know what actually has been taken on. And I think the minister wants to have the soft option of having a commission of inquiry so that she covers up many of the issues that have actually been highlighted in the process of management of this election. (Interruption).

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I was a former Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, and there was a member in this House who was a chairperson of the sessional committee. I understand this same committee of the House did not exactly do what hon. Mwandha wants to do. He is saying that we Members of Parliament are the only people who can do justice to the country, but I was the Minister of Gender, and I appeared before a committee and that report of the Committee has never appeared in this House.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Mwandha for giving me the floor.  I would wish to inform the speaker holding the floor that currently there are only 31 high court judges.  We have 56 districts and ideally each district should have its high court and a judge.  There is a huge backlog of cases. I have a case that has been in there for five years.  

The high court judges are up in arms whenever they are asked to serve on judicial commissions; they wonder whether we are aware that justice delayed is justice denied to the people of this country. Mr Speaker, I do not know how the honourable minister envisages taking away some more high court judges from a situation that is already quite desperate, to do a job that this Parliament could do very well. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I wish to inform my honourable colleague that on the question of Members of Parliament taking action on their own errant members, members here recall that we took very stern action on very senior Members of Parliament here during the Sixth Parliament when we found that they had engaged in acts of misconduct.  So, I have no doubt that a select committee can indeed name Members of Parliament and shame them before this House and even recommend stern action against them.  This is something that is well known within the capacity of this august House.

Lastly, we were at a workshop recently and the whole Chairman of the Constitutional Review Commission appeared at the workshop.  I remember you were also sitting there and this very respectable gentleman, chairman of the commission, told us that for three whole months, no work has been done by the Constitutional Review Commission because of lack of funding.  He actually appealed to non-Governmental organisations, which are kind enough, to give some funds to his commission to help it do work.  How do we envisage that the Ministry of Justice will find funds for yet another judicial commission on top of this very important commission that is sitting redundant?  Thank you Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Mwandha.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, it is evident that definitely the Minister wants to cover up this matter.  She does not have the money to finance the commission in her ministry and she will not have the money to finance this judicial commission, Mr Speaker - (Interruption).

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I am proud of the commissioner, who went to that seminar and appealed, but I am surprised that that is – you said – ‘a whole chairman’? It is on record that Government has provided that commission with one billion shillings - (Interjections)- No, no, no! Look here Members - you see, sometimes Members debate as if we, in the Executive, are from the moon and they are from heaven. It makes me shudder. 

We had two activities running concurrently: We had to get the elections out of the way and Government raised Shs34 billion for the Local Governments elections. We agreed with the commission that ‘you need not go out now because people are electioneering. Stay around Kampala, interview institutions. As soon as the elections are over’ - and that money was enough for them to do the job. Government is going to give them the money. One is asking for one billion out of three billion. We have already given them Shs2.6 billion. So really, who is telling a lie and who is telling the truth? They worked out a budget and the whole exercise was going to cost Shs3.6 billion. We have given them Shs1.6 billion and the balance is there for everybody to see. Now that the elections are out of the way, these people are going to get the money. 

But I want to put it on record that I am not covering up anything, and that it is an injustice for an honourable Member to impute that I want to cover up anything. I have no interest. My record has been clean, and I want him to prove that I have an interest which I want to cover in this investigation. 

As a Member of the Executive, I am mindful because I am a beneficiary of funds from Parliament. You know what has been going on. So, I want to put on record that I am not covering up anything. We have made our case. This Parliament in its wisdom can decide whichever way you want. I am not stopping you to decide the way you want, but I will not also allow any Member to impute improper motives from my submission.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I think hon. Mukula said we must be honest, all of us, and I think he included the minister.  The minister must be aware, if she has taken the trouble to find out, that the commission has a deficit of Shs3.8 billion and also it needs Shs4.6 billion. The minister must be aware that she only budgeted for Shs600 million, and therefore, there is no money for this commission.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, when we hide under rules, it is good to be organised. I think it is also unfair for a Member of Parliament to think that he knows more about what is going on in my ministry. It is on record that the commission budgeted for Shs3.6 billion. That is the budget that Government has. So, where do you get those figures? Is the hon. Member in order? What if tomorrow I submit in the House the budget of the commission and what Government has given? Is it in order for an hon. Member to tell a lie to this House when the facts are there?    

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I do not have the facts here with me. But hon. Members, I think many of you want to contribute. We should limit our contributions and be relevant to the issue before us.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers this Parliament to evaluate the activities of Government. The management of the electoral process is an activity undertaken by the Government and we are empowered by the same constitution to set up committees from time to time to discharge our responsibilities. We have no impediment in setting up a select committee to look into this matter, report to this House so that this House can pronounce itself on this matter finally.  I beg to support, Mr Speaker.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief because most of the things I would have said have already been talked about. I will start with the issue of the budget, because one of the problems the minister pointed out in her statement is the issue of the budget. 

We appreciate that not enough funds were given and even when they were given, they were given piecemeal. But on the issue on the Floor now, I think if Parliament went deeper to appreciate the problem through their own investigation, they are in better position than a judicial commission of inquiry, not only to recommend, but to compel Government, namely, the Ministry of Finance to release the funds which have been budgeted and appropriated by this Parliament in full without giving that amount piecemeal. 

The issue of the cost of having a select committee came up, but I think it is erroneous, because even a commission of inquiry will cost us money, and actually it may cost us more than a committee of Parliament. The funds to the Constitutional Review Commission have been talked about. I do not know whether we were misled at that workshop because I also attended it at Hotel Africana, and one of the reasons why the commission actually thought that they might not give us their findings on time was that of budget constraints. 

So, if the Minister has assured us that the money has been released, well and good. But how about the shortage of judges; how about the agony which the commission of inquiry which probed the closure of banks went through? Twice or thrice, they invited few of us on the committees on finance and on the economy. I remember we went there about three times with hon. Musumba and they were crying over and over about lack of funds. How sure are we that this commission when it is put in place will have the funds? 

Let us be honest to ourselves. The report from the Minister, and her proposal to put in place a judicial commission of inquiry arose out of Members concerns expressed on this Floor yesterday after your communication.  It is not as if Government had also realised that there had been flaws in the whole electoral process and came up with their own statement. This was something initiated by Parliament. So, I urge the 7th Parliament that if you initiate something, please finalise it. Mr Speaker, I beg to support.

MR J.W.WAGONDA MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion of setting up a select committee. One of the things that has pleased me this evening has been the statement from the Government side that indeed there is need for political sanitation.  This in itself, I think, is a realisation that there has been political pollution, and that pollution can only be removed or stayed by those who introduced it. 

The Constitution is very clear, Mr Speaker. What we want the judicial commission of inquiry to do or the select committee of Parliament to do are things that we are aware of. What has caused the violence that we are all condemning? These issues are very well known. It is because there has been pollution of the political environment. 

The monetisation of politics in this country has brought a big problem, and where did it start? We are talking about individual merit and yet people pump in millions and millions of shillings to support a particular candidate, thus overloading those of us who stand on individual merit. Are these unknown to us? Why do we pretend to be like ostriches and hope that if we put our heads in the sand, by the time we put them out the storm will be over? Why?  

So, there is a problem with the system. You cannot hope that a vehicle, which is made to use diesel, will fire when you put petrol. Forget it! We are talking about the Movement system; people have polluted the Movement. We are talking about individual merit as all-inclusive, then all of a sudden we say, ‘this one is ours, this one is not ours’. When was a resolution passed to expel members from the Movement? I want to know; when was a resolution passed to expel certain people from the Movement? 

We know very well people like Ssebaana Kizito served in the Government of Uganda under the Movement, a Minister in the Movement. All of a sudden he has ceased to be in the Movement. What does the Constitution say?  ‘All-inclusive, personal merit’. Are we still all-inclusive or not?  

So, if we are going to deal with political sanitation, those who are polluting the system must stop forthwith.  Sanitation in politics is as important as in health.  (Laughter). One of the polluters of the political system has been the system of people supporting candidates who are non-starters, and the honourable Minister is quoted to have supported one of the non-starters in Soroti.  

CAPT. MIKE MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I would like to be protected as I rise on a point of order. It is quite clear that the democratic process of this country, which encompasses even Soroti, for that matter - as a Member of Parliament from Soroti Municipality, I made it very clear in writing and on radio that I would support any person that the people of Soroti district elect. This was quite clear after a number of consultations were held. Is it, therefore, in order for an hon. Member of Parliament to mislead this House; and more so, on a matter that he has not been very well versed with, that I supported a candidate who lost?  Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate that contrary to the Constitution, the minister supported a non-starter?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I know is that only yesterday the National Political Commissar told this House that they held a nightlong meeting in Soroti to discuss candidates who were to be sponsored by the Movement, and there are Members of Parliament from Soroti who are in this House, who are trying to be honest with you.  

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor. As a very old member of the Movement and who is very concerned about the welfare of the Movement and its inclusiveness and non-partisanness and broad-basedness, are we hearing that in Soroti some of our Movement people did not get their money for campaigns? Is this what I am hearing? And if so, what happened to this money?

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of clarification and to help my colleague and good friend, hon. Winnie Byanyima from Mbarara Municipality. As a colleague from Soroti city, I wish to help her understand very clearly that yesterday, hon. Crispus Kiyonga, who is also the National Political Commissar, cleared the air on matters in which the Movement guided the country in the elections. It is also quite clear that as individuals we have the right to support anybody we so wish by any monetary contribution. 

I would wish to request the hon. Member of Parliament from Mbarara Municipality, or any other person, to put on record here in this House any document to show that the Movement supported any candidate in Soroti or in the country –(Interruption).

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, I think we are getting confused because the country has been informed that the Movement has ways of raising money through sympathizers and supporters without touching public funds, and I appreciate that point. But for an hon. Minister to say there has been no support at all by the Movement to any candidate, I do not want to call it dishonest, but it is not quite honest. (Laughter). 

I think we have to draw lessons from the elections that have just concluded. Is this how we want to continue to the next election? Can’t we come up with suggestions, with even strategies, of how to stem these shortcomings? 

Clearly, the problem of funding is lack of prioritisation by Government, of the election as a major activity. We know we have scarce resources, but if we identify the election process as a priority, then it should have the first calling on the scarce resources we have.  We would then not have had the problem of late procurement and late deliveries. 

I am surprised the reports say the papers for village elections were delivered in all districts on time when we know very clearly that in some of our villages, elections were not held. We know that elections started late, and in some areas the Electoral Commission allowed voting even to continue up to midnight –(Interruption).

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, I need your guidance on the procedure. I want to be guided on what we are debating. Are we debating the merits and demerits of the motion on whether we should have a select committee or not, or we are now going into the general debate on how elections were marred and what could have led to that? We seem to be derailed.

THE SPEAKER: There are two positions. There is the position for a judicial commission of inquiry, and there was a modification by hon. Omara Atubo. Now there is a motion by hon. Sabiiti. So, contributions should be on that and not on the running of the Movement.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: I appreciate that ruling, Mr Speaker. I was trying to point out the merits of having a select committee of Parliament because parliamentarians come from the villages that we are talking about. We come from the constituencies where these shortcomings were witnessed, and as parliamentarians we feel what it is when these things occur. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that I put the question. The question is how are you going to vote? Are you going to do it by show of hands or by voices? It seems some more people are still interested in making contributions, and I do not want to leave out anybody. So, since there are still many people who want to make contributions, let us proceed with the contributions.

MR AMON-REEVES KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope a word to the wise and to the House is enough. The positions have been exposed where Parliament is looking at the Executive and doubting its speed and opaqueness, and we are saying that let the Executive be transparent and very fast.  

In one case, where I would not wish to rush on to certain things, where hon. Dombo has quoted two cases in court, one was on the referendum and another one was a case on the presidential petition, the judges had their positions despite the interest of the Executive or the interest of the House. No position was changed; the position remained the same. 

I suggest, or if we could agree, because now we have twisted our arms enough, if the Minister can agree to sit with the responsible committee and they agree on the time, the speed –(Interjections)- all of us here, Members of Parliament and the Executive, were either participant observers in these elections or were at least agents. So, at one time, should you put up a select committee, you will come to a certain place to investigate and one of the members will say, ‘I have interests here’ and he or she will withdraw and we shall lose that input.  

It is therefore very important that we trust our judiciary. It is a matter of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to sit down with the Minister and agree on the timeframe and the terms of reference, so long as it is agreed that the Minister shall also table this report in this Parliament. I think it is better for us to begin trusting each other rather than all the time mistrusting each other and putting a gap. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to provide what I would consider to be a way forward, but I need to give a background to it. 

We are a house of representatives, and we represent people who have grave concerns about the way elections are conducted in this country. We represent people who have been beaten, had their hands broken, some have been killed, others up to today have not voted and they have not been elected. We have grave concerns. 

The resistance that the Executive is meeting in this House must be a wake-up call to the Executive that there is a problem. The laxity with which the Executive responds to the concerns of this country is what is brewing this problem. We started debating election violence on the first day I sat in this Parliament in July of last year. It went through and through. Concerns were raised; people criticised these forces that they create to terrorize people during elections. These issues were raised. The time for creating a judicial commission of inquiry has lapsed -(Applause)- that is why these concerns have been raised.

The Executive admitted that there are problems with the electoral process. It was admitted even by the Electoral Commission that we have a problem; ‘you give us laws late, you give us money late, we have a problem in the Electoral Commission.’ It was admitted by the Executive here that there is a problem. It was admitted by Parliament that there is a problem with the electoral process.  What is the way forward? I am proposing this with that background. 

There is a lot of heat that  –(Laughter)- at the moment there is a lot of heat, we need time to seriously reflect on this matter, and that is why I am coming to this proposal. 

I have taken into consideration the views raised by the Minister about the commission of inquiry, and I have also taken into consideration the issue of the select committee proposed by hon. Sabiiti. I have also understood and appreciated the proposals of hon. Omara Atubo and his colleagues on this matter. 

I am proposing this - and let the Hansard show that I proposed it on this day - that we give time to the Legal and Parliamentary Committee to draft a terms of reference, bring it back to this House and then we take a decision as to whether it goes to a select committee or it can go to a commission of inquiry. But it should be known because now we do not even know the size of the problem we are dealing with.  

We are mistrusting the people who were involved because we do not appreciate the size of the real problem. I would propose that the Legal and Parliamentary Committee sit with the minister, within a short time come out with a list of terms of reference of what areas of inquiries will be included, and thereafter, we can sit and then report and then decide on which would be the most appropriate.  I beg to propose, Mr Speaker.

MR SABIITI: I would like to inform hon. Oulanyah that the motion I have moved has a detail of terms of reference, which I think are very, very important for the select committee.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, unfortunately, when you moved your motion, you should have given all these details.  That is why I think it is coming up.

MR SABIITI:  I have been waiting, that is why I said I was not given a chance.

THE SPEAKER:  I will give you a chance; honestly.

MR SABIITI:  Yes.  May I, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  No, now there is a proposal, hon. Sabiiti. There is a proposal by hon. Oulanyah.  I think let us explore it.

MR AWORI:  Do I understand there is a counter motion now or is it an amendment to the substantive motion?  Is it a counter motion or an amendment to the existing motion?

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Oulanyah, what was your position?

MR MWANDHA: But before hon. Oulanyah comes in, there is a problem with his proposal.  He started by saying that the time for a judicial commission expired.  Which means that the only way forward now is a select committee.  Now he is saying the committee should now go and come up with terms of reference so that we can decide whether we go for an expired judicial commission or a select committee.  I think there is confusion.  I think the important thing -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oulanyah, could you clear this problem.

MR JACOB OULANYAH:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am sure hon. Mwandha did not really understand me.  I said that the acrimony that is going on now in the House is because the time they should have actually put a judicial commission of inquiry in place passed, because this problem has long been with us.  That is what I said.  

The proposal I am making, is because I have sat here from the beginning and I have not seen the motion being debated.  I have only seen the proposal coming from the Speaker that we explore possibilities of reaching a compromise. That is why I come on this.  The substantive motion has not been introduced, has not been read, has not been seconded, and has not been proposed to the House.  So, that is why I am proposing this.  But if I was given a chance -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Are you moving a motion?  (Interruption)

MR SABIITI:  Information, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER:  Let me exhaust with him.  Are you moving a motion?

MR OULANYAH:  Mr Speaker, if there was a substantive motion that was being debated, I would then now propose an amendment to that motion.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Then make it, you move the amendment.

MR OULANYAH:  Mr Speaker, I need to know whether there is a substantive motion on.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, there was a motion.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, may I give him this information, which he is looking for?  The motion I moved is as follows:

WHEREAS various elections have been held in the country from March 2001 to 14 February 2002;

AND WHEREAS these elections have been characterised by gross mismanagement by the Electoral Commission, violence, misuse of various arms of Government and various levels of rigging;

AND WHEREAS there has been a general public outcry about the conduct of these elections;

AND WHEREAS it is in the interest of democracy, peace, unity, social justice and progress that elections be held and conducted in a free and fair manner;

NOW THEREFORE, we Members of Parliament do hereby resolve that a select committee be appointed by the Speaker to generally inquire into the misconduct, violence, alleged rigging that characterised the presidential, parliamentary and local Government elections in March and June 2001, and January and February 2002, and in particular to inquire into the following: 

(a) The cause or causes of the violence.

(b) The cause of the misconduct of the election by the Electoral Commission.

(c) The need, if any, to strengthen the law related to the conduct of national elections.

(d) The need, if any, to review the organisation and management of the said elections.

(e)And any other related matters. 

The select committee should report to this House within two months from the date of this resolution, its findings on the above.
  
Moved by Jack Sabiiti, MP, Rukiga County; seconded by hon. James Mwandha, hon. Omara Atubo, hon. John Kazoora, hon. John Baptist Kawanga, hon. Kasule Lumumba, hon. Winnie Byanyima, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Nathan Byanyima, hon. Annette Mukabera, hon. Beatrice Rwakimari, hon. Okot Santa, hon. Sylvia Sinabulya, hon. Kule Muranga, hon. Christopher Mbalibulha and hon. Geoffrey Ekanya.  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Supported, now proceed.

MR SABIITI:  Mr Speaker, the election process in this country has seen many, many huddles and as a result, the elections in this country have become a laughing stock.  We have seen the misuse of the state organs by the Executive, which all members are aware of; secondly, the failure of the Electoral Commission to do its duties properly; thirdly, because of the political system. We have been talking about Uganda having a Movement System, but the Movement continues to categorise candidates.  This in itself has caused violence whenever elections are held. 

Fourthly, the weak law enforcement agencies, this also has resulted into a number of candidates and population engaging in violence; unfair laws which I think this select committee will have to look into so that the laws are clearly straightened; and failure of the state to fulfil its duties. This is another area where I think this select committee should look at.  

I, therefore, Mr Speaker, without wasting much of your time, move that this motion be properly discussed and a select committee be put in place.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION (Maj. Tom Butime): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am really surprised that it is hon. Sabiiti moving this motion because –(Interjections)- that is what I want to say, he must reflect back to his constituency and the problem there. When the inquiry begins, I can see a lot of politicians and Members of Parliament being really seriously grilled about what happened in their constituencies, so that is a very interesting development.

I have not heard from the Minister nor from the Prime Minister that the elections in Uganda were meticulously held or where held in an excellent manner. No minister, not even the Prime Minister, has said that. We are all in a learning process and there is nothing perfect as yet. 

Hon. Members know that even last year, when elections in the United States were taking place, there was a problem in Florida, and these are the giants of democracy. Any election is bound to have a lot of upheavals and problems. So far, we have not reached perfection, let alone in Uganda, even in the United Kingdom. You will remember the Deputy Prime Minister was caught throwing stones! This was during the election campaigns between the Labour Party and the Conservative Party. 

I am not saying this to say that Uganda should perform badly, but I am saying that there is always heat, not the heat that the Lieutenant General was talking about. That one connotes animals, but you know he is a cattle keeper, so I can appreciate why he used this word. But the elections are bound to generate a lot of excitement, and if not properly controlled - and that is a development process - you can have a problem. In my view, Uganda has done its best –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we are not talking about elections because that will be the subject of the inquiry.  We are concerned about whether we should have a select committee or not, under what terms, et cetera. We should direct our minds to the motion that requires us to have a select committee.

MAJ. BUTIME: Thank you, Sir. If only I could just be given another minute to – (Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is my understanding, from the Rules of Procedure, that when you are speaking, a member resumes his or her chair.

THE SPEAKER: He has appreciated the rule.

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, I apologize and I thank you for the caution. 

We all know that the debate is about the Executive having been involved in the failure to manage the election through the Electoral Commission. Members believe that the Executive or its agents were involved in violence et cetera. We also know that even the politicians, let alone some of us here in this House, considering the presidential, parliamentary, LCV, LCIII and other elections were also involved. 

In other words, the two that stand to be questioned may have to be the Executive and the politicians.  The Judiciary stands alone so far. The Judiciary is the only one you can say could carry out a better job, because for the time being, they have not been involved. Their hands have not been in this exercise since March up to today. That is why I am arguing that a judicial commission of inquiry would do better than a select committee of Parliament.  

That is why I disagree with hon. Kiraso who argued that a judicial commission of inquiry may not get the funds, but a select committee can exist while a judicial commission of inquiry is also appointed. The funds will not be available for both and that becomes a problem. So, we do not get a better answer there. That is why we should compromise –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the gist of the debate should be on expedience in the best way.

MAJ. BUTIME: Precisely, Mr Speaker, and the most expedient way is to have one, a judicial commission.  I thank you.

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the formation of a select committee. It defeats my understanding - in this country we have parallel organisations, and every organisation is not stopped from doing its work because the other one is doing its work also.  

We have a critical incident of the office of the IGG and the Ministry of Ethics and Integrity. We also have CID. I do not see a contradiction, because we have on the other part Government realizing that actually there is a problem, and it is setting up a judicial commission of inquiry, and on the other hand, we are seeing Parliament doing its work and setting up a select committee. 

I do not see a contradiction, and I would like to inform the Minister, particularly that members do not doubt the credibility of the judicial commission of inquiry, but there are issues that have been raised by members. One of them is financial constraint, the other one is the time lag, and the other one is to whom it reports to.

I listened to hon. Tumwine’s contribution and it reminded me that actually, one of the reasons why he fired the first shot was election malpractice -(Applause). And now that this problem is coming up again – (Laughter)- we should exhaust all avenues so that the parties involved are satisfied. 

I do not see the problem with the committee. It can go ahead and report to Parliament and the judicial commission of inquiry, which we all believe will do a good job, can also come. I do not see any contradiction. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Okumu Ringa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion using Rule 44(b), which reads: 
“The following motions may be moved without notice-
(b) any motion for the adjournment of the House.” 

Considering the importance of the motion on the Floor, which has aroused the interest of all Members, both the Backbenchers and the Executive, and realising that we need a bit of consultation in order for us to have a consensus, I beg to move that the House adjourns and the debate continues tomorrow. I beg to move.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I saw hon. Okumu Ringa seated in this House from the beginning of the debate and I believe that he was listening to the proceedings, particularly your ruling to allow more people to debate this motion so that it is exhausted. Is it in order, when in fact one Member had wanted the question to be put under Rule 63, for the honourable Member to bring Rule 44, which has almost the same effect so that we do not pronounce ourselves on this matter now? Is he in order to move this motion?  

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the issue is the question of merit of the motion. His motion does not preclude you to continue with the debate. He is only saying that we adjourn and continue with the debate tomorrow. So, the debate will continue if you pass the motion. If you do not, again the debate will continue until we adjourn.

MRAWORI: Mr Speaker, not long ago, I moved a motion to that effect that you put the question. You said that – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I said that because many people were interested in contributing to the motion, I would give them the opportunity to do so, and that is what I am doing. Now, somebody has brought another motion that we adjourn.  We should consider whether we adjourn or continue.  

MR AWORI: Procedurally, can you put the question that we clear his motion? (Laughter)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you clear his motion.

MR OKUMU RINGA: Mr Speaker, according to the Rules, this motion does not require secondment. The import of my motion is not to stifle the Members from contributing and making decision. It is basically to enable Members to consult, internalise and continue with this debate tomorrow. We shall articulate terms of reference and all the issues relating to this very important matter. 

I am equally aggrieved because we need to have a peaceful atmosphere within which to conduct our elections. We are all aware of the statements of Members and this motion – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that we have been consulting on this matter from July last year and we are very informed.  

Secondly, I would also like to inform him that we have a big baggage according to the briefing you gave us yesterday - the Political Organisations Bill, the Suppression of Terrorism Bill. All that needs time and we would like to save as much time to discuss those very crucial issues. With that information, I believe we should dispose of this matter and proceed.  

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for adjournment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR AWORI: Motion!

THE SPEAKER: If it is a motion to put the question, I am not going to do it. I am going to allow Members to continue.

DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora Country, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a bit worried; the Constitution has given Parliament a mandate. Article 90 is very clear.  Parliament is trying to discharge its duties and in so doing it can set up committees that can enable it to smoothly discharge its functions. We have identified a problem and Parliament is seeking to address the problem in the best way possible. With due respect to the Executive, the manner in which they are supposed to debate is so rigid that it gives me the impression that there may be some hidden agenda.

Aware that we would like to have a serene political atmosphere – sanitising up the political atmosphere, as somebody put it, we would like to convince our colleagues in the Executive that Parliament is desirous of having a serene political atmosphere. Let us trust each other, have a select committee in place and we move on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Speaker, the problem I see is this high level of mistrust. It is extremely unfortunate that one organ of the state mistrusts another so much, and yet it expects the other organ not to suspect it. 

I was seated there listening, and the levels of suspicion in us will not let us really do well for our nation. And yet I thought that the three organs of the state, each of them independent in their own way, do relate and work together for the betterment of the people whom we all work for.

In this House, we in the Executive are also honourable Members, and I can assure you, we are as concerned about the violence among our people as you, backbenchers, are. I do not think that you are in a better position to be more concerned and love the people than we do. I do not think that the moment you are on the Back Bench, that is when you are honest, that is when you are trusted; and when you come to the Front Bench, you become rotten. It is really amazing the way we conduct our business here.

Now, I want to say, and I have a witness here - hon. Winnie Byanyima - that I am one person who, in fact, has not been involved in causing this violence. I hate it so much and I participated in saving and protecting the people who were suffering from violence. She knows that; and I did it as a Minister of Ethics and Integrity in the Government, because I thought that there were some Members working on behalf of Government who were causing violence. They were using the name of the President and I said, ‘I am here in Mbarara, I am the Minister in the office of the President and I take authority to correct these wrongs’. At least that should be a credit to the Government.

MS BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Minister. Indeed, I want to whole-heartedly agree and confirm that hon. Miria Matembe used her position as Minister of Ethics and Integrity to try to restore sanity in a process that had become completely derailed by Members of the Executive. Some of them are sitting right here, in front of me on my right hand side, some of them even carrying senior ranks on their shoulders, some of them using junior soldiers and pushing them to manipulate an electoral process. That is why, hon. Minister, we need a parliamentary select committee.  

As the hon. Minister knows, this House has been able, from time to time, to investigate, including its own Members, who have been involved in acts of misconduct, and has been able to shame them. 

So, hon. Minister, I hope you will support this motion for a select committee so that ministers like yourself who are upright, who have used their position to defend democracy, can be recognised, and those Members of the Executive and Parliament who derail the process can be ashamed. Thank you.  (Applause).

MRS MATEMBE: In fact, the information hon. Winnie Byanyima is giving me is to show that there is need to trust the Executive –(Interruptions)- let me proceed. I can assure you that if I did not come in there, things would never have been the same. I was in collaboration with the President. So, that means that all this mistrust which you put on us should be reduced.

On the other hand, I know very well that some honourable members in this House - and let me tell you, I am not asking you to tell me loudly, but in your heart of hearts, you know the roles some of you played in promoting that violence. So, the reason why I rose is to prevent the pinpointing of fingers and to say that we have a national issue at stake. It is not the question of who has power and who does not. 

The Executive has power because you gave it to them; the Constitution gives it to them; you give us the programme to implement as Government.  We are answerable to the nation because you told us and the Constitution told us to be.  

On the other hand, you also - and me inclusive mark you, because I competently represent Mbarara district here - over a million people - we also in that capacity are answerable to our people, and we detected violence. The problem that I detect is for the Members of Parliament to think that violence was entirely motivated by members of Government.  I want us to agree that both of us – the Bible says that all have sinned and fallen short of God’s glory and they need repentance. That is all, Mr Speaker and hon. Members.

The reason I am arguing like this is that the mover of the motion -I am sure he is here present- knows very well what went on in his constituency; the things we were reading in the papers, all kinds of things. What perturbs me now is the constituting of a committee. My question is, you put your Members, and we do not know what you did in contributing to this violence - (Interjections). When Members are talking, we really listen to them. I wish they could also listen to us. 

My problem is, when you are a participant and then they choose you, because we are not being honest to agree to what we did. I did not ask you to tell us, but you know it deep down in there. You are a player; we are participants. When we say we want to clean up - I beg your indulgence to say that hon. Omara Atubo had come out very nicely to say that we are all participants in this matter. Let us sit together and see how best we can clean the dirt. But when we say the other committee and the other, the mistrust will be there. 

I do not see any reason why I should trust Members of Parliament in the BackBench who do not trust me. Why do you think I should trust you when you do not trust me? Since we do not trust each other, why do we not sit together – we might come together, once we sit together like the hon. Speaker had guided us on that motion. I wish to appeal to you, hon. Members, to look at this as a matter of expediency.

Finally, Mr Speaker, since the hon. Members of the Backbench do not trust us, and since they are going to put up their select committee and they make their recommendations for us to implement, how do they trust us to implement them? I know they may threaten us with censure, but some of us do not fear censure. I am telling you there is nothing so much that I enjoy in this thing in which I suffer so much –(Interruption) - I am telling you, I do not fear censure - (Laughter).

When you threaten us with censure, some of us are not bothered. Or, you can effectively censure us but another minister will be there and it will be the Executive to implement.  So, we better be together and come out with a real position that will move all of us together for the good of our people.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this matter, I think you are the only one who can help us.  We have spoken round and round; we have steamed out almost everything that we would want the House to know. 

I think we are all conscious of the principle of checks and balances.  We know that the cabinet has a responsibility and we know that Parliament has a responsibility and on these matters of elections, I think the Executive has been in control of the situation. They were the managers, they were the supervisors and things went wrong. And it is because of this that Parliament has come out to say ‘how can we help the Executive? And this is being done in good spirit. I would have expected the minister responsible and the cabinet to be very appreciative of the spirit, which Parliament has shown in saying ‘yes we know things went wrong’. 

Mr Speaker, if you will recall, in the Sixth Parliament when the President was opening Parliament, he said that the Electoral Commission mismanaged the election.  But I am surprised that no action was taken to discipline the Electoral Commission. And even then, we have come up with more and more electoral fraud, electoral malpractice and so on. 

I would like to remind you about the story the late Julius Nyerere told Parliament of Uganda when he visited us in 1987.  He said that for a long time his clan never knew who was emotionally in charge of a child, who owned the child between the father and the mother.  It was so until one day, the mother left the child with the father and when the mother came back she found the child was burnt, and the man had not taken trouble to take the child to hospital and so on.  

It is true that we have charged the Executive with responsibility, but things have been going wrong and we are concerned. People whose houses have been burnt are living with us; people who have been killed in the electoral violence are living with us, and they are all looking at us and saying ‘Parliament, what are you doing?’ 

Today we have come out, Mr Speaker, and we are saying we are not stopping Government from going ahead with whatever they can do.  In fact, this Government must apologise because when we opened Parliament, the minister responsible should have come up with a statement as to why electoral violence and electoral fraud continued even to the last one.  They should have come with an apology, but no action was taken. Now, Parliament with its own initiative is saying ‘let us try and help you; can we put up a select committee and we come up with some ideas so that together we can improve the system?’ But the Government is trying to block it.

I think you are the only one who can help us.  We have debated this matter, you have seen the consensus and I am only appealing to you, because people have exhausted their words; the frontbenchers now do not know what to say, they are just quarrelling with us and for us we have given you all the wisdom.  Mr Speaker, I am just appealing to you to let this matter be put to rest, by allowing us to put in place a select committee to help the Executive clean its image.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA, REHABILITATION (Mr Agard Didi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am very grateful that the previous speakers ably elaborated a number of areas and showed how elections have been flawed and how the Electoral Commission has mismanaged elections.  

Earlier on, we were informed here that if the minister sets up the judicial commission of inquiry, it will report to that minister, and at the same time, we are saying that we now want a select committee.  When hon. Oulanyah stressed the importance of the terms of reference, I think we have missed the point because I think the issue to stress here is: what is it that we would like to be stressed?  What is it that we would like investigated?  This is very crucial. 

People have been mentioning Kalangala Action Plan; you go to Gulu you will find the MPs are saying the chairman-elect is threatening them; you go to the western part of Uganda, non-reform group. You will find that just like in cabinet - I will just give an example. You heard one cabinet minister was boxed on the mouth by a candidate who lost, another one was carrying boxes for a candidate who lost.

So, do not think, therefore, that there is such a thing like a Frontbench position vis-à-vis a BackBench position.  I thought, therefore, that one middle way out would have been accepting that since they have name-calling of the Executive and of us here in Parliament – I know many of us here have had various candidates and supported various candidates, the point is, if we are going to be in that select committee, at what stage are we going to say ‘in this regard, I have an interest?’  

The better way out would have been to put very strongly what we want investigated and also take advantage of the compromise that came out that since we have got a legal committee, why do we not get the legal committee to sit with the line minister in drawing up the terms of reference? 

Secondly, the point about the judicial commission is that - I think nobody here has doubted the independence of the Judiciary.  So, is it not fair that if both the Executive and the Legislature are suspicious of one another, we do fall back to the arbiter whom we all have trust in, the only the difference being that we as Parliament give very clear terms of what we want investigated, so that rather than reporting to the Executive, the commission now - since we are now accepting that the Executive appoints a judicial commission, we now make it a joint venture, what the Lieutenant General calls SMART partnership?  If, therefore, we are able to say these are areas we feel, if properly investigated, will put an end to election violence, it will put an end to the name-calling. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, given the weight of this matter, I want to beg you to put the question only when you are satisfied that it is thoroughly debated and when there is a quorum.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, it is true I said I would exhaust members who want to make a contribution.  But now I have realized that what we are getting is a repetition of what has been said by other members.  I think it is time for us to decide on this issue in light of what has been suggested by hon. Omara Atubo.  But one thing that should be clear is that our decision for a select committee does not stop and will not stop the judicial commission of inquiry.  It will mean that we shall have two inquiries on the same subject matter.  These are factors that you will take into account when you decide in one way or the other to ensure that this is done transparently. 

I am not going to decide by voices, I am going to ask you to put up your hand.  

 (Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  I declare the motion carried. (Applause)

There is the issue of terms of reference, maybe we have not exhausted that, but there was an idea that a committee of Parliament in charge of elections looks at the terms of reference, that is acceptable.  I am supposed to nominate members to that committee and that I will do.  

MS KIRASO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to suggest that we have sub-regional representatives - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think leave that to me, because I am going to be very, very fair.  

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, given the experience with the previous select committees, which we have had, first of all, we should have an odd number in case there is a contentious issue, and we need to vote in that select committee.  

Secondly, we need people of integrity and they are so many, and I would like to propose nine members on that committee, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is number nine okay? 

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes!

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, unless the rules have been altered, you have the powers to nominate.

THE SPEAKER: I know I could have decided, but I want you to decide.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, and hon. Members, I want to seek clarification from the Speaker because I want to clear my mind on how we are going to move.  Yesterday, a hon. Member from Padyere raised a concern that in that district the whole of it has not elected.  I have just submitted on the Table a number of areas that have not elected.  How will these investigations – (Interjection) - yes, I must clear my mind.  How is it going to affect the future elections in those areas that have not elected?  Like the petitions for the LC III and LC I, because we must be mindful that if you are investigating me, I may not get the morale to do the work- (Interjections)- yes, it is natural.  So, I wanted to beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, to clear my mind on what is going to happen.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I do not see any problem; I do not know why this problem should arise, because if we were having the judicial commission of inquiry, which we shall have, again there would be an inquiry.  So, this process is not going to stop anything.  

For areas and polling stations that did not vote, and also maybe where results were declared - I do not know the use, but I think election will be relevant where actually the winner had not been declared.  But if the winner had been declared, unless the numbers in those polling stations can influence the results, personally I do not know, but that is a decision of the commission, to decide on how to handle it.  I think the select committee will do it in such a way that it does not prejudice the on-going process.  

I also think that the inquiry that is going to be made is going to help. As I said the other day, the local council elections will be carried out in 2005 and not 2006, as I heard on Spectrum on Radio One.  I think that should be made clear because yesterday I heard people debating very seriously that local council elections will be in 2006.  So, our results of investigation, if they are of any use, will definitely affect the local council elections in 2005.  So, I think you leave this to me, and in due course I will tell you the names and also the chairperson of that committee.  You see we have been having a problem about Idd Aduha. When is it? Is it Thursday or Friday? 

AN HON.MEMBER: Friday.  

THE SPEAKER: Friday, so tomorrow is a working day.  So then, if it is a working day, I am adjourning the House -(Interruption)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, in view of what I had said and now that I am defeated, my concern is still there, and my strong concern is related to what hon. Kiraso said.  I would wish that when you are nominating the members -(Mr Awori Aggrey rose_) 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, once the House has pronounced itself on a matter, there shall be no further contributions.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I assure you I am going to nominate the team, and I know what I am going to do.  

MRS MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS WINNIE BYANYIMA: Mr Speaker, we have just passed the motion as moved by hon. Jack Sabiiti.  That is what I have understood, and hon. Jack Sabiiti’s motion, if I heard him well - I did not read but I heard - was elaborating some terms of reference.  Now, I need to understand, are these terms of reference going to be reviewed or have we adopted them as read in his motion? I just need that clarification.

THE SPEAKER: The concentration of the debate was on expedience of a select committee or a judicial commission of inquiry, and as you see, Members never went deep into details of the terms of reference.  But I think the terms of reference as stated by hon. Sabiiti are okay, but maybe they need to be expanded. That is why the Members think that the appropriate committee, the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, can improve on this, even maybe draft these terms of reference.  But definitely, as far as I see, they are most likely to be included. Members were only concerned whether we have a select committee or not.  Now, this has been decided.  

We shall have a select committee because what we need is a thorough investigation so that every aspect of malpractice in elections is covered. So, I have no doubt that a good job will be done, and I will be able, in due course, to tell you the names of the people who will constitute this particular committee.

I thank you for your kind attention, because it is almost 7.00p.m. I adjourn the House until tomorrow 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 February 2002 at 2.00p.m.)
