Thursday, 22 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in the Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment on Clause 3 immediately after sub-clause 3 to insert the following sub-clause.  Every member of the Commission shall before assuming his or her duties as a Commissioner, take and subscribe the prescribed Oath.  This is intended to ensure that the oaths to be taken by a Commissioner is as the usual practice is properly prescribed by law as part of the Statute, it was missing from the original draft, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, in sub-clause (v) of the Clause 3 Sir, I want to add at the end the following words; and shall be deemed to have taken and subscribe any oaths prescribed in respect of their full office.  Mr Chairman, this is intended to cover the Commissioners who were being appointed under the Interim Electoral Commission Statute, who took the oaths, but because we have said, it will be forth prescribed in the Statute, it is proper to deem them having taken that oath, that is purpose of that Amendment, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

MR SIBO:  Mr Chairman, I beg to make an Amendment in Clause 3 sub-paragraph (vii).  I would like to add a (d) with the following words. Offenses connected with elections; Mr Chairman, the removal of members of the Commission have these three reasons.  I would like to add, that offenses connected with elections is serious enough for any member of the Commission to be removed because, he actually, if he has committed those offenses, he has actually lost the trust of the people.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I see the good intentions of the hon. Member moving the Amendment, but Sir, we have one technical problem in that, the provisions of the Section sought to be amended are directly borrowed from the Constitution and in this subsequent legislation, we cannot add or subtract, amend, otherwise, we shall appear to be amending the Constitution.  I know it is a very good intention but we have a technical problem; I am referring to Article 60, sub-Article 8 of the Constitution.  Let me read it; Article 60 sub-article 8 reads;

“A member of the Commission may be removed from office by the President only for;-
(a) Inability to perform the functions of his or her office, arising out of physical or mental incapacity.
(b) Misbehaviour or misconduct or;
(c) Incompetence”.

Mr Chairman, as you see, that is exactly what is in the Statute and we should not appear to be amending the Constitution in this Interim legislature.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 3 sub-section (vii) be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment to the effect that immediately after sub-clause (ii) of Clause 5, the following sub-clause is inserted.
The Secretary shall be a public officer and shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section 4 -(Interruption) 

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Point of procedure. I think may be on the sections, we should deal sub-section by sub-section, because I have an Amendment on 5 (i) and the Minister is addressing 5 (ii).

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  5 (i), okay, move your Amendment first.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to substitute the word cabinet in the third line with Public Service Commission.  I hope, Mr Chairman, the reasons for this are very clear because, this appointment is to be made by the President and Cabinet is ordinarily part of the Presidency, part of the executive and therefore, it is within the mandate of the President to seek as much advice from Cabinet as possible, but this being a public officer, who is being appointed, the persons who can best advise on his ability should be the Public Service Commission.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, again I see the honest intentions of the hon. Member.  But Sir, in the Interim period, we sat here and we passed the Interim Electoral Statute which addressed this question and introduced the office of the Secretary to the Commission.  In that Statute, we said, the appointment shall be by the President and on the advise of cabinet and acting under that Statute, we went ahead and appointed the Commissioners and the Secretary and at the end, we are going to repeal that Interim Electoral Statute, it will no longer have any effect of law, the problem we may have, is for somebody to question the legal basis for the current Commission if we drastically change, rather the Secretary, if we drastically change the mode of appointment. 

Mr Chairman, since this Statute is an Interim Statute to operate for just a number of months, because, we have to have a new permanent Commission put in place, six months after the elections we are going into.  I would request the hon Members to keep the status quo undisturbed, it does not have any legal or constitutional problems, but it can have some administrative repercussions.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, sub-section (vi) of that Clause, provides that a person who was Secretary to the Commission immediately before the commencement of this Statute, shall be deemed to have been appointed under this Statute.  So, the incumbent is not to be affected, is saved from the provisions that we may make in this Statute. But I would like it to clear that should the incumbent for any reasons as provided in this Statute no longer be the Secretary, then the Secretary to the appointed should conform to these provisions.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, the only technicality again we have, you see, when you legislate, you want to have the legislation as a package.  As far as the Secretary is concerned, this is almost one of the first provisions relating to the Secretary now and the practise that we have been following in the Interim period.  I think it will be unsafe to say, because, we are proposing in subsequent provision which we have not debated, which we have not passed and abandon a principle, especially when there is no useful practical value for disturbing the arrangement we have followed during the interim period.  I would request hon. Besigye to leave this matter as we have been handled it and - I am asking him to minimise on inconveniences, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 5 sub-section (i) be amended as proposed by Hon. Besigye.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUBEGA DAMIANO:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move a further Amendment under Article 5, (i) so that, Article 5 (i) reads, ‘The Commission shall have a Secretary who shall be a public officer appointed by the Commission…’ and then we continue with the Amendment which has been just passed.  My reasons for proposing that the Secretary be appointed by the Commission, is in line with Article 65 of the Constitution, which Article 65 of the Constitution reads, that the appointment of officers and employees of the Electoral Commission shall be made by the Commission acting in consultation with the Public Service Commission.  We have just passed that the advise should be given by the Public Service Commission, but now, I want further to propose that the appointment be made by the Commission in light with the provision of Article 65.  

I understand, Mr Chairman, that we are repealing the Interim Electoral Law, so that we are not really going to be bound by the Interim Electoral Statute which we passed, since we are envisaging later in this Bill, to repeal it and in fact, when you read other Articles of the Constitution, it is provided that we should make laws as far as possible in consonance with this Constitution.  I think that is Article 263 and 264.  Thank you, I beg to move.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the Motion.  Mr Chairman, Article 65, is directly related to the permanent Electoral Commission as anticipated by this Constitution; that is the Commission that will be appointed after the next elections.  Mr Chairman, as you will rightly observe, the Constitution did not bother itself with mentioning the Secretary to the Commission, it did not mention anything about it, but this legislature in its wisdom and it was for good reason, in the Interim Electoral Commission, said, okay, there could be other officers, there could be Commissioners, but they needed somebody who was senior at the rank of a Secretary, who should be appointed to fill that office. So, the legislature had supplied the office which had not been mentioned in the Constitution.  

Now, Sir, this Article 65 if you look at it carefully, it is related to members of staff of the Commission who are junior, below the rank of the Commissioners and the Secretary.  So, Sir, the two should not be confused, this is a matter of high officer in the Commission and we should leave him appointed as provided in the law and Sir, if it is a question of independence of the Secretary, we have proposed Amendments that are going to safeguard this Secretary and they are available with the Members; this an Amendment which is going to require the Secretary to be assigned duties from the Commission.  There is another Amendment which is going to define the modalities of removing that Secretary, which fortifies his independence from outside interference.  For those good reasons, Sir, I beg the NRC to reject the proposed Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 5 sub-section (i) be amended as proposed by the hon. Damiano Lubega.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended by inserting a new Clause following immediately after (ii) the following; 
The secretary shall be a public officer and shall subject to the provisions of sub-section (iv) of Section 7 of this Statute, perform such functions as may be assigned to him or her by the Commission.  Mr Chairman, this is intended to strengthen the position of the Secretary so that he is accountable to the Commission subject to the provisions of the law which specified his other function in addition to the administrative functions.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that immediately after Clause 5 (ii) be added on the other sub-section which the Minister has just moved.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move by inserting a new sub-clause to Clause 5 in the following terms.  The Secretary may be removed by the President only for inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising out of physical or mental incapacity or misbehaviour or misconduct, or incompetence.

Mr Chairman, this is exactly the same format that is provided for the removal of a Commissioner. The office of Secretary is such a high ranking office and is supposed to be impartial and independent.  This provision is intended to strengthen the office of the Secretary, so that he acts without any fear from any quarters and his aware that he removal can only come just in the same way as the removal of a Commissioner would come.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I think that the hon. Minister may have forgotten that we have just moved and passed an Amendment that this Secretary shall be appointed by the Commission and therefore, he no longer enjoys the same status as a Commissioner and therefore, I think that this Amendment should not be moved.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, the appointment can be made, but that does not stop anybody from strengthening the officer appointed and the way you do it, Sir, is to make the method of removing that officer difficult and the way we have done it, is to equate it with the removal of a Commission.  I do not want to believe, I do not want to see a Commission which comes in place and then for trivial matters, disagrees with other senior officers of State and just chucks him.  It would throw us into chaos and you remember hon. Members, we do not have much time, I would really plead that we protect the independence of the Secretary by having a procedure of removal which is akin to that provided by the Constitution for the members of the Commission.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  We have a history of a secretary of an Electoral Commission who, when he tried to declare some elections, doing his job, the next thing, there was a law passed by Mr Muwanga and said, that anybody declaring elections will go to jail for five years and will be fined UShs 5 million, at that time, was like U$5 Dollars and this man had to take off as fast as he could and lived in exile thereafter.  Now, we have a problem.  If you read what we have just passed, the Amendment moved by the Minister, it says, the three, the Secretary shall be a public officer and public officers normally are appointed by the Public Service Commission and by the President and shall subject to the provision of sub-section (iv) of Section 7 of this Statute, perform such functions as may be assigned to him or her by the Commission.  Now, it is the Commission which is assigning him the functions and responsibilities.  It should be the Commission which know whether this person is doing a good job or not.  

So, to me, I have a problem.  If this secretary is in conflict with the Commission, who is going to find out to go and inform the President that during the performance of these functions, the Secretary was inefficient.  I think it would be a tall order, almost uncalled for to start going to look for the President to come and tell him that, you know, this man is drinking too much lately and we have decided to put him aside and get an efficient one.  Although they appointed him, they cannot suck him, the one who hires, ought to be the one who fires!  If I am hiring and I am not firing, then this hiring is going to be in doubt.  We already have a secretary in the Interim Electoral Commission, we passed these rigid laws to stop him from being fired, supposing now, there are past records on this person which will be exposed in due course, the Commission’s hands will be so tied that they will be an embarrassment to them.  While if it is an independent Electoral Commission, let us strengthen that independence.  In any case, we have already passed that they appoint him.  So, I would call upon the Minister to consider these issues and concede.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I concede to the proposals made.

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a new Clause 6 be inserted in the Statute to read as follows; this to be added immediately after Clause 5.

(i) Every decision of the Commission shall as far as possible be by consensus.
(ii) Where on any matter consensus cannot be obtained, the matter shall be decided by voting and the matter shall be taken to have been decided if supported by the votes of a majority of Members of the Commission present and voting.

(iii) In any vote under sub-section 2, each member of the Commission shall have one vote and none shall have a casting vote.

(iv) The quorum of the Commission at any meeting shall be five.  

(v) The Secretary shall cause to be recorded minutes of all proceedings of the Commission, and

(vi) The secretary shall have the custody of the minutes of the Commission.  

Mr Chairman, this is to assist the Commission in its day-to-day implementation of the duties we have given it under the law as you remember, Sir, there is departure now from the CA where we had a Commissioner and his deputies. The shift now is that, there is a body called the Commission, which has seven members as of today.  This is the body which is going to over see the programme of thorough and effective democratisation of our country.  It is therefore, fitting and proper that democracy gets practised right from that Commission.  In order to help the Commissioners, Sir, we are now putting in place a modality of how they should reach their decision, so that no body can turn around and say, the decisions were made in dictatorial manner. The other duties of the Secretary, Sir, are the usual duties of the secretary to take minutes and keep them.  I beg to move that Amendment, Sir.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Much as I do appreciate and support the Minister’s proposed Amendment, I have a problem in the event of there being a persistent, if six members sit in the Commission and the first time they debate a matter and they put the matter to the vote and becomes a tie, consistently, day in, day out, I wanted to seek clarification from the Minister what would happen in such event.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I do not think we can legislate for all the administrative details, but I see this a Commission of seven people, the number already gives them a way of avoiding tying. We are also saying that even if they are not seven, the quorum is five.  So, definitely, I see that as a remote possibility, but thirdly, even if there was that possibility, normally, if you cannot take a decision and they have been doing it in many organs, you could postpone the matter to think about it for a night or two, then you come back and see whether you emerge, I do not think it is a terrible catastrophe that is going to happen to this Commission, I think we should leave - the law is protective enough and we should not waste time on it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that a new Clause 6 immediately after Clause 5 be inserted as a new Clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 9 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I would like Clause 10 to be voted on part by part so that we can get all the amendments which we have on hand.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is what we are doing.  If you have got any objection you raise up.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment to Clause 10, 1(c) to be renumbered (d) so that the new Clause should read as follows: ‘To publish in gazette and three local News Papers, the running serial numbers of ballot papers to be cast in each Constituency and known to candidates agents as corresponding with a number of registered voters in the register displayed two weeks before voting.’  Mr Chairman, I was in the Committee and the Committee Members agreed that this should be one of the possibilities of getting any would be malpractice to be stopped because in the last CA elections, there were a number of malpractice.  People from different electoral areas went in another electoral area and therefore voted there.  But if the numbers are clearly placed, 

Mr Chairman, it would make it much easier.  For instance, Mr Chairman, if in any electoral area, I have my own card here, District Code 26, Constituency Code - that is Budadiri East, 128, and if they are 200 people who are registered and the register is displayed, you find that the serial numbers for the 200 people should be displayed and therefore it would make it impossible for anybody to cheat.  I am speaking from the professional training (Laughter)  Therefore, I beg Members to agree to this and the Committee itself; the Legal and Security Committee had said this would be taken on.  I thank you.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I stand to oppose the Motion moved by hon. Wanendeya on the grounds that if you want to have a smooth fair and free election, the Rules of Procedure which use the process of election especially in the details of serial numbers should be made as simple as possible to say that they should be published in free News Papers as he says.  The which are the three News Papers?  -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: He said, three, not, free.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, if he said three News Papers, in my Constituency for example, people read The New Vision, Orumuri two weeks after the publication and one person has it and interprets for others who are interested.  Now, if the serial numbers are wrongly printed by a newspaper, it means you can sue the whole process and challenge it. Therefore, it will cause delays and for us Lawyers we shall have most wonderful time in getting fees from hon. Wenendeya who will be suing because serial number 274, was not there when in fact he has it and it is appearing in the register, but it was missed by News Paper No.3.  The fact that it is so cumbersome, that it does not even help.  Since the registers are going to be displayed and hon. Wanendeya will be free to read the registers, and check his serial number in the register and follow, and all the other supporters of his go with him and line up and read the register without anybody stopping him, I do not think he should really cumbersomely make this Statute an impossible one to implement.  For that reason, I call upon him to withdraw his amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 10, sub-section 1(c) be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 10 (1)

MR LUBEGA DAMIANO:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 10(1), the word ‘Referenda’ be deleted wherever it appears because with any stretch of imagination during the interim period for purposes of this election, there is no referendum envisaged at all.  Now, to confer a function under the general functions of an Interim Electoral Commission, and you confer this being one of them, could be misused.  There is no referendum being envisaged therefore, superfluous and inapplicable.  I beg that if be deleted.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment in that whereas this Law is interim, we do not know how long yet it is going to be interim, but until the substantive Law established.  The next Parliament, surely might come up on a location when they might need a referendum.  That must be provided for.  Several other things that we have provided for that could have been left for the substantive Law.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, we need to leave in place contingencies in case there is need.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF.  KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support hon. Lubega’s proposed amendment.  You see, Mr Chairman, if you believe in systems and order, the title of this Law is the Parliamentary elections, forget about interim.  But it is the Parliamentary elections.  As far as I am concerned I cannot understand how you can smuggle into this subject anything that has nothing to do with the title.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I support the proposed amendment.  

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, it may very well be that we may not foresee the possibility of having a referendum between now and when the Permanent Commission is put place.  But Sir, when we legislate in Law, we legislate without leaving room for doubt or any loopholes.  But the most important reason, Mr Chairman, is what I told hon. Members, the Provisions of this Article are exactly borrowed from the Constitution.  Under the Constitution, under Article 264, and 263 we are supposed to have an Interim Electoral Commission which as far as possible and practical conforms to be Provisions of the Constitution.  But we are specifically required to comply with the Provisions of 60 and 61 of the Constitution.  Therefore, Sir it would be an indirect way of trying to achieve what we should not achieve; which we cannot achieve of amending the Constitution.  On that ground, I oppose it, Sir.

I can read the section.  It is Article 61, and it says, ‘The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions: (a) to ensure that regular free and fair elections are held; (b) to organise, conduct and supervise the elections and referenda in accordance with this Constitution’.  That is directly from the Constitution and you know Sir, we have provided in this Constitution that the people at any time can demand that there be a referendum on any issue.  That can happen today, or tomorrow or two years after that.  It is a safety valve we should not abandon.  We have a referendum Statute on our Statute Book.  It would be improper to remove these functions from the Commission. 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I am on my feet to oppose the Motion moved by hon. Lubega and I am supporting the Minister on this.  If you read the heading of this part three, it is the general functions of the Commission.  These general functions are spelt out in conformity with the Constitution.  Now, if you miss any of the functions which are spelt out in the Constitution, in this enabling Law, it means you may have to come back here and just write another enabling Law on one of the little functions spelt out in the Commission.  I think that will be wasting a lot of taxpayer’s money to call this Parliament to come and pass this enabling function.  There is no point in us wasting time about this.  

In my view it is clear, and does not do any harm.  While it might appear that this Law is about Parliamentary elections.  The general functions of the Commission are not necessarily limited to the general elections of Parliament.  They are an enabling function of the Commission and this is the Law which we passed and once we put it there, it does not harm.  If somebody calls tomorrow for a referendum on anything that we should not smoke any more in public places, then the Electoral Commission would have to have this enabled and we do not have to call Parliament to meet on that.  Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support hon. Lubega’s amendment, and Mr Chairman, doing so, I think it is very, very important that the House does act in accordance with the Constitution.  We are not making this Law under the Article sighted by the Minister, but under the transition of provisions 263 and 264, Mr Chairman.  If you read the Provisions under 264, we are to make the Laws to conform as it is possible and practical with the Constitution.  

Mr Chairman, under 264, (d), we are to make interim Laws for election and other matters connected with elections in any office under this Constitution.  Interim Provisions related to the elections are purely for elections not for referendum.  If we are going to hold a referendum, supposing as they are suggesting, we are going to have a referendum before a new Parliament is in place. We would have to come here again and enact the Law purposely for the referendum.  So, we should not confuse the two issues.  
Mr Chairman, considering that these are interim measures, not for permanency; considering that the period referred to by hon. Karuhanga of two years, in two years time we shall have a Parliament in accordance to this Constitution.  So, the question of interim measures will no longer apply.  It would be necessary for the new Parliament to re-enact Laws which we have enacted here.  So, Mr Chairman, I support this amendment because to do otherwise, we will be confusing issues.

MR BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, surely the amendment of hon. Lubega cannot be seeking to treat any mischief.  I do not suppose that he believes that by leaving referendum, this things is going to attract people to go into referendum.  It is absolutely harmless even if he was comfortable with it, and I think we are spending a lot of time on an inconsequential matter.  I move, Mr Chairman, that the question be put.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I want to react to the contribution made by my learned Friend and hon. Prof. who gave the impression that what I quoted was not relevant to the subject before under discussion.  Mr Chairman, as he rightly puts it, 264 and 263 require us to put in place Laws which will implement the Provisions of the Constitution. Now, Sir, normally when you go to a referendum you are deciding on issues by way an election in hourly man’s language.  It is another election, it is not an election for Parliamentarians, not Presidential, but it is a consultation of the people through the vote to tell us which of the two sides they support.  Now, Sir, I do not think it is correct to say, and it is not, that what we are talking about is irrelevant.  We are saying that there is a Commission which the Constitution charges with the responsibility of holding referenda if there is need for it.  We are saying, this matter dues with the elections during the time this Commission will be in place.  So, we are being only cautious not to leave any room just in case a matter happened and we have given constitutional right to people to demand a referendum any time so that we do not really have to come back here as hon. Members proposed to come and meet only to legislate for a referendum, when we can do it here and do it properly, constitutionally and in the Law.  Mr Chairman, I beg that we move and reject the amendment by hon. Lubega.

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, I thought that we should close this argument with reference to the Constitution.  We have, Mr Chairman, given the people of Uganda a right to demand a referendum any time and the Constitution also says in Article 1, Clause 4, I shall read it. ‘The people shall express their will and consent on who shall govern them and how they should be governed through regular free and fair elections of their representatives or through referenda.’ A referenda is a method of choosing who and how we should be governed.  So, we should put it there in case we come to that.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 10, subsection 1, be amended as proposed by hon. Damiano Lubega.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 10

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on Clause 10, sub-Clause 2.  In Paragraph (g), I want to add at the end of that Paragraph the words, ‘including where practicable the use of sign language.’  Mr Chairman, this is intended to take into account that almost ten per cent of our population are people suffering from different disabilities.  One of the agonies they have been undergoing is that in any public place, official places, there are no facilities to cater for their disability which occurred to them without having choice.  Sir, we also by Constitution under obligation as State to facilitate every citizen, not only to get on the register but also to exercise his right to vote.  Since we are talking about ten per cent of our population, I want to ask Members to approve this amendment so that when we organise these elections and it is necessary and practicable, then care should be taken that the people; voters who suffer from different disabilities are properly catered for.  I beg to move Sir.

AN HON MEMBER: I rise naturally to support the Minister on this Amendment.  Mr Chairman, I think this would be one of the ways to really fulfil the intentions of the Constitution where a Provision was made for the development of sign language.  In the past many people who suffer from hearing -(Inaudible)- have not truly participated in the election of their representatives because they could not follow what was going on.  So, this very important amendment by the Minister will go a long way to really confirm our ideal of affirmative action.  I rise to support Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 10, sub-section 2 be amended as proposed by the Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Paragraph (k) under sub-Clause 10, 2 be amended by deleting the word, ‘Minister’ and inserting there too, the words, ‘Minister responsible for Finance’.  Mr Chairman, I am here legislating the office of the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs out of business which deals with finances of the Commission.  We have in the Constitution which says that the Commission shall be independent and shall deal directly with the Ministry of Finance in matters relating to this finance.  This is intended to strengthen the Commission and also to facilitate its facilitation in terms of funds and all those matters to deal with from the Ministry of Finance.  I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question as read above.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Paragraph (l) of sub-Clause 10, 2, we delete that Paragraph and instead insert the following Paragraphs:
One - ‘subject to Paragraph (m) and in consultation with the Minister to engage on such terms as the Commission may determine, the services on any person whose special expertise maybe required for the proper discharge of the functions of the Commission.  Then (m), ‘to pay any person engaged under Paragraph (l) remuneration at such rates as maybe determined by the Commission in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance.  

Mr Chairman, these are short consultants who maybe required by the Commission and it is necessary that before they get engaged, Government is in the know of who is coming to be an expert and it is also necessary and fair that the Minister of Finance should be consulted in terms of what package these people are going to be paid.  I, therefore, this very innocent but useful amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question as read above.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAHERU: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to Clause 10 by inserting a new sub-Clause 3 immediately after sub-Clause 2, to read as follows: ‘In the discharge of its function under this section, the Commission shall ensure that the polling day for the election of the president shall precede that of Parliamentary elections’. Mr Chairman, Article 263, which authorises a continuation of NRM Government limits the time when the NRM Government would be in power to nine months.  In practice it limits this time to 7th of July.  So, it is very important that we as Parliament ensure that the elections of both the President and Parliament are completed in time to avoid confusion.  Now, this amendment, Mr Chairman, is made in that spirit.  As has been circulated to Members, there is a time scale and within this time scale, the elections of the President has got its limitations, and yet the elections of Parliament has not got so much limitations.  Mr Chairman, as was indicated before, if we want the Presidential election to be on time, we will have to include as one of the guidelines to the Electoral Commission.  A provision, -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Kaheru and the hon. Members that I have no objection the amendment he is moving, but I think it is better placed somewhere in Clause 46 and to that effect it is among the amendments that are to be moved when we get there. I would request hon. Kaheru to hold on until we get there.

MR KAHERU: Mr Chairman, actually this is a general provision and 46 speaks about the naming of the polling day.  That is more specific.  In fact it is referring to the actual functions of the Commission on appointing a specific day.  But this is a general guideline to the Commission to ensure that this is done.  

Now, this first reason which I have raised, is very crucial.  In practice, it means that the elections of the President has to be held in the first week of May, at the latest.  Now, the Parliamentary elections can almost be any time so long as it is before the 7th of July.  So, it becomes very important that in order to avoid political and constitutional confusion, this Parliament which has got the political responsibility for the free and fair elections give the proper guideline to the Commission.  Secondly, Mr Chairman, there is also need that by the time of Parliamentary elections, there is a President with a mandate; an electoral mandate.  

Another point is that some of our Colleagues have raised the point -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Kaheru to continue with the amendment, because under section 10, it says, ‘functions of the Commission’.  If on the other hand, as advised by the Minister and you look at Clause 46, Mr Chairman, it says, ‘Commission to appoint polling day and  places.’  Is it, therefore, in order Mr Chairman, for hon. Kaheru to continue?

MR KAHERU: Mr Chairman, some people have raised the issue of why do we not have these two elections on the same date, and I wanted to clarify on this Mr Chairman.  The first point to note is that it is not very wise to have uncertainty on the existence of vote institutions.  The Presidency and Parliament at the same time. It is wise to have Parliamentary elections when there is a certain amount of stability in Presidency when there is actually an elected President. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 10 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 11 be deleted, and the following Clause be inserted thereat. 11 (1), subject to article 263 and 264 of the constitution, for the purposes of article 63 of the constitution, Uganda shall be divided into 214 constituencies for the election of Members of Parliament as specified in the First Schedule to this statute; and each constituency shall be represented by one Member of Parliament. Two; the Minister may, on the recommendation of the commission and with the approval of the legislature by statutory instrument amend the First Schedule to this statute.  

Mr Chairman, the simple principle behind this amendment is that, for reasons that are very very evident to us, and to those outside this House, it may not be wise or even practicable to go into an exercise of over holding the entire electoral areas in the country.  The people are satisfied that if we have a House based on the electoral areas we had in the former CA, which is actually what is being proposed here, there would be fair and adequate representation of every corner of this country, there would be opportunity for sharing diversity of opinions in public life, it would be less cumbersome to the commission, it will be less expensive, and definitely it would save a lot of time and time is not our side. Mr Chairman, in Clause 2 we are saying that in the unlikely event that there is a mistake or something to be attended to since it has become a matter of law, then the Minister should have the authority but that authority is now restricted or subjected to first seek a recommendation from the commission and then approval by this legislature. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 11 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I want to remind you that we have got more than 100 Clause which we have to deal with.  So, I will not accept those who are interrupt.

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 12 on page 16 of our Bill, be deleted. Mr Chairman, this Clause becomes irrelevant in view of the fact that we have prescribed the number of constituencies and it would obsolete on the statute book superfluous. (Interjections) 

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of order. I stand on a point of order.  I tried to put the House in order over this question of who has the powers to demarcate the constituencies as spelt out in the constitution section 61 sub-section (c), that the powers to demarcate the constituencies is with the commission.  Now, the Minister is trying to bring an amendment which under section 12, that the thing is superfluous, which is against the constitution, our own constitution.  Is it in order to overlook the functions of the commission under the constitution, our own constitution that we take over the powers-that we are taking it over by bring a wrong amendment.  Is he in order when he is supposed to defend the same constitution?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is in order.

MR KARUHANGA: I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Member to article 63 (1) which will assist him so that he can withdraw his point of order.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I have already ruled on that.  The Minister was quite in order. 

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to apply that -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on Clause 12.

MR KAVUMA: Yes Sir. I beg to apply that in this committee stage where we are, conclusion on Clause 12 be stood over, we shall come back to it because there is an apparent discrepancy in the documents relating there to which we –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that in Clause 13 (1), we delete the Clause and insert the following new Clause. One; the commission may assign to any election officer, Public officer. member of staff or of the commission or any organisation or institution or group such duties for promoting the discharge of the functions of the commission as the commission may think fit and subject to such conditions and restrictions as the commission may direct.  

Two; that the commission may revoke or transfer to any person or organisation, institution or group or assume the performance of any duties assigned by it under sub-section 1 of this section Three; the commission may also where necessary assume the performance of any function of an election officer under this statute. This is simply the principle of delegation, and what is involved is, that he who has power to delegate has power to take away in case things were going wrong. It is only proper and fitting that the commission has this power because a commission of 7 people cannot do all these things throughout the country. So this is a Clause to enable it to delegate some of these functions with limitations and regulations as provided for.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like under Clause 13 to add a new sub-Clause to state that, a presiding officer, returning officer, polling assistant, counting officer or any other election officer shall not be involved in officiating elections in his /her home constituency area or be informed in advance the neighbouring constituency where he or she is officiating until 7.00 p.m prior to the election date.  In the last CA elections, some of the people who officiated in their electoral areas were involved in malpractices.  

As a result, therefore, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, some of the results took a bit of time and sight Mbale Municipality as one of the examples.  It is therefore, in this spirit that if those people who are going to officiate at the elections are not doing it in their electoral area. It would be in the best National interest of making sure that, nobody influences voters privately or otherwise.  It is in the best interest of transparency that, this be done; and this amendment was circulated to the committee and I beg that the hon. Members agree to this as one of the ways of instituting transparency. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA: I beg to oppose the hon. Wanendeya.  The amendment is not called for, it is slightly unclear, and it is likely to confuse those who administer the election.  For instance, one of the requirements when a commissioner is appointing a returning officer if he was going to appoint returning officers by their office, and normally this happens. One of the conditions is that, that returning officer should be a resident in the district where he works.  That would be already an apparent conflict and yet it is desirable so that you do not have to get somebody from all the way from Kitgum to become a returning officer in Rakai.  I know there could have been problems with the past elections, but we have tried our best in this law as Members would have seen to rectify on these problems by putting very stiff electoral offenses with punishments, including these election officers, so we should not be dragged into complicated legislation which may even be too difficult to implement because of small experiences which we have tried our best to cure.  I beg that we reject the amendment of hon. Wanendeya.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 13 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 13 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14

 THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete sub-Clause 3 of Clause 15 from the Bill. We have since the publication of the Bill looked at the drafting and we have provided elsewhere covering matters that are required for this Clause and it would be unnecessary to repeat it here. I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete sub-Clause 2 of Clause 15 because this is a redundant sub-Clause because in Clause 15, we have already provided that the commission may at any election accredit any individual or group or institution to act as election observers or monitors.  Now, when it comes to our local observers, it is apparent and very disappointing that the hon. Minister is disregarding the credence of our people and instead giving due concern and regard to the Foreign observers.  So, I propose that we also delete sub-clause 2.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I was originally of the view expressed by hon. Brig. Kyaligonza.  But I have since then made quite a bit of research on this matter. In election language we are not denying the Ugandans any opportunity to monitor; and it is better to monitor elections. Because an observer in election terms is a person who is disinterested.  He could be from a Foreign country.  But for a Ugandan really I do not think at this stage we have reached, we would want Ugandans to be observers in their own elections.  They should be playing a more prominent role.  So, they can be accredited as monitors. Because the monitor will form an opinion, make a report with recommendations which are taken as very strong points by the government. Instead of a mere observer who comes and nobody may even appreciate what they are doing.  So, we are not undermining the Ugandans, we are only saying, Ugandans actually if there is anybody who feels he should be an observer on this election, he should come home and participate vigorously, and also monitor it from here and be able to pass his own judgement as a Ugandan. Rather than reducing him to a level of a mere observer if he as an interested party in the exercise.  I beg to oppose.

AN HON. MEMBER: I largely agree with the Minister that Ugandans should be more active in participating in the electoral process than merely observing. But I have two areas I would like to get clarification on from him. One; even if you are participating in any other role, is it in conflict for you to file an observer’s report? Secondly, are we worried that the commission is likely to appoint Ugandan observers contrary to our wishes?  Because I tend to see a tendency as if we do not trust the judgement of the commission. The other time we said, the commission may not judge when election days may be held and so on. Are we saying that the commission in its own wisdom will not choose the right observers in order to put it here negatively that the commission shall not accredit any Ugandan to be an observer or whatever?

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, as I did say, the more effective and important role is that of monitoring, and any Ugandan is free to do that. But having said that, if somebody wanted to reduce himself to the level an observer and to file a report, they can do it to the commission even a Uganda has a right to comment. But then, on the question of these observers, I think we should try to be-because supposing you accredit me and I have been out of this country for the last 15 to 20 years, I do not know even what circumstances are obtaining to my chances are that I may come and pass irrational judgement. But I think I want Members to appreciate this provision, it is not intended to reduce the Ugandans, politically it is intended to encourage them to come and be more effective monitors of this election, and be able to file something that will bear the weight of their report.

MR ONGOM: Point of clarification. Thank you, Mr Chairman. Whereas I appreciate Minister’s concern that Ugandans should gent involved in election rather than observe, I would like to get a clarification that in the event that some observer groups may be required in any election in Uganda and it happens that some Ugandans are probably working in the Common Wealthy Secretariat, in UN body, and they are actually experts in observation of elections, are we saying that we should bar those fellows from appointing them to come and observe here? when they are citizens of Uganda, and they are working elsewhere, and they are competent.  I would like that clarification. Because if you in like that it means, even an independent body outside cannot appoint a Ugandan to be in their team to observe election in Uganda.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, the provision was very innocent, it has no repercussions. But if Members feel they want it on the statute book, my advice is to delete it. I am saying, if the Members are so firm about, I will concede to their views. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 (2)be deleted as proposed by hon. Matayo Kyaligonza.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I wish to announce  2 Members of Parliament from Kenya who are seated there,and 5 delegates, women leaders from Kenya, then we have Dr Jane Martin African American Team. (Applause) You are all warmly welcome.

Clause 16

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.
           
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 17 of the Bill be deleted. Mr Chairman, we have redrafted the contents of this Clause and it would remain superfluous if it reminded on the statute book.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

THE CHAIRMAN:I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 19 we insert at the beginning of sub-Clause 3 the words “subject to sub-section 1” Two, I beg also to move that in sub-Clause 3 on page 20 we add at the end the following words, “except that the transfer may only be effected under this sub-section during any period when the voters’ register is being revived”. Three; to insert after sub-Clause 3 the following new sub-Clause. When updating the voters’ register, the commission shall update it to such date as the Minister may by statutory instrument appoint.  This is largely to accommodate the views expressed by hon. Members during the general debate on this Bill. We have since then looked at it and we have accommodated the sentiments expressed. In the Clause 3 we are only subjecting the provisions of that Clause 1 which is paramount in this Clause, and we have also the idea that this exercise should have a cut off date, and that date should be as per the existing arrangement declared by the Minister by signing a statutory instrument. This will remove the uncertainty about when the voters’ register is going to be updated, until when just before an election.  It is to remove that kind of uncertainty.

MR DAMIANO LUBEGA: Point of clarification.  Before I contemplated moving an amendment to make the proposed amendment by the Minister clearer in terms of the time frame work, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister whether, when the Minister by statutory instrument issues a cut off date, that cut off date cannot be so near the election day that people will keep on changing their registration.  Otherwise I was proposing a cut off date being say, 14 days before the election so that people stop moving about transferring their registration.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I did consider because hon. Lubega raised this point with me, I did take into account.  But as we have been practising this, normally the date is even declared long before the 14 days being talked about.  Because there are a number of things which must be put in place after the filled update has been made by the commission, and the commission itself needs a number of months.  So, administratively and judging from the conditions on the ground, we leave some flexibility for the commission to advise and then the Minister takes an appropriate decision as it happened this time without necessarily making a matter of very strenuous legal provisions which may even recall for amendments of the law in case we find ourselves in a straight jacket. This is for administrative convenience, and I would recommend that we take the text as it appears.

MR WANENDEYA: I terms of the Minister’s amendment, I have an amendments which should in my opinion go further than the Minister’s which I would like to be considered, especially, in  connection with -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  You are out of order.  Let us deal with this one first. I now put the question that Clause 19 sub-section 3 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 19 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.


(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21                   
                                    
THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22

MR SIBO: I wish to move that Clause 22 paragraph 3 be deleted. Mr Chairman, I am proposing that clause 22, subclause 3 be deleted.  This is a clause that is referring to the registration and polling of officers in our foreign service overseas.  Mr Chairman, we are ill prepared for this registration now, and there is no way really we can do it, and if we prepare and provide for it there will be a demand for it and we are not able to satisfy that demand.  I, therefore, propose that we should delete it.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I will respond to hon. Sibo’s Amendment by way of giving information.  Because, it is true we have closed off the updating of the register, for this coming election.  But it is also true, Sir, that normally the updating of the register is a continuous exercise.  Secondly, Sir, it is also possible that in the next six months when this Election Commission is going to be in place, there could be another election in terms of a by-election for the Parliament we are going to elect, in terms of a referendum if one happens, like we passed previously.  So, it is necessary to leave opportunity for Uganda who are by our own Constitution entitled to get on the register and who are also entitled to participate in the voting by the Constitution, who may be willing to exercise that right.  

So, Sir, this provision should not be looked only in terms of this election.  It is possible that after this election updating will be re-opened just in case there are by-elections, petitions may came after the elections of Parliament and people may want to participate in this; a referendum may come, election for -(Interjections) 

So, in order to leave the hands of the Commission free to continue updating the register in preparation of any election, this provision should be there to allow them that flexibility.  What is important is that before any particular election, a cut-off date is declared as we have passed and then the exercise is closed for that particular election.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  This bill is about the forthcoming election that is why we call it Interim Elections Bill. Therefore, the argument of the Minister that this refers to future elections is null and void.  Secondly, it is almost known that a man or a woman votes where he has registered; if you are registering people overseas about whom the commission has no authority at all, they are going to vote there, and therefore, we are going to get votes which will come from non-Ugandans.  Therefore, in order to avoid all these, if Ugandans want to vote, let them come here; they can come.  Therefore, I support the deletion of this clause entirely, Mr Chairman.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Amendment by hon. Sibo; many reasons have been advanced but my main fear is that if you allow this exercise to take place outside the jurisdiction of the Commission we are bound to involve ourselves with a possibility of non-Ugandans taking part in voting without our knowledge, that is my main concern.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 22, subsection 3, be deleted as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24

MR LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I propose that under clause 24 subclause 3 we substitute the word ‘shall’ for the word ‘may’ and delete the words ‘whenever it considers it desirable’ reason being that the Commission should not have option not print voters’ roll; we had a lot of problems in the last elections, registers being omitted out in exercise books and so forth and so on.  This time we have had time, therefore, I propose that the Commission should mandatorily be charged with the duty of printing.  Hence my proposal that we substitute the word ‘shall’ for the word ‘may’ and delete the words ‘whenever it considers it desirable’ under clause 24 subclause 3.  So, I propose. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 25 subclause 3, we effect the following Amendment, by inserting in subclause 3 at the end, the words ‘or that the name of a person qualified to vote or to be registered has been omitted.’ 

 Two; immediately after subclause 4 to insert the following new subclause; “The Returning Officer shall appoint the tribunal comprising of five members to determine objections received by him or her under subsection 4.”  Mr Chairman, during the last elections there were many complaints which came up and could have been determined at the spot.  The machinery was lacking, what was in place was not adequately enough and a number of complaints came up.  So, we are proposing, Sir, that in the event that there is a dispute which has arisen, a tribunal should be appointed which should look into these complaints and take a decision there and then to facilitate the further administration and conduct of elections.  

Mr Chairman, in 6 we are proposing the composition of the tribunal and it is made up as follows:  At least 3 member of the LC executive committee, and at least one of whom shall be a woman (b) at least one each of the following; elders and chiefs.  This is intended to enrich the committees so that when a decision is taken everybody is satisfied that the matter has been looked into by men and women of substance.  

Secondly, we are catering for the women because in many cases of this nature where we are also directly affected, they do not have an opportunity to participate.  So, we are trying to balance it out in that formulation.  Then in 7 we want to provide the modalities of decision making by that tribunal once again so that they are supposed to do, and we are proposing that all decisions shall be as far as possible by consensus and in the absence of consensus on any matter decisions on it shall be taken by vote, each member having one vote, and not having a casting vote.  In (c), Sir, we are saying that in case of voting any matter shall be taken to have been decided if supported by the votes of a majority of members of tribunal present and voting.  

In 8 we are saying any decision of the tribunal appointed under subsection 5 shall be subject to review by the commission.  This is to avoid a situation where they could make a decision which a party may feel so strong about as having been incorrect; if we do not provide this kind of second person to look at what they have decided it could create problems. So, we are allowing in the event of an aggrieved party an opportunity to have his matter aired and heard by an additional ear which will be independent of the tribunal; and we are saying that no person, in 9, is entitled to make an objection under this section if he or she failed to apply to be registered when the register was last opened for registration or updating.  

The importance of this, Sir, is to prevent a situation where, for instance, for this election somebody did not bother to update his information on the register, then when he sees there is an opportunity to go to the tribunal, he could now come and say you know I was not registered and he could cause a bit of a problem.  So, in this if he himself did not bother to go and get on the register he should not now be had to complain, that is his problem and this is the principle behind this provision, otherwise the cut-off date will be rendered ineffective and useless.  I beg to move Sir.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposal of the Minister to set up a tribunal but I have a problem with his proposed clause 6, which says that the tribunal shall comprise, (a) at least, three members of the LC executive committee.  I do not know what that LC executive committee refers to, especially, coming after clause 4 which says that an objection under subsection 3 shall be addressed to the Returning Officer through the RC 2 Chairman of the parish of the person raising the objection.  I had, in fact, moved an Amendment to his Amendment when it was till in the report of the sectoral committee, that the expression ‘LC executive committee’ should be deleted and insert in its place ‘RC executive committee of the person raising the objection.’

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, one of the problems that was experienced in the last election; a similar power was given to the RC 2s now it so happens that in some places parishes are very, very big in terms of areas and the commission is now intending to make it easier for people to vote by taking polling stations as near to the people as possible.  Now, if you restrict it to RC 2, if you have an RC 2 who sits some 15 or 20 miles away from where this problem is going to occur - yes, even in my Mpigi District there are parishes where you have -(Interjections.)-  Mr Chairman, this is a reality, even in Mpigi there is a parish you can go to, especially, in Gomba in Maddu area where you may walk 20 miles before you go to the parish headquarters.  So, we want to leave flexibility so that if there is an executive which is nearest to where the problem is, those people even if there are RC 1, could handle that problem.  If it is near the RC 2 headquarters, then the RC 2 headquarters will handle it.  We are trying to facilitate easy administration.  I used the word ‘LC’ here but I will not want to go - but both are okay.  

So, I think, for administrative ease it is important that we should have this flexibility in this law.  Now, this question of matter being channelled the RC 2 may cause a problem, but even if it was you have ameliorated it if this RC 2 was able to say, a problem has come but you are near there, RC 1, please let the tribunal be appointed from that area.  So, I would think that for the administrative convenience and ease we should leave it flexible so that this tribunal can be appointed from people who are nearby where the voters are going to be.  

MR BAMWESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I first of all really hope that the Minister does not intend that these tribunals be set up in the villages at the RC 1, because I think it would be extremely cumbersome to the Returning Officer to set up tribunals and with this elaborate procedure at the village level in the district.  But even if that was, of course, his intention, then the drafting has a problem.  Because he is saying, at least, three members of the LC executive committee; once you talk about the LC executive committee you are referring to a particular LC executive committee, maybe, you would then have used the expression an LC, or executive committee, whichever it is.  But I still think that it is desirable that this appointment should be at the level of the parish in a district rather than at the level of the village. 

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I find the argument of the Minister quite persuasive, especially, when you consider the level of understanding and responsibility for members to go on this tribunal.  You are looking for people who can sit in judgement.  If you limit it to a certain level, RC 2, you may find that the people you have found are not in a position to execute a judgement of the level of this Statute.  So, it is important that you leave the Returning Officer with a guideline of the elders, they will look around for the elder, women, he looks around among the able women, and members of the RC, within the available proximity, which one of the RC executives he could use; and I felt that the Minister’s argument should not be put aside.  However, there was a correct argument by hon. Besigye that when you mentioned as you do now, the words’ members of the LC executive committee’, by that word you are a kind of indicating that there is a level you are addressing.  So, there has to be some other wording, but I think it is important that both of these ideas could be accommodated. 

MR KAVUMA:  Well, Sir, I think, hon. Besigye is raising a matter of English and a matter drafting; that can be looked at, they can polish it at -(Interjections)- what I am saying is that if he wants to replace the words ‘the committee’ by  ‘a committee’ really that is even in our legislation, the draft people do correct these, and I have no objection to that!  All I am worried about is the principle that there should be jurisdiction near to where the people are voting; that tribunal should be composed by people who have respect among the people in which they are going to adjudicate, which I think is well covered, and Sir, I would not buy his idea of saying that he hopes we are not going to involve people from RC 1 on this; even in RC 1 you may find a resident who is a member a higher council in the area, and even there there are people who can look at these problems, these are local problems;  even an RC 1, there are our people who have the capacity, and as long as the appointing officer is a knowledgeable person, I do not think he will make a mistake.  But if you leave it to 2, then the problem will not be addressed, of people who have to traverse miles and miles and yet this problem is intended to be solved as soon as possible.  I would really pray that hon. Besigye concedes and we move on Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 25 subsection 3 be amended as proposed by the Minister.
                
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment in clause 26 subclause 2 to delete subclause 2 and insert the following,  “No voter shall hold more than one voter’s card.” I am very grateful to all the Members who brought out this drafting lacuna in the law, and I am persuaded by their argument.  So, I concede to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 30 subclause 1 be deleted and a new clause inserted in the following terms:  “The Commission shall by notice in the gazette appoint a Returning Officer for each electoral district and the person appointed shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity”.  Mr Chairman, as the current provision stands, some Members expressed concern that anybody could be appointed to be Returning Officer, so we are improving on the law to define so that it is clear that this is a person who is going to be a public servant, somebody of high moral integrity, a person of high moral character and proven integrity to remove that fear, Sir.  

Then in subclause 3, paragraph (e) we propose to delete the words ‘politically, partisan’ and insert the word ‘sectarian’.  The reason is that this word ‘politically partisan’ is foreign in our legislative drafting and language where we think somebody acts to the prejudice of another in a manner that needs to be catered for by law.  We have opted for the formulation of legislating against sectarianism, and this is the spirit to harmonise this legislation with the appropriate statutes we have passed, and also to avoid connotations that could rightly or wrongly put on this kind of that clause.  

Mr Chairman, in clause 30 we further want to propose an Amendment to come after subclause 1 so that we insert the following new clause –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That will come later.

MR LUBEGA:  Mr Chairman, I think, the Minister is moving many Amendments under a certain clause; I think it is better procedurally to subclause by subclause.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is if we are on clause 1 now.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, I did not quite get what the Minister said;  the Amendments which we have here do not tally with what - has he even inserted the word ‘public officer’ in the Amendment, because they do not seem to tally, Mr Chairman;  and if it is –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Minister is on clause 30 subclause 1;

MR KAVUMA:  Appears on the Amendments page 5; I only said that we wanted to have the quality of this officer who is going to be appointed to be reflected in the law, and that is enough for our purposes.  Because the other one left the room too wide, and some Members were worried about what kind of person is going to be appointed.  But as we look at this provision the status is by law being equated to that of a high-ranking public officer - we have brought it by way of example.  The person who appoints him will have to take into account these considerations and they will help him to appointing a person of a quality that will be satisfying to the electorates and those to participate in the election otherwise.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Mr Chairman, then I am having a bit of difficulty.  I thought that in the initial clause, at least, we knew a public officer and who is defined in the interpretation.  Now, if it becomes so vague, it becomes a bit of a problem.  What type of person will this person be?  The level is not defined; in the initial presentation the word ‘public officer’ was defined and we knew what level he would be.  At the moment if we are taking clause 31 and clause 30 and include the Amendment which the Minister has given it brings confusion.  I would rather retain clause 30 with knowing that the person to be appointed is a public officer.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, in the text as it stands in 30.1 there is no mention of public officer, and when we were debating the fear was that we were leaving very vague, any Tom, Dick and Harry could be appointed.  So, we went now to, at least, give guidance to the Commission about the quality of the person to be appointed, and we say he is a person as it is defined in the proposal, Sir.  So, it is an improvement on what Members complained about, and I do not think we should have any problem with it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in subclause 3 we remove the words ‘politically partisan’ and insert the word ‘sectarian’.  Mr Chairman, in our previous legislations we had wanted to deal with the kind of mischief we are trying to deal with here; we have legislated against sectarianism, and it has also been properly defined and it is part of our legal vocabulary.  The point here is to harmonise this legislation with our previous laws which are on the Statute book, and I beg to move.

MR LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to oppose the Amendment by the hon. Minister, because I intend to move a superior Amendment in the sense that if he leaves the word ‘sectarian’ and the beginning of the sentence under (e) says has been proved, even to prove somebody to be sectarian; who is going to prove?  It has been found very difficult under our law in courts; now during the voting exercise who is going to prove that?  I am proposing later on, a deletion of that clause because we legislating for the impossibilities.  We should remove politically partisan and also not even substitute that by sectarian, they are not provable.  Therefore, I oppose the Minister’s Amendment in view of my proposed superior amendment to delete later on.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to opposed the Minister’s amendment in that one who is sectarian by the other law is on the basis of religion or ethnic grouping it is a group visa a group in this case, I am thinking of candidate X and Y and the Returning Officer may be, partisan by favouring one of the candidate and two candidates may be, of the same ethnic community or religious or whatever the grouping so of the same sector, but different in religion and therefore, being partisan can be in favour of one part or the other and accommodating what hon. Lubega was saying, could has been actively or openly partisan.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

MR MAYENGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to join hon.  -(Inaudible)- Mr Chairman, in 1980, we should remember the case of the 14 district Commissioners they were being just shifted under this vague circumstances.  These political partisanship or sectarianism is so vague that anyone could easier wake up and say this one should be removed it is politically partisan or sectarian things which are so difficult to interpret, so difficult to prove one way or the other, Mr Chairman, I think the best thing is to do away with the whole thing.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I would welcome ideas about improving on the mischief we are trying to cure, but to argue that because it is now talking about groups and not a person and, therefore, we should delete it, this is a real problem we have you will find people being unfairly treated our law should address it, I am persuaded by the argument by hon. Gasatura that we could add any person down in the definition and probably I could have read the fourth amendment, Sir, which also is related to this one so that we get the full picture of the whole thing which says, “ That for the purposes of subsection 3 of this section a person shall be taken to be sectarian if she or he says or does anything which is likely to  degrade or expose to hatred or contempt create alienation or despondency or raise discontent among or promote any other way feelings of hostility among or against any person, group or body of persons  on account of political inclination, religious, tribal or ethnic or regional origin.” 

Mr Chairman, this is the exact text that was debated by this House and it was passed and it is part of our statute book which is part of our law on the statute book.  So, Sir, we want to remind these who administer elections that sectarianism should not be practised even it sounds a little over - this is exactly what we inserted and passed and I see no problem with it, Sir.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I thank you, Mr Chairman. My Colleague is seeking to remove the words appearing in 3(e); and replacing it with a word ‘Sectarian’ and then copy the definition of sectarian as appears in the other legislation we passed here.  My only little difficult which I hope my Colleague can clarify is really the mischief we are aiming at.  We are looking at a person who have been appointed a Returning Officer, a Returning Officer to be an impartial habitat between two, three, or more contending candidates.  Now, if he makes a statement which for instance degrade, exposes to hatred or contempt any particular class of people I do not think that will necessarily be going towards either favouring one candidate as against another are necessarily, it could be either be bad mannered, or drunkard at the time.  So, I would rather that we focus on mischief, the person can be removed from office because he has failed to maintain impartiality in dealing between him and the various candidates or he is biased in other words we are looking for the word ‘bias’.  I do not know whether my Brother can proceed and if he can clarify that. 


MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, as I said, I was welcoming any improvements on the draft I want to propose that, may be, we go back to the original (e); and say; “has been approved to be impartial or politically bias”. So, I beg to move it that way, Sir.  I will restrict myself to a person who has been proved to be partial.

MR KAWANGA J: Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)- but the problem is, he is setting a very big question, he has been proved to be, but proved to whom and by what processed, unless you can deal with that whatever follows also becomes a very big problem. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Are you proposing something?

MR KAWANGA J: I was arguing that actually that clause is so difficult to be implemented, so we better leave it out.

MR WAPAKABULO: For me I am convinced that if my Brother accepts the changes that were being proposed, the question of proof really we do not have to put it in the law there, because there will be some one who will complain it will not just arise from the blue and you complain to who?  To the Commission, because this person is appointed by the Commission so you complain to the Commission and then the Commission will put into strict prove. You must produce evidence to show that this person has behaved in a partial manner and once you have established that then it is up to the commission now to go ahead and invoke it’s power to remove the person, because you may not even have to prove beyond reasonable doubt because the mere fact that integrity of this person is being questioned on credible evidence - remove him to make sure that the  process is not questioned in any form and so we do not have to set down the rules as to how and what evidence is just the conduct cannot be determined because we could do it in many ways.  But now what we are saying is that, once we can adduce that satisfy the Commission, because if we said, if the Commission was of the opinion which would quite capricious, but we are saying if it has been proven on evidence or satisfied on evidence I think we just leave it at that and let the lawyers battle it out at the right time. Thank you.

MR KAVUMA: Sir, as to who proves this question really all these matters are the responsibilities of the Commission and whoever has a complaint will have to take it to the Commission and convince it that the Officer must be removed.  So, I therefore, think that the way we have improved on it would allow people to complain and then the officer concerned will take action if they are satisfied.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Can you, hon. Minister read it to them.

MR WAPAKABULO: I thought we had taken it that we just retain moreless (e) as it is, but modify to it as been proved to be partial in performance of his or her duties under this statute.

Clause 30 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, it is very clear, that we cannot go through the whole of this Bill today and we are dealing with very, very, important matters,I want to propose that since we cannot finish this Bill today that we adjourn and discuss it on a fresh day with fresh mind.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Are you moving a Motion?

DR TIBERONDWA: Yes, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that since this Bill is very, very, important and from the volume of what is remaining since we cannot be able to finish it today I wish to move that we adjourn and finish it on another, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Seconded by who?

MR MWANDHA: I wish, Mr Chairman to second the Motion by hon. Tiberondwa in view of the fact that as we are seated here we are getting fresh amendment from the Minister from other Members of the House and I think we need at least some time to go through these amendments before we can come back here and discuss them.  Mr Chairman. I, therefore, support the Motion.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, when I seconded hon. Tiberondwa’s Motion I was actually doing in sympathy with the Minister himself. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, it is within the Minister’s interest to come out with a perfect no for this coming exercise and the mood of the House at the moment appears to be so -(Interjection)- that it is unlikely that we will come up  -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, you can notice that the little sub-section 30(e); took us half an hour here to decide on mere two words whether they were right, whether anything to be proved or not proved by all the lawyers we could not even get the right thing, Mr Chairman, I think it is important that we give ourselves a holiday and I see no reason for hurrying in any case even if we pass it to night I think it is impossible in any case.  Mr Chairman, I second it strongly.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, everybody is concerned about the time factor and the more we delay the more we are likely to get into problems, I therefore, Sir, pray that we push on and be able to do what we can we may not finish the Bill today, but the provisions remaining are very many and, Sir, I would pray that at least we go and complete this part which stops only at page 30 then may be, we decide to come tomorrow in the morning -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, so that we can complete this legislation in good time the Commission is desirous of commencing full - on the exercise they cannot go ahead until we have finished this law.  The population is waiting for this law it should have been passed yesterday, Sir, it is in our interest all of us to do and complete it as soon as possible. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  In African tradition there people who are called ‘sorcerers’ -(Interjection)- a ‘sorcerer’, Mr Chairman, is a person who - without personal control has powers of administering evil.  When something is good the ‘sorcerer’ especially when he know it is not good he affects that good.  Mr Chairman, this is the longest time we have had a quorum of this type, I would have felt that we would all be appreciative that the gravity of the Bill is so important that has kept us all here.  I would, therefore, would have thought that we would all encourage ourselves even sit for more hours today and even tomorrow come in the morning.  Those of us in this House who are saying now, who wants to delay so that the elections do not take place within the time surely must be judged on the scale of ‘‘sorcery’’.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I stand up to support the Motion.  We have to support the Motion that we come back to this Bill on another day.  I would also like to remind you, Sir, that Women Parliamentarians have got a very important International Sub-Regional Conference that is why we have been seeing the Kenyan’s parliamentarians here, if we meet tomorrow it means that either we are divided between coming here to do our very important duty to be here or to hold a long standing date with International parliamentarians.  So, I am asking for your indulgence that we come back on Tuesday. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: We proceed please.

Clause 31

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend clause 31; sub-clause 2; by deleting that sub-clause.


THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.


MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I move to delete this clause we have re-drafted a clause which takes care of the contents of this clause with an improvement to include a schedule which we shall come to, so this will come -

THE CHAIRMAN: We delete it?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SIBO: I would like to propose that we make an additional clause in clause 31, provide ability for a candidate to complain against the appointment of a Returning Officer.  Mr Chairman, we have suggested in clause 30(e); that there is a possibility of some one becoming bias.

THE CHAIRMAN: Bring out your amendment very clearly.

MR SIBO: My amendment sounds like this, Mr Chairman, that a candidate my complain to the Commission against a Returning Officer or Assistant Returning Officer against any injustice or action done against the provision of this Bill.  There is no provision for it, and I suggest that, this is the appropriate moment where we can insert in this so that a candidate can complain against the appointment of a Returning Officer who is bias or who is not applying the provision of this Bill.  It has happened before in 1980; and Returning Officers were misbehaving in anyway against the candidates and the candidates were not able to appeal to anybody and it is for this reason that I am suggesting that candidates should be able to appeal to the commission against the appointment of a returning Officer who is biased or who is not fulfilling the provisions of this law or who is indeed against any specific candidate.  I beg to move.


MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I think hon. Sibo’s worries are taken care of, the provision we have just passed can be invoked to cause a removal of a person who does not operate with partiality. 

 Secondly, Sir, if any of the election officers aggrieves a party normally this a complaint against the whole commission because these people are working under the commission, again you can use that average.

 But, thirdly, we are providing that these people who are going to be appointed are going to be published and gazetted in advance and even published in papers so that anybody who has any complaint can rise it before the elections comes to the Commission to take collective action.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification. I am giving a living example to the House -(Interruption)- 

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not clarification.

MR ASIKU: I said information and clarification.  First of all I want to give the information so that the Minister can clarify the point to me.  There is no provision where obvious hon. Asiku’s agent in the field will be appointed as Assistant Polling Agent in the election.  Everybody knows all along this man has been running around campaigning for hon. Asiku and we know that if there other interested parties it is very difficult for this obvious polling agent to be partially to everybody, that has happened in few elections, it happened in 1980, it will also happen. I wanted to know whether there is actually a point where candidates are guided in his own law?  In otherwords I would have been happier if we say, agents of other parties are disqualified in this position then that would have been said to many of us.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I think the explanation that the hon. Minister gave was sufficient.  First of there is a clause which is going to handle a case where somebody is obviously partial or bias as already forwarded.  

Two what is not prevented in law is allowed, nobody has told you, you are not allowed to go and complain to the Commission against somebody bias that is already provided for.  So, really the amendment he is bringing is stating the obvious it does not even have to be put in the statement of law, the moment somebody is allowed to show his bias it means you are allowed to make a complaint to the Commission.  So, really the contribution he is making is not an improvement on the law at all, it is not even necessary. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31 as amended, agreed to.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, clause 32; sub-clause 3; be amended by deleting the word ‘who appointed that Assistant Returning Officer’ and insert “for ‘his or her’ electoral district.”  Mr Chairman, the clause will then read that, “where an Assistant Returning Officer dies, becomes disqualified or incapable of acting or refuses to act or removed from office for any other reason, the Returning Officer shall immediately appoint a substitute for his or her electoral district.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I move a small amendment again to cater for expressions by some hon. Members in the House to replace the word “may” which appears in clause 33(1) with the word ‘shall’. I beg to move, Sir, so that it is not a matter of choice.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, Clause 33(2) be deleted and be replaced with the word, ‘each polling division shall have at least one polling station and no two polling divisions shall have polling stations at the same polling centre’.  The current one Mr Chairman, which we have on the Bill, says that ‘you can have two polling stations on the same centre.’  Now, the problem with that, is that if you have got two polling stations on the same polling centre, there is confusion among the voters and the probability of people moving from one station and voting in another one is raised and creates confusion.  We even saw it in the last election.  Therefore, since in the previous part of 1 of Clause 33; it says, the polling division will be taking into account the distances to be traveled by voters to polling stations.  Therefore, it is in order that the polling stations are actually separated and not put on the same centre.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you Sir.  Mr Chairman, a lot of what we are debating in terms of administering this election was derived from the experience of the last elections; the Commissioners experienced some difficulties here and there.  The question of confusion, we are trying to cure it this time, by displaying the registers very early, by advertising and displaying all the polling stations well in advance, so that each voter knows exactly where he is going to vote from.  So Sir, in order not to encumber the Commission with administrative clause I would request the hon. Members to leave some room for flexibility to the Administrators of this law.

MR RWAKAKOKO:  Mr Chairman, I do not see why the hon. Minister is not able to accept this proposition.  Mr Chairman, if the Minister fears that because of administrative problems, it maybe essential to bring two polling stations on one centre, we would rather you had one bigger polling station.  Mr Chairman, we have just been given Schedule One, and if you look at the report of the Electoral Commission, you will find that in some polling stations, the number of voters goes to even up to 3,400 people, 3,500 people.  Others are smaller.  So, why do you want to create confusion by bringing two polling stations into one centre, instead of if you wanted to simplify it by making it one polling station.  So, I think, Mr Chairman, once it is a polling station, it should be separated from its neighbour.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I want to support the Minister on this issue.  We have areas which are so big and so scarcely populated that it becomes very useless to create one polling centre catering for two areas.  Like now where we have a parish which is almost 20 miles across and very scarcely populated.  The only way you can do this kind of thing is by creating one polling centre to cater for two different areas.  In an area like Kyayi, the area is so scarcely populated. 

Mr Chairman, I want to agree with what the Minister is trying to move.  Because we have got very impossible areas in counties like Ngomba; take the example of Kyayi.  Kyayi is so scarcely populated, that we have got to create voting centres into one place so these people come and converge there and vote.  Otherwise, Mr Chairman, if you make the mistake of splitting these voting centres, you might find you have got to create about say 100 of them in an area like Kyayi.  Because you just find a pocket of people in one area, a pocket in another area which maybe five miles away.  The only way to solve this problem is by converging all these four into one place.  So, Mr Chairman, I want to support what the Minister is trying to move.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR RUZINDANA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  By way of information, in my own experience where there have had pinned polling stations, it has been because there are no other facilities to accommodate another station.  It has not been really deliberate to have two polling stations at one centre.  It has been because in some cases, there has not been any other facility to accommodate another polling station.  That is the only reason.  So, having them pinned together is because of convenience, rather than because of confusion.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful for the Members who have tried to see the administrative problems the Commission may have.  It is dangerous to say that if these people are nearby, let them be at one centre.  Especially when we consider our urban area.  It is possible that, you may have villages where there are very many people in terms of population, living you know, very closely together there.  But you may have scarcity of open space that is going to accommodate the kind of arrangement we are putting here.  So, far we are saying if it can be arranged that even if there was 3,000 people; say a number of 600,000 of them could be directed to one polling centre, that would help them and the Commission.  Because if 3,000 people are going to be crowed along one polling place; there is no way they will ever vote in the ten hours we are providing for the law.  

So, we need to leave this flexible as it stands, so that in areas where you want to take into account distance, the Commission can take that into account.  Where you have such device, but you are also confronted with areas of open space, you can also leave this question to the Commission to improvise, so that at the end of the day, people vote in the limited hours we are giving to the Commission to organise this polling on a polling day.  I would request Members to leave these administrative matters as far as possible for the Commission which has had prior experience and they experienced these problems last time and they resulted into a number of problems to the voters, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 33(2); be amended as proposed by hon. Manzi.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 33, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 33, as amended do not stand of the Bill.

(Clause 33 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 36(1), be amended after paragraph (d) by inserting the following; (e) at a polling station induce or endeavour to induce any voter, to vote for a person other than the person of his or her Choice.  Mr Chairman, there were a number of malpractice reported during the last elections that some people deliberately tried to come and confuse the voters to vote for people who were not of the choice of the voters.  This is intended to cure that mistake Sir, by adding that provision to other provisions intended to ensure that there is freedom for the voter to vote and there is no unduly interference with the voter’s choice.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 36, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  What is it?  We have finished 36.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I had 36(2).  In Clause 36, subclause 2, on page 30; I move to delete the word ‘oath of sequence’ and we add ‘the oath specified in the Second Schedule to this Statute.’  Mr Chairman, this is to bring it in line with what we deferred when we were debating provisions relating to the oath.  That is to be taken and we have a schedule inserted for this purpose.  I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 36, subsection 2, be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 36 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, Clause 36 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 36 as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 37, subclause 1

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, there was very clear understanding that we would not start a new task.  That we will go as far as page 30.  On the request of the Minister himself, I think -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, before we go to 37(1); I want to move that the heading, which appears as part four of-(interruptions)-  Mr Chairman, since we are going to a new part of the law, which we may not be able to complete Sir, I beg that we adjourn and we come back tomorrow and deal with business.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, the import of my Motion Sir, is that we adjourn at this juncture and I beg to move.

MR CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I now move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee has considered the Parliamentary Elections Bill partially and has not completed it.  I beg to report Sir.
  
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, the Report of the Whole House be adopted. I beg to move Sir.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session we adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)




