Thursday, 21February 2002

Parliament met at 2:34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday we passed a motion to set up a select committee to investigate matters related to the elections that have been conducted for parliamentary, presidential and local government. I am supposed to give the names of the team, but since we agreed that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee sets the terms of reference, I decided that I would do so as soon as the Committee sets up the terms. That will give me an idea about the kind of team to set up for the probe. So, as soon as we get the report, I will announce the names of the people to constitute this select committee so that they can start work as soon as possible.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, and fellow Parliamentarians, I am making a personal statement concerning allegations against me on Bujagali affairs. 

I am very grateful to hon. Lukyamuzi John for courageously clarifying during his press conference on 12 February 2002 that he and hon. Ekanya Geoffrey were the only two MPs who signed the letter to the World Bank, discouraging it from funding the Bujagali dam project. Consequently, he exonerated hon. Nsubuga Nsambu, hon. Nandala Mafabi, hon. Salaamu Musumba, hon. Dan Kiwalabye and I from earlier allegations by His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Mr Ofwono Opondo, Director of Information in the Movement Secretariat, that all the seven of us had signed a letter. 

As you recall, the letter caused the President to denounce us as economic saboteurs on several occasions, including when he was launching the Bujagali project. In his usual style, Mr Opondo unashamedly published non-researched information about us in the Monitor and the New Vision newspapers. But, hon. Lukyamuzi’s exoneration came when a lot of damage had already been made to our reputations at national level and in our individual constituencies. 

For example, the Resident District Commissioner of Jinja used the NRM celebration’s rally at Busoga Square on 26 January to denounce me as an economic detractor because of the alleged letter, and my stand on Butamira Forest Reserve. He also claimed that he had started drawing up his own list of the economic –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I have been surprised. I have looked in my file to see a copy of your personal statement, but it is not there. You see, a personal statement, according to our Rules, need not be controversial. As you proceed, you seem to be controversial in that other people are coming in. It is unfortunate that you did not give me that statement. I would have assisted you to edit some of it, not because I want to edit, but because of the rules that do not allow a personal statement to be controversial. So, I wonder whether you can edit it in such a way that it does not become controversial; these are the rules.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I want to conclude my statement –(Laughter)- by restating, as an historical and liberal Movementist that, if we are looking for economic saboteurs, we should examine ourselves from the Movement itself, to which I belong. 

I would like to ask you kindly to allow me to reveal what my research told me about economic saboteurs in this country –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member –(Laughter)- as I told you, I do not know whether it was deliberate not to give me a copy, but a personal statement should not be controversial. When you start revealing the saboteurs in a personal statement, you are bound to attract reactions from other people - I do not know, but they could be here. 

As far as I am concerned, the explanation was about a letter or a fax to the World Bank stopping the processing of the Bujagali – you should restrict yourself to that; just say you did not sign. How the names came to be connected with hon. Lukyamuzi, that is a different matter. But please do not involve yourself in controversy under this particular rule. It is not that you cannot get involved in the controversy, but not under this rule.

DR NABWISO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will avoid the controversies; I will simply say that I was not one of the people who signed and that it was wrong for anybody to denounce me at public rallies as an economic saboteur. The views of the people I represent are different about economic saboteurs in this country. If I am allowed I will put the statement outside and they can read it.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. Well, I may comment on this matter because a number of Members of Parliament approached me after the release of a document from the World Bank. They complained that their names were included on that document without their knowledge. As a result, I approached hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to see whether he knew about this document. Hon. Lukyamuzi said, ‘Yes, but it was signed by two people’. Then I said “the best thing to do, since the same document included names of other Members of Parliament, is for you to convene a meeting with the persons concerned so that you iron out this matter, because it is causing embarrassment to those who did not know about this matter.”  

Those are the circumstances, and I think now the matter has been cleared. The authors, namely, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and hon. Ken Lukyamuzi owned the document. The only question is how did the other five names get to be included on the document? But I think we leave it as that.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I am aware of the rule in relation to personal statements, that there should be no debate, but I am seeking clarification from you, because I was intending to make a similar statement to this House in view of the gravity of the matter. And in my case, it did go down badly with my neighbour, hon. Isaac Musumba -(Laughter)- Member of Parliament for Buzaaya - (Interruption. He is my neighbour, we share borders. 

To me, it is not enough to rest the case here because it has implications on how we communicate between the two arms of government.  Next time, if we do not handle the matter carefully, we will end up finding our names on terrorist lists without our notice. And to me, it is wrong for anybody to use any one’s name in matters where they have not been consulted, and then they have to bear the consequences of that. 

I was of the view that the matter could go to the Committee on Discipline, because I think that, as Members of Parliament, we should be careful the way we deal with our colleagues, and the way we put the whole institution in disrepute. I think the utterances of His Excellency the President, at Bujagali were not just aimed at me and my colleagues, but to the institution as well. Indeed, that kind of communication puts the entire institution of Parliament to ridicule and in bad light.  So, I am wondering, in your view, do we rest the matter there because I am not satisfied?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, it is not really my view to decide on what to do. As I have told you, you remember you approached me complaining about this matter that a document carried your name when you did not participate in sending the document. And I said I would get in touch with the people concerned, maybe have a conference with them and find out what happened. And what I did was to call hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, because his name was first on the document, and I asked him whether he knew about this document bearing the names of seven Members of Parliament.  

He told me that, yes, he knew but this document was actually signed by two people, he did not tell me the second person that signed the document. And I did advise him, in view of the concerns raised by the colleagues appearing on the same document, to meet and discuss this matter and see what really happened. Subsequently, I heard he made a statement saying that two people only signed the document. And you remember I told you that the person, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, had exonerated you. 

Now, what happens? It is really not for me to come here and start saying we take this action. The rules are clear; the rules are in your hands, so it is better for you to consider with the people concerned.  I would advise that maybe the seven of you meet - that is the two and the five - because apparently the five were put on the document when they had not signed it. But the document went to the World Bank. So, I think you try to sort it out and find a way out.  In case you do not, then you look at the rules and see what we can do. (Mr Dombo rose_)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Members of this House have been hearing about this issue in the press. At one time the President was quoted to have got concerned. And not only does it concern individuals in this House, but it also reflects on the integrity of this House and the institution and the way we conduct business.  Now that hon. Lukyamuzi is in this House, could it not be prudent for him to inform this House how this document came to include other names when actually they were not first and foremost part of the document; because this is the basis of the matter? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have seen that hon. Lukyamuzi is here and apparently this matter is causing concern, and apparently this was a document which was sent with some names of persons that did not sign it, maybe hon. Lukyamuzi can make an explanation if he wishes.  But personally, I would have thought that the seven people should sit before the matter really comes here, and then sort it out instead of now starting it here. 

This is even what I told Dr Nabwiso, because two people who complained to me were hon. Proscovia Salaamu Musumba and hon. Dr Nabwiso. Others did not come, but apparently they also had not signed it. But subsequently, hon. Lukyamuzi made a statement in a press conference where he explained what he did and he is standing by it. 

The question is how did the other five come in, because you know, they were, I think, on the document, which was received by the other quarter.  That is why I am advising personally that we give time to these seven Members of Parliament to sit and sort out their problem.  I think we proceed like that.

MR AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on the principle of the matter. On the principle of my right to express myself, and the right to differ with the Government. A number of us attend various -(Interruption)
 
THE SPEAKER:  You see, hon. Aggrey Awori, that is not the issue.  Nobody has said that hon. Ken Lukyamuzi had no right to do what he did.  The issue is involvement of other people who are not part of the document.  That is the only issue.  So, we are not censuring anybody for expressing his views. You have heard the Members expressing concern.  So we are only concerned with the inclusion of other people who did not sign the document. Do you have anything to say about that?  I do not think you have.  I think let us rest this matter here really.

MR AWORI: I am just begging your indulgence, Mr Speaker, and I always value your guidance. These people were allegedly called economic saboteurs by no other person other than the head of state.  I may go to Amnesty International and make certain statements, which may be regarded as subversive.  Will I also be called a saboteur, a subversive, and a terrorist? I am just seeking your guidance.  How far can we go on such matters?
  
THE SPEAKER: You see, I cannot answer for a remark made by some other person; that I cannot answer.  Maybe that is his conclusion, he can also justify why he made that conclusion.  My concern here is the five members, now maybe two who have publicly expressed that they disown the document. 

The document is owned by two of the seven. The question is how did the five get involved in a document that they did not sign. That is the only issue. And I am saying that let the seven people sit privately, and maybe they can sort out what happened. If they have a problem and our rules allow us to solve this problem in the House, then we shall address that issue.

MR AVITUS TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek guidance from you on this matter.  This House debated this matter and the project was approved, and a Member of Parliament who was part of the discussion went ahead and did what he did. And he has come out publicly and accepted that he did it. Was he in order in that respect? Are there deterrent measures that this Parliament can take?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have not come to that point. I have said that if there is another complaint related to this issue, let the appropriate measures, rules, procedures be taken so that we can address the issue.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MARINE INSURANCE BILL, 2001

THE MINSTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Marine Insurance Bill, 2001” be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I am introducing this bill to cure a gap because we do not have a marine insurance law. This bill that I am moving is similar to that of the Kenya Marine Insurance Act, but we have added something, taking into consideration the fact that Uganda is a landlocked country, to include damages, insuring property on land onto the sea. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister has justified the policy behind the law. Now I call upon the chairperson of the Committee to make a report.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Marine Insurance Bill, 2001. 

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the bill in accordance with our rules of procedure. 

The bill seeks to make provision in Uganda in relation to marine insurance and other related matters.  

The Committee discussed the bill with the Minister of Justice and the Law Development Centre. It also received memoranda from the Uganda Insurance Brokers Association and the Uganda Insurers Association.

The Committee observed that the bill is similar to the Marine Insurance Act of Kenya and it is therefore important that this consistency between the Ugandan law and the Kenyan law is maintained, since most of Uganda’s goods and cargo pass through Kenya.

The bill is also based on the English Marine Insurance Act of 1906, which has served as a basis for marine insurance throughout the Commonwealth. It was found to be appropriate for Uganda. However, consideration should be given to the fact that Uganda is a landlocked country.  

There are technical terms that have been used in the bill, that are not defined. The Committee, in its report, has proposed to define these terms in its amendments.

The Committee recommends that the bill should be passed into law to enable the current gap in the insurance law to be filled. And this legislation should take into account the conditions of Uganda as a landlocked country. 
Mr Speaker, I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, now you are free to make your contributions to this bill.  

Since there is no one, I now put the question that the Marine Insurance Bill, 2001 be read a second time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MARINE INSURANCE BILL, 2001

Clause 1 agreed to

Clause 2:
 
MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the following definitions be included in Clause 2: 

‘abandonment’, which means the surrender, relinquishment, disclaimer, or cession of property or of rights, or the voluntary relinquishment of all right, title, claim and possession, with the intention of not reclaiming it; 

‘barratry’ means an act committed by a master or mariners of a vessel for some fraudulent or unlawful purpose contrary to their duty to the owner, and resulting in injury to the owner; 

‘bottomry’ means a contract by which the owner of a ship borrows for the use, equipment, or repair of the vessel, and for a definite term, and pledges the ship or the keel or bottom of the ship or part of it as security; it being stipulated that if the ship is lost in the specified voyage, or during the limited time by any of the perils enumerated, the lender shall lose his or her money; 

‘contingent interest’ means an interest which depends for its effect upon an event which may or may not happen. 

‘defeasible interest’ means an insurable interest which ceases during the currency of the voyage;

‘hypothecation’ means the pledging of property as security or  collateral for a debt;

‘respondentia’ means hypothecation of the cargo or goods on board a ship as security for the repayment of a loan.

Mr Chairman, the justification for these amendments is to give meaning to the words, which are not very clear but are used in the text of the bill. 

I also wish to expand the definition of ‘maritime perils’ in the bill to insert after the word ‘policy’ occurring at the end of the definition, the following expression: ‘and perils of land incidental to sea voyage’.  The justification for this is that Uganda being a landlocked country, there are some risks likely to be on land related to marine.  Mr Chairman I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended agreed to.

Clause 3:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move in sub clause (1) to replace the word ‘incident’ appearing in the last line with the word ‘incidental’.  The justification is to correct the printing error.  

In sub clause (2) insert between the words ‘land’ and ‘risk’ appearing at the end of the third line the words ‘or air’.  The justification for this is to include air risks, which are incidental to marine.  Mr Chairman I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended agreed to.

Clause 4 agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 7, delete the word ‘insurable’ appearing between the words  ‘interest’ and ‘and’ appearing in the first line, and substitute the word ‘is’ between the words ‘interest’ and ‘insurable’ appearing in the second line with the word ‘are’.  Mr Chairman this is to make the drafting better.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended agreed to.

Clause 8 agreed to.

Clause 9 agreed to.

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

Clause 26 agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32 agreed to.

Clause 33 agreed to.

Clause 34 agreed to.

Clause 35 agreed to

Clause 36 agreed to.

Clause 37 agreed to.

Clause 38 agreed to.

Clause 39 agreed to.

Clause 40 agreed to.

Clause 41 agreed to.

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43: 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 43, we add the following expression at the end of the Clause to read: ‘unless the insurer is notified in advance and concurrence obtained.’ The justification for this is to protect the insurer from arbitrary changes of place of departure, which might increase the risk.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended agreed to.

Clause 44:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to Clause 44 at the end of the clause to read as follows: “unless the insurer is notified in advance and concurrence obtained.” The justification is to protect the insurer from arbitrary changes of destination, which might increase the risk.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended agreed to.

Clause 45 agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48 agreed to.

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Marine Insurance Bill, 2001” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MARINE INSURANCE BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Marine Insurance Bill, 2001” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Marine Insurance Bill, 2001” be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED 
“THE MARINE INSURANCE BILL, 2001”

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations! (Applause) This is the second bill we have passed in three days. That is good! Thank you very much. 

We have now come to the end of today’s business. Hon. Members, I wish you a happy Idd Aduha, which will be celebrated tomorrow. The House is adjourned until Tuesday, 26 February 2002 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.20 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 February 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)
