Tuesday, 26 February 2002

(Parliament met at 2.25 p.m.in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: After the Order Paper had been distributed, I received communication from the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee that they have finalised the terms of reference for the select committee.  I don’t know whether this is the position.  Unfortunately, I do not see the chairperson; otherwise I would have liked to complete this exercise so that the committee can start its work.  

MR ABDU KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  We did finalise the terms of reference of the committee this morning and we handed it over to our clerk to pass it on to you.  I am wondering why it is not ready!  

THE SPEAKER Who is going to present these terms of reference?  Maybe we wait since we have on the Order Paper item (iv) where the chairperson is involved.  Is it not okay?  Definitely the chairperson will handle item (iv).  So let us proceed with other items on the Order Paper.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, sometime back we requested the Government to give us a bill to operationalise Article 210 of the Constitution regarding deployment of troops outside the country.  

The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, on behalf of the minister responsible, promised us that such a bill was forthcoming.  I note with concern that this bill is being delayed, and yet the events on the ground would imply that the law is in place.  When I say ‘events on the ground’, I imply that there is an activity related to that law.  I am referring to the deployment of LDUs from Katakwi and other places in Congo, in Benin.  Mr Speaker, I note with great concern -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I thought this matter came up last week and the Prime Minister directed that the Minister of Defence should answer this particular question.  Was that not the case? 

MR AWORI AGGREY: Mr Speaker, that was the case.  As I said, I note with great concern that the activities on the ground indicate that they are either ignoring that provision of the Constitution or the bill is under difficult circumstances.  Because, Mr Speaker, we have got American troops here.  I do not know what they are doing here.   We are moving our troops to -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, why do we mix up issues?  You are talking about a bill under Article 210 and LDUs.  What is the connection between LDUs and Article 210?  You are now talking about American troops here.  Will Article 210 deal with this? I would rather advise, hon. Member, that since the Prime Minister directed the Minister of Defence, as soon as he appears, maybe this week, he will be required to answer the question and then we shall see how to proceed.

MR AWORI: I do apologise, Mr Speaker, if I was not clear.  When I said LDUs are being deployed to Benin under the command of UPDF – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t we suspend this issue until the Minister of Defence appears because he was told to handle this matter last week, and the Prime Minister is on record as having directed the Minister of Defence to deal with this question?  When he comes, definitely I will give you the opportunity to give whatever information you have on this issue. The chairperson has come, we understand you are ready with the terms of reference?

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I would like to present the terms of reference of the select committee of this House, which was set up to inquire into election violence in 2001 and 2002 Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council elections.  

The opening paragraph states that the select Committee will generally inquire into the misconduct, mismanagement, violence and rigging that characterised the Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council elections held in 2001 and 2002, and will in particular inquire into the following: 

1. The cause or causes of violence; 

2. The mismanagement of the electoral process;
 
3. The misconduct of public officials during elections; 

4. The staffing of the Electoral Commission; 

5. The role of the armed forces and other security organs in the conduct of elections;

6. The suitability and adequacy of the laws governing elections;

7. Allegation of financial impropriety in the Electoral Commission; 

8. Inadequacy of civic and voter education; 

9.The role of the Executive, Members of Parliament and the Movement Secretariat in the conduct of elections.

Mr Speaker, we had discussions on the terms of reference, the appropriateness of holding Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Council elections separately, but after consultations, we realised that this is a subject for constitutional review, and it would be improper to subject it to an inquiry of a select committee of parliament.  It is a constitutional matter which I think we have agreed to withdraw. 

In the conduct of the inquiry the select committee may: 

• draw experience from past elections held under the 1995 Constitution; 

• refer to judgements and decisions of Courts in election petitions; 

• refer to reports of Electoral Commission and election monitors; 

• conduct public hearings;  

• review literature and co-opt other members with expertise on particular issues.
 
We also recommended that the committee should make its report with recommendations to the House on how to improve the electoral process within two months from the date of its appointment. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: It appears there is agreement that these should be the terMS I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: It is my duty to constitute -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): I must congratulate the Committee on these terms, but Mr Speaker, I think we can improve (4) because when you talk about the staffing, I think it will be proper to look into the structure, or the offices, and so on. That one does not come up because that is a package that motivates staff - if the committee so wishes.

THE SPEAKER: Any problem?

HON. MEMBERS:  No.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; that is improved upon in the said terMS The Rules of Procedure require us to constitute a select committee. I must say it is not an easy task to carry out, because it involves elections where all of us were involved. There were incidents in our particular constituencies, but anyway, we must have a team; a team that has to carry out its functions judiciously; a team that has to be independent-minded; a team that should not bring its own experience into the matter. 

Having been selected to be on this team, you cease to be a witness.  Therefore, you will not be able to relate what happened to you or what happened in your constituency. The report will be based on what you have heard that is on record. 

It is true many of you might have been interested to be on this committee because you are independent-minded and impartial, but as you indicated last time, the size of the committee was to be nine members. However, while constituting it, I had a problem because I had other considerations to take into account, and I decided to have a select committee of 15 Members of Parliament, and these are the names:  

Hon. Mbabazi Kabushenga
Hon. Tibarimbasa Avitus 
Hon. Odur Tomson
Hon. Charles Bakkabulindi 
Hon. Martin Orech
Hon. James Mwandha
Hon. Issa Kikungwe
Hon. Oliver Woneka 
Hon. Dora Byamukama
Hon. Jacob Oulanyah 
Hon. Patrick Apuun 
Hon. Mulindwa Birimumaaso
Hon. Winnie Byanyima
Hon. Augustine Nshimye 
Hon. Aanimu Angupale.

I nominate hon. Nshimye chairperson of the select committee.  

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, you said that when somebody is on that list, he or she ceases to be a witness. If I hold some of them strongly to be witnesses, what does the committee do? I know some of them who I think are very important witnesses. Do I come to you to ask for disqualification, or what do I do?  

THE SPEAKER: Because of the nature of their job, they will not be able to be witnesses. One cannot become a witness and then afterwards go back to the panel because the panel will assess the whole evidence before it. So, how will he or she assess the evidence where she has been a witness?  So, this is something we forego, and I think that is a normal process. If a judge is a witness, either he decides to back down or he ceases to be a witness. But, it will be up to those Members - I did not know they had cases where they are to be witnesses; I just wanted to balance the committee.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, can we reserve the right, that if one has a strong view that many or some or one of these should be a witness, to come and inform you and you withdraw the name? How do we solve that problem because the purpose -(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Lieutenant General, in case there is such a case and you draw my attention to it, then we shall balance up and see whether serving on the panel or backing down to become a witness is more important. Otherwise, I did not know what was happening in their respective constituencies. What I was trying to do was to have a committee that is representative of our society from various parts of the country - not every district, but at least areas, so that they are represented on this committee.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Okumu Ringa): Thank you, MR Speaker. I am seeking clarification regarding the membership. In case a member whom you have nominated declines – or, is there a condition that they should signify acceptance? If not, how would it work in case you have nominated somebody and a person declines the offer?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: First of all, in setting up this team, I did not consult anybody. I just looked at the members and saw their suitability. I have appointed hon. Nshimye as chairman because if you look at his background, I thought he would be able to direct the committee. But in case any member whom I have nominated is not willing because he wants to become a witness, I think he or she is free to come to me, and then I will find a substitute for that particular member.

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Some of those you have put on the committee even have petition cases. An example is –(Interruption)

MR AGGREY AWORI: The selection of members for such a select committee is a prerogative of the Speaker, and it is not a matter of public debate.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay, but in case you really have a very serious matter as an individual, please approach me.  I will consider it, and if necessary I will talk to the member concerned. But I think let us give them a chance to do their work and see what they produce. If they are unable to carry out their work, again the rules allow me to appoint some other person to substitute a member.  

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can see the concern of some members about particular names that have been proposed. I wanted to find out from you whether this committee could compel somebody to become a witness unless somebody volunteers to be a witness.

THE SPEAKER: I think the rules of our committees are well set out in the Rules of Procedure. The powers of the committees are well set out. They will be following those rules to carry out their function.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

DR WILBERFORCE NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to set the ball rolling for the Seventh Parliament to ask formal questions to ministers, so that they can present their answers formally. 

My first question, which goes to the Minister in charge of the Presidency, is as follows:

The President has recently been reported to have lambasted certain persons, including Members of Parliament, who are bent on sabotaging the economy of this country. 

Could the minister inform the House whether Government intends to introduce lawful effective measures to deal with this matter other than just denouncing such acts during public rallies?  

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you hon. Nabwiso for a good question.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the vision of most, if not all Ugandans, is to transform this country from a backward state to a fully industrialised one that is able to meet its obligations towards her people. 

In order to realize this vision, leadership must concentrate on building the infrastructure so required to attract investors, and also to put into play a development strategy. Therefore, leadership must also drum up nationalism and selflessness among its people, especially the leaders.  

Recently, the custodian of advocacy for Uganda, His Excellency the President, was not happy with some leaders who went out of their way to de-campaign the country among our development partners so that they do not give us money for building the infrastructure required for development.  It was in reference to such de-campaigning that His Excellency the President reacted in his recent speeches on economic sabotage. You may recall that even in recent times, a number of leaders have also made it a habit to insult the President and his family. This is also a concern to many, if not all the citizens of this country.  

I have been asked by the hon. Member for Kagoma whether Government intends to introduce lawful, effective measures to deal with the matter, rather than denouncing such acts on public rallies. 

Yes, Mr Speaker. I have been consulting with my legal colleagues, and I am told that these acts of economic sabotage and insult to leaders can be penalised as sedition and abuse of office under sections 41 and 83 of the Penal Code.  I am also told that under the Leadership Code of 1992, these acts of sabotage contravene section 14, which prohibits leaders from conducting themselves in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the country. However, Government has chosen a system of dealing with such people by exposing their lack of patriotism, their short-sightedness and their lack of capacity to lead. This way, the whole country is given a chance to judge as to who is working for progress and development, and who is actively involved in trying to keep the country backward.  

Government is not, therefore, about to introduce laws that will infringe on the rights of its people and leaders’ freedom of speech. Government is simply appealing to leaders to be more responsible and nationalistic, and to cultivate a sense of judgement towards the implication and consequences of what they say or write. 

If such a statement could jeopardize the development of this country, it need not be said. Seeking to dialogue between ourselves where disagreements occur is a better channel rather than attempting to confront our development partners and leaders. 

Therefore, we shall continue to expose leaders who fight development and nationalism as the only political way, and that is what the President utilized in his comments about these leaders sabotaging the economy. Such denouncements on public rallies, therefore, are likely to continue so that the people can know what their leaders are doing about their development. And exposing leaders to the wanainchi will make the wanainchi make correct decisions in future. 
I would like, therefore, Mr Speaker, to thank very much hon. Nabwiso for his personal explanation last Thursday, because in that way we shall be exposing leaders who are economically sabotaging the country and this will be very helpful.  Thank you very much, MR Speaker and hon. Members.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, any supplementary question, hon. Nabwiso?

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, what if the President is given wrong information about leaders or if he is misinformed and then he uses a public rally to denounce some leaders?  In that case is that not likely to undermine the integrity and the respect that we give to His Excellency?

MR NOBERT MAO: Thank you Mr Speaker.  For the benefit of members who may not be familiar with the law, may I request the minister to read out those sections under which the so-called ‘economic saboteurs’ would be prosecuted, so that they are more aware of the details of the offence?  

Secondly, I would also like to find out from the minister whether, in his opinion, opposing a government policy amounts to economic sabotage, and whether an entire government cannot be guilty of economic sabotage through policies that expose our economy to exploitation, and undermine the delivery of social services to people?  

In his opinion, does the minister think that crimes do not have a limitation period? For instance, theoretically, a president could also be guilty of economic sabotage but he cannot be prosecuted while in office!  But I hope the minister is aware that the president can be prosecuted when he leaves office under those same provisions of the law.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Supplementary to what hon. Mao has just said, I would like to know in precise terms a definition of ‘economic sabotage’.  Secondly, I am just wondering whether Government plans to introduce a bill for economic crimes so that maybe sabotage could be regarded as an economic crime, and if so, will the punishment be capital? (Laughter)

MRS MARGERT ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like also to find out from the hon. Minister, since he said that the Government has decided to take un-judicial procedures, I want to find out, for instance, if the public decides to make a demonstration against the utterances of a leader, and in the process they are hurt, whether they will also be charged. And under which law will they be charged, because I know some of them who are really willing to go out and demonstrate?

MR  PATRICK MWONDHA: In matters of public domain, a policy is permanently reviewed, scrutinized and put to debate.  When does it cease to be a meaningful engagement as a matter of debate, and when does it become economic sabotage and a crime? Because these are very thin lines and we should be careful with some of the words we use.  Mr Minister, describe to us that thin line.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I thank you, Mr Speaker.  What if the leader or the President has said somebody is an economic saboteur, and in reality he is not, should the person who had been named take him also to court for damages?

Two, supposing the so called economic benefits you are talking about are meant for a few people with hidden agenda, should the people complain about it?  

Lastly, should we also expose on public rallies those who have called others economic saboteurs?  Thank you.

MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I just need some clarification from the honourable minister.  I got his concern and I listened to his explanation.  In his introductory remarks, he said ‘we are moving towards a modernization state now’.  In answering the question, he quoted some already existing laws that can deal with such people, and then he ended up by concluding that ‘we are going to adopt a new method of denouncing those people on public rallies’.  Doesn’t he think it would be better if he revisited those good laws and reinforced them so that they can suit his answers?

MR KASIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have two supplementary questions that I would like to put before the hon. Minister.  When a person grows up and stays in a hostile environment, he or she learns skills that can make him or her survive in that hostile environment. He has told us that it is an offence to abuse a leader. From our own African cultural practices, yes, leaders are to be respected, but how about if a leader also does not respect himself, and he goes ahead to insult other people in public gatherings, which is also the most appropriate forum where such a leader can also be brought to book?  

Secondly, if some people are judged to be economic saboteurs, is a political rally the most appropriate forum to expose them now that he has told us that there are appropriate laws under which they could be judged? Can he please advise me about the two scenarios?  Thank you.

MR MICHAEL AKISOFERI  OGOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.   Not too long ago, this august House was preoccupied with the question as to whether Uganda Commercial Bank should be sold, and what percentage should it be.  In the process, the decision of this House was flouted and Uganda Commercial Bank was sold at a level where the House felt its decisions had been flouted.  Mr Speaker, in such circumstances, could it be that the decision of this House was a sabotage in reference to the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank?   Is this sabotage?  May I know from the honourable minister whether none of those conditions constitute sabotage at all?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If Government undertakes a project and that project turns out to be an economic disaster, would Government hold the people responsible for that project to be economic saboteurs?  If they are not, why not?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: You see, one thing which I have to explain here is that there are essential elements in a crime. One of them must be the intention.  If the intention is not there, then there is no crime. But if the intention is there, that one determines whether it is a crime - then the act itself or an omission. If one of them is not there, then it is not a crime. 

Therefore, if one conceives of a plan but by executing it eventually it does not work out - you have to look at the time when he started the project. Did he have the intention to collapse it? Did he know that it was going to collapse, and then at the same time proceeded with – I am only explaining as a lawyer.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I have in mind somebody taking a bribe and, therefore, turning a blind eye to an aspect that would actually collapse that project and therefore resulting into an economic disaster.

MR ERESU:  Mr Speaker, I am disturbed. I am wondering, first of all, what are the parameters which are considered to constitute economic sabotage? I would like the minister to give me a clear picture. 

Secondly, I ask the minister to give clarification as to who in this country has the mandate to carry out the judgement in determining who is an economic saboteur?

THE SPEAKER: Could you answer the questions, Mr Minister?

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya):  Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I thank you all for the good questions. I will start with my friend hon. Nabwiso. He is saying that supposing the President is misled.  Before the President goes to talk to the public about issues of national concern like the economy, he is thoroughly briefed. And even then, he is told not to mention names yet, so that all the steps through which we have to go are clearly done. 

In the case where he was talking about this economic sabotage, there was care initially not to mention names, and that was because of our continuation with the investigations.  So, Mr Speaker, that is normally what the President does.

Hon. Mao has asked me to mention and read the sections of the law. Although I am a learned man, my knowledge of law is extremely scarce. But I am a learned man; and when I consulted my legal advisers - the learned friends - they actually mentioned these sections. At a later date, I will be more than happy to bring them here. 

They mentioned intentions for sedition and abuse of office under sections 41 and 83 of the Penal Code, and under the Leadership Code, which is about to be revisited, of 1992. Also that economic sabotage of that nature contravenes section 14 of the Leadership Code.  (Interruption) I hear the sedition failed with Winnie.  So, Mr Speaker, I think at a later date, this clarity can be put to this House.  

The question of economic sabotage has been an issue of concern to many Members, but in my opening remarks, I did indicate the views of this country, and I presume all honourable members here have the same views; that we are here to fight very hard to bring our country from relative backwardness to full industrialisation. And the process implies building infrastructure and attracting investors, and putting together a development strategy. 

I think it will be superfluous for me to stand here and simply define economic sabotage because the range, the deviations and the focuses are many, and simply not a single dictionary word. So I think we shall in future call upon the economists to define this precisely.

Hon. Aggrey Awori, my good colleague also -(Interruption)- wondered if the law also stated whether it is a capital offence or not.  All I can answer here is that, probably the Attorney General can help us and tell us whether it is capital or not, but not myself. 

Hon. Margaret Zziwa wondered if this going on rallies and mentioning the economic saboteurs would be similar to allowing people to demonstrate against some action - I hope of economic sabotage.  Indeed, there are laws governing demonstrations, and if you want to demonstrate as a people, you inform the police, and if they find substance in what you want to demonstrate for, I think they do allow.

Hon. Patrick Mwondha was concerned about the issue of economic sabotage, and he was wondering whether we can differentiate between positive criticism to a policy that may be going wrong, and economic sabotage. I have definitely taken note of that. I think Government should not be in a position to stop positive criticism if it is aimed particularly at fighting economic backwardness.

Hon. Nandala was concerned about condemning people at a public rally, and he said, supposing even those who condemn are found to be economic saboteurs, can they also be condemned. I think in my preamble I did not qualify or disqualify anybody. I said the vision of this country, at least for most of us, is to fight backwardness. And if you find someone in leadership fighting your development, you have every justification to fight him back.

He was also concerned about a case where the economic nature of the issue is beneficial to only a few people. If this is really beneficial to a few people, I think then it cannot be categorized as economic development to this country, and there we can draw the lines.

Hon. Bakkabulindi voiced his concern that going to the rallies is now a new method of Government. I do not think it is new: for all of you who have been in the political arena, when you go to rallies, you mention the strategic development that you want for your area, and the opponent comes and says that strategic plan of yours is useless. To us this is not new. We are only saying that it will probably be that awareness of the people towards their development will become more.

The honourable friend of mine from Terego, hon. Wadri, says if the leader has not respected himself in his utterances, then what do we do. I think if you find that a leader is not respecting himself in his utterances, we have the justification to go to the rally and tell him that here he is wrong. But I do not think you have justification to abuse.  This is all I can say about that.

Hon. Ogola was concerned about the issue of UCB and what we discussed here. I am glad that this question has come up because what we were discussing on UCB and other issues concerning the development of this country was dialogue. And I mentioned, in my oral answers, the need for us to dialogue, but to go to people in Washington or elsewhere and try to dialogue there! So, I am glad you brought it up because that is an indication that even in Parliament here, there was concern about UCB. And we used this House to dialogue and tell the Executive that probably here it is wrong.  I hope the Executive took it.

Hon. Mwondha asked a genuine question. He said that supposing a project that has been formulated by all of us becomes an economic disaster, will Government also be called an economic saboteur. When a project is finally concluded, it does involve most, if not all of us. And I have heard about many such projects passing through this Parliament. In that case, all of us will be accountable if the economic disaster takes place in a project we have all passed.

Finally, hon. Eresu was extremely concerned about parameters of economic sabotage. Here, I would like to propose that I take up this issue and write to people who are dealing with the economy, and they will shed light on what we are talking about. As I said earlier on, a mere definition as to who determines sabotage is not enough. I think every citizen of this country who is interested in the development of this country is also a person who can determine whether there is economic sabotage or not. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Mr Speaker, this is another propitious question. It is to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Could the minister explain why the Ministry has not yet allowed Uganda Teachers Association to be re-registered as a trade union, despite the fulfilment of all the requirements?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Thank you my honourable friend. Mr Speaker, let me say from the outset that no teachers’ union has been disallowed from registering as a trade union. But having said that, let me begin by giving you some background information that will then lead to the substantive answer. 

In 1992, Uganda Teachers Association (UTA) applied to be registered as a teachers union in the name of Uganda National Union of Teachers (UNUT).  However, at the time of UNUT, the interim executive committee was mainly composed of head teachers and deputy head teachers who, by that time, were not permissible to be unionised by the laws then existing. 

The UTA executive was then under Mr John Kisekka, who was the organization General Secretary. He argued that his organization would organize a delegates’ conference to elect new office bearers, who were eligible to be union members, to take on the management of the union. It took long - actually until last year - for UTA to organize such a conference due to leadership wrangles that had bedevilled it. 

In 1993, another organisation of teachers calling itself the National Union of Teachers (NUT), now Uganda National Union of Teachers (UNUT), also applied to be registered as a union to represent the teachers of this country. This meant that two factions of teachers were seeking to be registered. 

In line with General Notice No. 546 of 1975 of the Ministry of Labour, which categorised trade unions according to trades in order to avoid multiplicity of trade unions for the purpose of viability and strength, and in order to avoid rivalry of trade unions in the teaching service, my Ministry advised the aspiring trade union leaders of UTA and UNUT on several occasions to merge in order to have a credible and representative union that would truly represent the interests of teachers in Uganda. 

The Ministry requested the National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) to mediate over the matter and to recommend one union to be registered. NOTU subsequently recommended UTA, but the rival group opposed it. The matter stalled until 1997, when another group calling itself Uganda Allied Teachers’ Union (UATU) also applied to be registered as a trade union.  

The formation of the third organisation complicated matters. UNUT and UATU were of the opinion that their registration should not have been held by UTA, whose interim executive was not eligible for registration.  These two unions later merged to become Uganda National Union of Teachers.  

The efforts by my Ministry to advise the unions to sit on a round table to discuss the possibility of the merger fell on deaf ears. Furthermore, efforts by NOTU to try to help the parties out of the problems in 1999 and 2000 – (Interruption)

MR MAO: MR Speaker, I recognise that this may be the honourable minister’s maiden speech, but may I request that following our Rules, he speaks audibly into the microphone for Members to follow? (Laughter)

MR OBBO: MR Speaker, I was about to wind up, and I thank you. I think the microphone was faulty.  

The efforts by my Ministry to advise the vying unions to sit at a round table to discuss the possibility of a merger fell on deaf ears. Furthermore, efforts by NOTU to try to help the parties out of the problem in 1999 and the year 2000 also could not help. Consequently, in the year 2000, NOTU recommended that UNUT be registered. This was again opposed sharply by UTA, which had doubted the impartiality of NOTU on this matter.

Mr Speaker, this is where the matter now stands. But the doors of the Ministry are still open, and we are trying our level best to continue to advise the various unions within the teaching profession to come together, reach an amicable understanding and qualify for registration. I thank you MR Speaker.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, in view of the fact that teachers constitute the biggest number of civil servants in this country - they are more than 250,000 plus; about 50,000 who are on pension. In view of the fact that this group of public servants remains disorganised, will the minister now assure this House that he will take quick steps to assist them to be properly organised rather than contributing to their disorganisation?

MRS SENTONGO NABULYA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the information given to this House in regard to the non-recognition of the teachers’ union. I think this is an overdue action to be taken by the Ministry. 

NOTU, as a mother umbrella of all trade unions in Uganda, has taken it upon itself to convene several meetings and conferences, with the full knowledge of the Ministry of Labour, to make sure that the two factions of the teachers’ union come together to form a body which is viable, and which could be recognised as a trade union.  But I think the Ministry has its own agenda, which is hidden from NOTU. 

I think what the minister has said is very irrelevant and does contribute to the failure of recognising this union. It is very absurd to note this and to hear it from the minister himself, that they had failed because that is tantamount to failing to recognise a viable trade union of such a big number of civil servants. 

I think one of the reasons why we recently had a strike around the country is that teachers were dissatisfied since they do not have a forum through which to negotiate and get their terms of work properly looked into.

The Minister has an agenda that must be revealed to this House, why they are failing to recognise this viable trade union in this country. It is very absurd. Thank you Mr Speaker.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister whether he is aware that we are in breach of the International Trade Union Treaty to which we are signatory. The fact that we have denied our teachers to be unionised, we have denied some of our hotel workers to be unionised - are you aware that we are in breach of the international treaty regarding trade unions?

MR KIZIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable Minister whether he is aware that in every district there is a head teachers’ association for primary school head teachers, and secondary school head teachers? 

These associations do not work for the interests of the teachers.  I do not know whether this is an informal trade union that has been allowed at that level, and yet a formal trade union for the majority of the teachers has been denied?  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to know whether the honourable minister is aware that there are new owners of previous government enterprises, who have taken it upon themselves to deny their workers the right to unionize.  This is definitely, contrary to the established law.

Can the minister clarify whether they are doing it with the knowledge of Government or without Government support? And if so, what measures do they intend to take against such employers?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, are you not widening the question?  Because now this is becoming a general question on trade unions, when the principle question was about teachers.  So, since these are supplementary questions, they should be relevant to the principle question; namely, the teachers.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am supplementing Dr Nabwiso’s statement, in connection with the question by reading the teachers’ concern.  I am a professional teacher.  

In 1993, the Trade Union Laws Miscellaneous (Amendment) Statute was passed.  This law allowed public servants, including teachers, to join trade unions.  Public servants had earlier been outlawed from trade union membership.  

Three different unions were proposed by different workers. These were the traditional civil servants, teachers and health workers.  Of these, the Uganda Medical Workers Union and the Uganda Civil Service Union mobilized and they were registered in 1994.  But when the teachers attempted to do it, since 1993, the Ministry of Education could not allow them. And now they have organized themselves in such a way - I think every Member of Parliament received a copy from these teachers.  They are ready to unite, but then the Ministry of Education does not give them the opportunity.  

I think it is advisable that the Ministry of Education takes higher steps in helping these teachers to mobilize.  Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, the problem, honourable member, it seems your question is directed to the Ministry of Education.  You cannot combine ministries in answering a question of this nature.  What the minister can do is only to answer matters related to the labour relations rather than matters of teachers.  Maybe, if you have a question to the Minister of Education, you will be free to put that question to him.

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I have just a simple question to the hon. Minister.  Having read that long history about teachers, don’t you think it might be that there is some political manoeuvre by the Government to fail the teachers? To fail them because they are so many and scattered around the country. So they can easily be a problem.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: We conclude the supplementary questions with the chairperson of the relevant committee on teachers’ affairs.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wish to supplement by making some clarifications, given what the Members have actually reacted to the minister’s submission. 

I want to entirely agree with the minister’s submission.  It is true in this country we have some professions that have organized themselves and have been registered as trade unions and they are performing well.  One of them is the Uganda Medical Association. They help in the monitoring of the professionals, they help to do the registration of the medical practitioners, and they help to discipline those who are not performing well.  How come that the teachers have not organized themselves?

I want to entirely state here that there are quite a number of associations of teachers scattered all over the country. And to me, I feel it is now upon the teachers themselves to all re-organize themselves so that they come to the relevant bodies like the Social Services Committee. We can work hand in hand to make sure that the relevant ministry -the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - now registers them as a trade union.

They have requested my committee, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, and indicated these histories of the confusion, which has been on for some time.  There is an on-going reform whereby Uganda Teachers Association, as far as we are concerned, has been operating only in the urban areas, and they did not penetrate the rural areas to make sure that they mobilize the teachers to come under them.   

So to me, I want to leave the challenge to those who are concerned, since they have already indicated a reform and elected a general secretary to make sure that teachers are organized, and then we can see where the faults are.  But I do not also refute that there are those who are taking advantage of the confusion, like the ministry and NOTU.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, can you answer the supplementary questions?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Joseph Obbo): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Nabwiso, in his supplementary question talked about 250,000 teachers who are there and are ready to be unionized.  Unionization is not denied to any teachers, except they must follow the right steps and insist on that.  Once they do that and we are in consultation with the relevant authorities, they will be unionized.

Hon. Sentongo talked about teachers union also, and mentioned something like hidden agenda.  There is no hidden agenda to deny teachers unionization at all.  In fact, it is in the interest of Government to get teachers united and unionized, so that Government can easily deal with a group that has a body to handle their affairs.

What has actually happened in the past is that, you get a particular group of teachers, like say, the primary teachers, wanting to be unionized, excluding senior secondary school teachers. And in turn senior secondary school teachers would come forward wanting to be unionized, leaving out technical schoolteachers.  But Government had in the past said ‘all of you come together and have one union’. And this is where the problem had been.  We are still speaking that language.

Hon. Awori talked about breach of the international treaty. There is no breach of the international treaty because the Government of the Republic of Uganda has not denied teachers unionisation. Once the parameters needed are fulfilled by the teachers, Government will go ahead and register them and they will be in operation at once. So, it becomes the responsibility also of honourable Members here, since teachers brought us up and they are scattered all over our constituencies, to educate them on these matters.  I do it in my own constituency.

Hon. Kizige; head teachers’ associations are just part of it; just like you could have a geography teachers’ association or a chemistry teachers’ association. But they are all teachers and they must all come together under one body.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for rejecting hon. Muguli’s question. I think I have answered almost all the relevant questions. I would like to thank hon. Hyuha for coming forward and clarifying on pertinent matters about teachers’ registration, teachers’ association and the rest. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (FINES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence because I did request that because this is a short bill, we should handle it expeditiously. However, when I appeared before the committee, they were of the view that the two issues relevant to fines should be brought in one bill. 

This small bill was addressing inflation and putting value to the fines in the law book. The other matter was to rationalise fines and confinement penalties. I conceded to the advice of the Committee, and we have gone back to the drawing board to look at those two issues in one bill. So, we are not ready, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, there is an outcry which has been addressed to me, and I think you have heard it over radio.  This concerns the issue of fines in adultery cases. People are fined 200 shillings; you get a coin with fish at the side and you pay the fine and walk away! 

I think there has been a general debate about this matter. And I must say, from what I have been hearing on radios and from comments, this matter may cause serious crimes to be committed. A person thinks he has committed an offence and he is going to be fined 200 shillings. And that is paid to the court, and I get nothing. It is an insult!  

I am saying this because letters have come to me from various quarters, talking about the injustice displayed in as far as this particular case is concerned. So, the sooner you deal with this matter, the better. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, the majority of our people go to Magistrates’ courts, and the formula that we had used for a simple magistrate to compute a fine before sentencing was complicated. That was one issue. 

The other issue was rationalisation. You find in one offence someone is fined Shs 100,000 and the option is three months in prison. In another act, you find someone is fined Shs 100 and committed to prison for nine months. So, Government was concerned that we need to rationalise. I want to promise you, Mr Speaker, that the Law Reform Commission has worked on the other request by Government and we shall come back soon.  Your concern is my concern. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Now that the minister is not ready with this particular bill, we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2:00p.m. 

(The House rose at 3:50p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 5 March 2002 at 2:00p.m.)
    

   

