Wednesday, 29 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a long list of business to transact today, there is no communication from the chair.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is anybody standing in for hon. Cecilia? 

MR MUGUME: Mr Speaker, she is outside. Let me call her now.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: The Rt Hon. Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, I want to lay on Table Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - Irish Aid Support to Gender and Equity Budgeting (Education Sector and Karamoja Sub-region) Financial Statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

THE SPEAKER: Let it be captured.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I beg to lay on Table the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (EATTFP), Ministry of Works and Transport component – financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I beg to lay on Table, Uganda Public Service Reform Programme, financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

2.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House do dissolve into a Committee of the Whole House for the consideration of the amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE STAGE

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Please turn to page 18, rule 25. It is designated as Prime Minister’s time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There are two page 18s; this particular one is page 18 of 61. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to introduce a new rule and the sub-title will be Prime Minister’s time.
1)	There shall be time to be designated as Prime Minister’s commencing at 3.00 p.m. every Wednesday.

2)	During the Prime Minister’s time -
a)	The Prime Minister may make a statement, or 
b)	Questions may be put to the Prime Minister relating to matters of Government policy or the general performance of the Government and Government agencies. 

3)	In the absence of the Prime Minister, a deputy Prime Minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her.

4)	The Prime Minister’s time shall not exceed 45 minutes.  

Mr Chairman the justification for this proposed amendment is contained in the report as follows;

The Prime Minister is the leader of Government business and should have time reserved for him or her to answer questions or make statements in Parliament in relation to Government business. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, if you look at the proposed sub-clause 3, you make mention of the Deputy Prime Minister. We do not have such a title. I think you could amend to say, in the absence of the Prime Minister, a minister standing in his or her place. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Amended as such.

MR MULIMBA: Mr Chairman, on the proposed amendment in rule 22, it talks about Government business being accorded first priority. Again here, when we talk about the Prime Minister being given time, I do not understand the two. I thought all Government business comes from Government and the Leader of Government Business here is the Prime Minister. Are we not duplicating what is being done? What is the difference between the two? 

DR EPETAIT: Mine is just a point of clarification which I think even the chairperson of the committee may not handle sufficiently. Legally, we do not have a deputy Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have dealt with that already. 

DR EPETAIT: Yes, but in practice, we have them. So, are we handling an illegality? We have the first deputy, second deputy, third deputy and yet in the laws we do not have a position for deputy Prime Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, we have finished that. We are done with that in the rules.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, you are a legal man and you must be able to guide us. Do not close your head, help us to understand. If here you can delete it, why haven’t you advised that there is no need for you to have deputy Prime Minister? You are a legal person, so have we been handling an illegality by having first deputy, second deputy and third deputy?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we are dealing with rule 25; there is a proposed amendment to that rule and I have advised that the title Deputy Prime Minister does not exist in our laws. So, it should not be contained in this rule. Can we proceed?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I think this amendment is only complementary and there is no duplicity in any way, shape or form. The committee is of the opinion that we need a specific interface with the Leader of Government Business. He needs to account to the House and to report to the House regularly on the performance of Government. This can only be done by availing him time to make such reports and for the Members to ask questions. I do not see how this is conflicting with rule 22 cited by the honourable member.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you look at rule 25, I do not know whether it is complementing the existing 25? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, now that we have given space to the Prime Minister, I would like you to have a look at page 73 of our Constitution, Article 82(a); Leader of the Opposition. Article 82(a)(1) under multiparty form of democracy, there shall be in Parliament a Leader of the Opposition. Now that you are assigning space to the Prime Minister, wouldn’t it be relevant to assign to the Leader of the Opposition the same.

I want to know from the chairperson of the rules committee whether they considered this matter and if they did not, there should be some space for the Leader of the Opposition.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I did explain to the House yesterday that the committee considered similar proposals in detail and declined to recommend to the House any provision for particular time for the Leader of the Opposition on the grounds that there is available time for private Members’ business and the Leader of the Opposition is a private Member of the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is true that a Leader of the Opposition is a private Member, then there is no reason why he should be in the Constitution to lead the Opposition. His or her purpose here is to provide alternatives. Even the Administration of Parliament Act clearly states that he will provide alternatives.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, what is being proposed here, to cater for the Prime Minister’s time, is standard practice in many Parliaments and the sitting Government is always required to explain and account on a number of things that are taking place. The Opposition always has an opportunity to raise issues and it is at this time that the Prime Minister is given the opportunity to directly respond to issues that are emerging and require explanation and for which Government is being held accountable. This is why the Prime Minister is featuring and is being given a slot to give the necessary explanation and accountability as and when he is required to do so.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I just want to buttress what hon. Migereko has said. Under Article 108(a), it stipulates the functions of the Prime Minister. It includes coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions. 

The functions of the Leader of the Opposition defined in the Administration of Parliament Act, Section 6(e) and 4; it says that, “The Leader of the Opposition shall study all policy statements of Government with his or her shadow ministers and attend committee deliberations on policy and give their parties views and opinions and propose possible alternatives.” So, the reason why the Prime Minister is being given this special time is because as a sitting Government, he is obliged to explain what Government is doing. He should respond to any questions being raised. 

In practice, whenever the Leader of Government Business has come up on the Floor here to raise issues, the Leader of the Opposition comes in only if he has anything to add. Otherwise, the functions as stipulated in the Constitution are very clear and I believe it is the reason why even in those other democracies the Prime Minister is given that specific slot.

MS OSEGGE: I am wondering whether a Leader of the Opposition must be responsive in nature and not proactive. Must he always wait to respond? I think as a Government in waiting, he can even give you an opinion which is considered as an alternative before a Leader of Government Business gives a status report. 

We are not disputing the fact that the Prime Minister needs time, but also saying in the same vein that a Leader of the Opposition is a Prime Minister of the government in waiting. I think in all democracies, this is just right for him to practice and exercise what is expected of that office. I think it is only right in a democratic nation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Would you consider adding (a); (5); the Leader of the Opposition shall be granted time to comment. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO : I concede, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please comment on what has been raised by the Prime Minister because this is a very specific – 

MR MUJUNI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Like it is in Article 82(a) where the Leader of the Opposition is a constitutional position, I agree with you that we must create time for the Leader of the Opposition. But the time must be stipulated just as the Prime Minister has been allocated 45 minutes. It may not be equivalent to that of the Prime Minister, but he should at least be given some time. I think it is only proper that when the Leader of Government Business makes a statement, the Leader of the Opposition should also respond, especially since we are in a multiparty setting. I agree with you, Mr Chairman, that we can allocate him 20 minutes. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you remember the difficulty we had during the Budget debate - where we had to accommodate the shadow ministers to make statements. And yet the practice should have been that they should have been given the opportunity earlier to comment on the ministerial policy statements so that when those statements go to the committees, they go with the shadow ministers’ views. That way, the statements would be considered comprehensively and when they come to the House, we only deal with the committee. But we had to accommodate the shadow ministers at that stage because we did not want to shut out their opinions. So, I think in that spirit, it would be good to accommodate that kind of arrangement here. What does the chairman say?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we concede to the inclusion of right of reply for the Leader of the Opposition. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I would suggest that we use the word “comment” instead of “reply”.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: But “comment” also includes reply. 

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, your proposal is acceptable to the Government side.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which one?

MR MIGEREKO: To use the word “comment” instead of “reply”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Namayanja for reading the law, but she should have also read Article 6(e)(i). It says: “The principal role of the Leader of the Opposition is to keep the government in check.” That is the principal role; but you read the lower part. Having said that, if “reply” is the same as “comment”, then let us put “reply”. But if you feel they are different, we can put “reply/comment”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is “reply” okay?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we shall capture both; that is “comment and/or reply”.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have a different view; I would propose that we use “comment” because the Leader of Government Business may give information to the House where the Leader of the Opposition may not be having much to tell us. So, where that is the case, then he can just make a comment. But if we say “reply” it means that whatever the Prime Minister says, the Leader of the Opposition would have to reply. Thank you.

MR TODWONG: Mr Chairman, I am seeking guidance because in other countries, the practice is that there is a Prime Minister’s question time where he is questioned first by the Opposition and he responds. Now, here, the proposal is that the Prime Minister comes and makes a statement and it is responded to by the Opposition. Of the two, which one are we pursuing?

Secondly, if we are to pass the proposed amendment, I think it would not be proper for the Prime Minister to make a statement in Parliament every Wednesday. That would be too hectic. We could make it to be every first Wednesday of the month or after every two weeks. 

MR ASUPASA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Like hon. Todwong was saying, the Prime Minister responds to issues which have arisen on the Floor. I do not see the need for a reply to a reply. In most cases, he is replying to issues and the Opposition has a right to comment on his reply. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are looking at the heading of this new proposed sub-rule “Prime Minister’s Time”; it is not “Prime Minister’s Question Time” like it is in the UK Parliament. This is the time for the Prime Minister to make a statement, if it is there. That statement is the one the Leader of the Opposition can comment on or reply to or whatever word we agree on. Is that okay?

MR KYEWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I wish to be clarified: We are saying here that it is the Prime Minister’s time to make a statement. Suppose the Prime Minister makes a statement and the Leader of the Opposition has not prepared, how will he make a reply? For example, the Prime Minister can come and make a statement on any issue and the Leader of the Opposition may not have prepared a reply or comment on that particular issue. Please clarify on that.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am at a loss about what is transpiring; what are we seeking to protect? If the Prime Minister, as the Leader of Government, has been allocated his time, definitely the role of the Opposition is to respond. As to whether the response is inadequate – that is another matter. We might also say that the Prime Minister’s time or speech is useless. Do not assume that he is prepared while this side is not; it could be the opposite. We are trying to entrench a multiparty system and in all democracies once the other side makes a statement, there is an automatic right of the other side to reply. I do not know why you would not want the Prime Minister’s statement to be replied to; what are you protecting? 

So, my view is, we might say - and I think the chairperson did not have any objection and I agree with him - “...response or a comment”. If there is a response then there should be a response. If there is a comment then there should be a comment. Sometimes you might make a statement and there will actually be no response or even comment from this side. The Leader of the Opposition will say, “I have nothing to comment,” and we proceed. So, Mr Chairman, let us not waste time on something which is obvious because you want to protect what the Prime Minister is saying. Whatever I say, you have got a right to reply. Not to heckle, but actually to reply. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Honourable Chairman, can you then now restate the wording properly so that it can be captured? That paragraph 5; now, because you read the others.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: “The Leader of the Opposition shall have a right to comment and/or reply.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And you could also re-read (3) to be captured.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: In the absence of the Prime Minister, a minister may make a statement or answer the questions put to him or her. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the proposed inclusion of a new rule 25 as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 25, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 40

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to substitute sub-rule 2 of rule 40 with the following: “Statements made by ministers may be debated provided that such debates shall not exceed one hour.” 

This proposal has a historical basis. Way back in 2007, on the 27th day of February, Parliament resolved that ministerial statements should attract some debates and we were only capturing this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think I made a statement on this some time back, that this particular rule had been amended but was not reflected in the Rules of Procedure. So, that is actually the position. We now just want to clarify it in the rules and to operationalise it. So, I put the question that rule 40 as amended do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 40, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 44

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft sub-rule 1 by sub-dividing it into paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) as follows:

(a)	Notwithstanding the provisions of rule 43(a), a Member may, with the leave of the Speaker give oral notice of a motion during a sitting; 

(b) 	The motion referred to in sub-rule (1) shall not be placed on the Order Paper of business until three clear days have elapsed from the day the notice is given;

(c) 	Where the Speaker is of the opinion that it is in the public interest that the motion should be placed on the Order Paper of business prior to the expiry of the three days, the Speaker may direct that it be placed on the Order Paper of business at such a time as he or she thinks convenient.

The justification for this is only breaking down the sub-heading to make the reading easier. It is also better craftsmanship. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is better that way? But chairman, would you consider talking about (b)? You say the motion referred to in sub-rule 1. That is sub-rule 1 you are talking about here.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: In this sub-rule, Mr chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. So, you should make that alteration. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: “The motion referred to in this sub-rule shall not be placed on the Order Paper of business until three clear days have elapsed from the day the notice is given.”

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I just want to understand clearly. Is the chairman saying that a Member shall not bring before the House a motion which is not on the Order Paper? Is it like that?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No. The Chairman is not introducing anything new. He is only re-drafting the rule as it is. What is contained here is just a re-drafted version. So, this one was one long sentence, which you could read and get lost in the middle, and they are just making it easy to be understood.

And of course, it is also true that you should give notice. That is why classes of motions that do not require notice have been treated separately.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I think what the honourable member was seeking for the chair to explain to her really, was the meaning or the details of that rule, not that whether it is the same rule, because she was saying, “You mean a Member cannot bring a motion and so on...” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu, I think the honourable member is satisfied. (Laughter) Honourable members, I put the question to rule 44 as amended by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 44, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 46

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft (k) of rule 46 to read as follows: “Any motion which in the opinion of the Speaker is a matter of emergency...” there has been contention on what form of certification a Speaker should take and we now want to remove the word certification and we say, “In the opinion of the Speaker.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any issue on that? Honourable members, I put the question to rule 46 as amended in clause 46(1)(k).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 46, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 59

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes in rule 59 to insert the words “or person” after the word, “Member.” The justification here is that Members of Parliament are expected to observe utmost decorum at all times and should, therefore, not use unparliamentary language when referring to a Member or a member of the public. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposed amendment seeks to extend the protection to persons other than Members of Parliament. Is that okay? 

MR KATUNTU: I think this particular rule, Mr Chairman, seeks to protect a debate within the House and it refers to actually Members who are participating in the debate because it goes on to say, “...or impute improper motive...” We are talking about business being transacted in the House. As to any other person outside this House, I think we can be guided by general parliamentary language. 

I will give you an example, Mr Chairperson. If I am talking about some person outside this House who acted I think with mal fides, you know - with improper motive, I think I have a right to say so and so acted with improper motive and so on. But it does not really refer to Members of Parliament. We should leave it as it is in my view. The issue about other people can be governed by the general rule governing decorum in the House - parliamentary language. That is my view.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think the way this rule is, when you read it - the one we have in these rules we are amending - sounds like you can use that kind of language for the public and which hon. Katuntu is supporting. I believe the committee did well because we need to use good language with our fellow colleagues here and also the public. So, I think it is better that we move with this amendment. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: This is under rules of debate. If this extends to committees, then I would expect - members who come to attend committees or have been summoned by committees at times are abused by Members of Parliament. If this extends to committees, I think it is relevant, but if it is only for Parliament here, then it is irrelevant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu, would there be any serious problem with extending the protection to other members of the public? Would it be very bad?

MR KATUNTU: Well, Mr Chairman, I do not want to be mistaken that members of the public do not need protection. They actually do. My only problem is, if I am debating and it is a case of thuggery and I refer to some people who to my knowledge committed this thuggery or are thugs and I said, “So and so was behaving in a thuggery manner” - because I cannot say that to a Member of Parliament when I am debating - would I be restricted by this rule, therefore, that I cannot even allude to these people who have been stealing public funds and I could even name them because some of them have been convicted. Won’t I be caught by this rule? We need to be very careful, because once we extend the parameters of this rule to the entire public, you cannot even impute improper motive and yet you would know that some people have acted with improper motive. I think I have that right as I debate. 

We have just been through these corruption debates and so on and most of my colleagues even advocating for this have been making serious allegations and not even innuendos; outright ones and that is the rule of the debate in my view. So, really, not that I am seeking to have the not public protected, but I think it is the role of the presiding officer to guide any person on the microphone that you are acting outside our rules.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think as much as I agree that as a matter of civility, we should capture the amendment proposed by the committee, I am only constrained by one fact. Because even when you look at the head note which he did not even amend, it refers to contents of speeches and contents of speeches by all implications are by Members within Parliament. So, really, if we are extending to members of the public, I think we would be overstretching it. We may have to look at other regulations that govern that particular relationship between Members of Parliament and the public, elsewhere other than in Parliament.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, I would like to - so that we can move forward, please - or I put the question to this.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I do not intend to concede on this matter for the following reasons -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then I will put the question to the amendment proposed - Have you conceded?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: No.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, he has not conceded, honourable members. I put the question to the proposed amendment by the Chair of the Committee.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in rule 59, sub-rule 2, it reads, “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current session”.

I have found one great mischief with this rule, unless it is amended, because even courts of law have powers to review and revise their decisions. Really, to make it so rigid to this extent is to make our work a little bit cumbersome when it comes to any proposed consideration for review. I intend to propose a small amendment so that at the end you add, “Except upon a substantive Motion for rescission”. I beg to move and I have given the justification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, if you could allow me to guide on this particular issue. In the rules that were before these ones, it was there. Somehow, in the rules that were drafted in this one, it did not show up and there was no debate on it. So, what the learned Attorney-General is doing is to re-introduce what was there like he has argued.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. On the substance of what the learned Attorney-General has introduced, well it is good to uphold the functus officio rule. However, I think I would agree with you. There are certain issues this Parliament can consider and the House comes to a conclusion; but given two, three, four, five weeks, new developments will emerge. Someone should not get an obvious defence that Parliament already considered that issue. At least, depending on the circumstances, like the nodding disease, it can transform into a different thing. Actually, this rule stops you from coming to talk about it when Parliament has already considered it. I would rather we make the exception “with leave of the Speaker,” because if it is a substantive motion, anyone can do it everyday, by the way. I can bring a motion that this matter be reconsidered, moved by me, seconded by - maybe we say, “With leave of the Speaker,” so that we can exercise discretion because – by the way, it is actually vetoing the Speaker’s decision if I may put it that way because they are saying, “We passed this decision on this day, but we want to reconsider it.” Probably we would seek leave of the Speaker to reintroduce that particular issue. I do not know, but by any one standard, I would recommend that this rule should be dealt with. We cannot leave it like this.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I actually agree with the learned Attorney-General that any decision made by any institution, whether it is this House or a court of law, that institution has got a right to review that decision depending on the circumstances. It could have been a mistaken decision and eventually, other facts emerged and you cannot be stuck with a mistaken decision indefinitely. I think we should have a mechanism - if it warrants reviewing our decision – in which, even when circumstances have changed, we can review our decision. I think I agree with the learned Attorney-General that we can have that particular rule amended to accommodate what he is saying -(Interjections)- yes, they should be on a substantive motion because if you have already taken a decision, there is no way you will change it, except when it has come for thorough debate and it can only come on a substantive motion. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much. I am just seeking guidance and I stand to be corrected. I think at some point, the Speaker has the right to suspend a given rule depending on the circumstances. I do not see why we need to change this. It can stay like that. When a necessity arises, the Speaker can suspend the particular rule and have debate going on the way it should. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairperson, my understanding of this clause if I may read it, “It is out of order to attempt to reconsider any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion.” My understanding, Mr Attorney-General, is that even to attempt to sit down and bring a motion for the House to review its decision already amounts to an attempt. This rule prohibits you from doing that because even the substantive motion is already an attempt by you to influence the House to review its decision. So, I want to implore the learned Attorney-General that – do we even prohibit attempting? And in any case if I bring the substantive motion, is that substantive motion to change the subject matter or to seek leave of Parliament so that you can eventually review that decision, which the House has decided upon? 

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I am seeking clarification on this sub-rule, rule 59(2). We have a rule related to rescinding of a motion in our Rules of Procedure. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, I moved a motion and we hit a snag. We had no option but to rescind. It was a constitutional matter because it was about the Referendum. I think the Attorney-General will help us on this. We have to have that because at times, we can make a mistake which can be constitutional and we need to rescind our position as Parliament. So, I request the Attorney-General to help us with this. I am seeking clarification from him.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I agree with the Attorney-General on the proposal based on the points raised by hon. Odonga-Otto. I suggest hon. Odonga-Otto that we go with the Attorney-General, because if we bring the Speaker in to be the one to take leave - whether a motion should be revised - we are bringing the Speaker into problems. He can come under pressure from different parties to go back to the House and convince us to bring another motion to change what we have changed. I think it is upon us, as Members of the House, to bring a substantive motion for rescission. Thank you. 

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. When this rule or sub-rule was made, I was not in this Parliament, but I would like to believe that there was a purpose for which the provision was given. I would like, first of all, to pose the question; what was the evil that it was intended to prevent? If I may answer my question; I think the evil it is intended to prevent is for somebody to turn around because he has fallen short of certain expectations and say, “By the way, we could do this again.” This is exactly what – there has been a tendency in this House to turn this august House into a lower house, where a decision is taken, and somebody shouts from outside because he has a different opinion from what has taken place in this House. There is a caucus that is called - it sits like an upper house and revises the whole decision -(Interjections)- I think the evil that was intended to be avoided by this provision -(Interjections)- is that, first of all, Members who sit in this House consent and, therefore, when they take a decision; their decision will always stand the test of time at least for a session. Therefore -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I am just seeking clarification. In law, when you discover new evidence, you make an application to tender in such new evidence which may help build your case. So, how do you want to relate this aspect I have just raised with a very good argument you are raising; supposing we discover new important facts in relation to a particular case? Like in the case of the nodding disease; we realised that creating those centres may not be necessary and yet we had resolved it was necessary. Supposing we benevolently discover that this new information has arisen, how do you relate it vis-a-vis the very good argument you are raising of fear thatthe upper house may command the lower house? 

MS OSEGGE: Just some information. Thank you, Chairperson. If we could kindly refer to rule 14 - suspension of rules; I think this would take care of such a situation. If there is need to change a position, the Speaker has the prerogative to suspend a particular rule. In the event that we have not changed this rule - I do not see why we are working so hard to bring that one on board – then this one is rendered null and void. Why is it still in the Rules of Procedure? Would we consider when we are supposed to apply Rule 14?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me give some guidance on this matter. Yes, rule 59(2) can be suspended using rule 14. But it is a very clumsy procedure; I do not think that in an organized House, you need to suspend a rule in order to exercise a right you inherently have. 

As I said earlier, the rules that governed the Seventh Parliament had this provision and it was just an extension of, “... during the current session except upon a substantive motion for revision of that decision.” That was it; similar to what hon. Odonga-Otto is talking about; the power of a court to review its decisions based on matters that have arisen. That is what the learned Attorney-General was proposing.

Now, we have looked at the old rules that governed the Seventh Parliament and we have looked at the Hansard which passed these rules. There was no debate conducted to remove that. The understanding, therefore, was that it might have been left out of typographical difficulties. It might not have been included out of a genuine mistake because its removal was never debated. It was just to give Parliament power to review. 

MR MUJUNI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the learned Attorney-General that we need a fall back position. But I also agree with hon. Kiwanda that there could be something that we need to cure.

Hon. Ayena is telling us that often, we have made resolutions which people are not comfortable with. Are we giving a breakthrough now? I want to be guided on what this insertion is going to cure. 

Actually, this rule 59(2) has helped us a lot. Every time we make a decision, people know that we have that protection. Now, if you remove the protection, where shall we run to?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let me give you my experience in the Seventh Parliament. The House was sitting like this; it was a constitutional motion for a referendum to change political systems; from the Movement Political System to a multiparty political system. The motion was brought to the House; I remember I was sitting where hon. Jack Sabiiti is sitting –(Interjections) – there were no sides then. (Laughter)

As hon. Kiwanda is re-stating, he got up and moved a motion for closure of debate. And when the debate was closed, they looked around because it is a constitutional matter that required three quarters to take that vote. It turned out that when we were taking that decision, there was no quorum to meet the two thirds requirement. 

Now, if there was no provision of that nature, we would be stuck because the matter could not be deferred to the next session of Parliament; it had to be handled then. So, we came through that motion. We spoke our lungs out here trying to get that matter reinstated. Eventually we passed the resolution; the referendum was held and that is why we have two sides of the House. That was the rule that saved it.

And as I have said, there is no argument in the Hansard on why it was removed. Now, inadvertently, it has disappeared from the rules. Isn’t it necessary for us; according to the Attorney-General, to put it back for the future?

MR AYENA: Mr Chairman, I think I am sufficiently armed with some of the most intriguing questions that have been raised, especially by my junior colleague in the profession, Mr Odonga Otto. (Laughter)

You know, for lawyers, when you talk about review, court can review its decision, especially when you find important matters of evidence which were not, even after exercising due diligence available to you at the time when the decision was made. 

So, in this case, when we are considering this type of provision, we must sufficiently warn ourselves of the danger of getting entangled into abuse of process. So, whatever we do, in considering this matter, we must know that whether it was done inadvertently or otherwise, we have found this rule here and we are well pleased with it. But if we are well pleased with it and yet we feel it might be questionable or sagacious for us to revisit it, there must be stringent conditions to avoid possible abuse. 

I have submitted here before that even without this provision, there have been very fervent attempts to reverse decisions taken on the Floor of Parliament. What will happen in a situation where we have opened the flood-gate? These are my views, Mr Chairman; if this rule must be amended, we must make a very stringent and air-tight provision to make sure that the motion can only be passed by not less than two thirds of the House approving it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Learned Attorney-General, would you restate the amendment so that we can recast and then see how to move forward?

MR RUHINDI: On page 92(2) –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Sorry to disrupt you. But both sides are actually correct. The need to amend is correct and the need to see that the rule is not abused is also correct. So, what the hon. Ayena is suggesting is what I had in mind – that the motion is supposed to be supported by not less than two thirds. Then we can proceed without acrimony; that will provide some safeguard if it is three thirds.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: For constitutional amendment, it is two thirds; and a resolution should also be two thirds?

MR RUHINDI: I think let us have a fair compromise. Since constitutional amendment requires two thirds and other entrenched provisions of the Constitution, for this important matter, going by the concerns raised by some colleagues, and after necessary consultations this side, I propose that we consider half of the Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Half - meaning half of all voting Members of Parliament and not just the ones present; that is the implication. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the arguments that have been advanced are to the effect that we must be very careful in having Parliament subjected to a situation where our very useful and well considered decisions are rescinded very easily. First, I would like to commend the learned Attorney-General for the proposal to amend and how we can review where need be. However, such a review must not be subject to abuse. 

Mr Chairman, I therefore would like to urge the learned Attorney-General, and indeed the whole House, that let us try to protect the decisions that we make. Two-thirds is not a very big number. We could go by two-thirds, that is when we shall all really collectively own up to the rescission of a decision that was earlier made, rather than subjecting it to a small number. I beg to submit. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, first of all, I appreciate the learned Attorney-General for bringing such an important amendment. What we are trying to debate is to make it very difficult for us to change our own decisions because we are 380 and there is no way all of us can be wrong at the same time. So, we are talking about changing our own decisions, and there are several factors that may force this Parliament to change their own decisions. One of these can be discovery of new facts, also whippings from our various parties, and these are realities we live in. 

So, what I suggest is that, in order to make it difficult for us to change our own decisions we should honestly talk of two-thirds of the Members of Parliament. If we say half, our fear would be, assuming tomorrow the FDC is in power and we have 280 Members of Parliament and the House is 380, we will change our decisions whenever we want. That is very dangerous. You cannot okay that when FDC is in power. So, I suggest that if we cannot accept two-thirds of the whole House, the worst case scenario then should be that we qualify that other half, that the half should have members of both sides of the House.

LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable colleagues, many times we make mistakes. Everyday people get involved in accidents as a result of mistakes. So, a system which does not correct mistakes and has no avenues for exit in wrongs is very dangerous for us to adopt. It is like a car without reverse gear. If you ever go off the road and you have no reverse gear, then you will have a problem. I think we should adopt a situation of a simple majority of 50 percent. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We have been moving very well but it looks like we are hitting a snag. We have these learned lawyers and they are telling us this and that but the rule is contentious and it is for the good of us. I think it would be best if we could also stay it like we stayed the one on the procedures for EALA and we let these learned lawyers sit together and come up with a position and report to us. We still have one which is pending, so we could add on this one so that they sit and agree on it and bring it back, so that we can continue smoothly because it will take us a long time.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, honourable members. I think we have resolved this one. We have resolved the most important bit. It is only a question of numbers. Do we take half of all Members of Parliament or do we take two-thirds of all Members of Parliament just like is required for amending the Constitution? That is the issue of contention. 

MR AKENA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. While we try to address one mischief, we are setting ourselves up for another. For those of us here present today, I can only see two political parties in this House at this moment that have more than two-thirds of their membership in the House. We have the Conservative Party, which has 100 percent representation - (Laughter) - and the Uganda People’s Congress with 70 percent. 

We are also trying to make a decision where even one half - I do not see half of the NRM or any other party here. The decision, which we are trying to make, is on a very substantive question; if the Government side wants to assure the nation that they are not up to mischief, I request that they concede on the two-thirds. It will show clearly to the whole nation that we are not up to mischief but we are looking at a situation where if the circumstances arise and there is good reason, two-thirds can be mobilised. We have demonstrated as UPC that we are here in good number. I thank you, Mr Chairperson. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, thank you so much. I am slightly opposed to two-thirds and I have reasons. I was reading the Constitution and in Article 118, on a simple vote of censure, they say, “Parliament may, by resolution supported by more than half of all Members of Parliament, pass a vote of censure….” We know that this book, the Constitution, is paramount and the others are secondary – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, that provision is talking about that motion. For that motion to pass, it has to be supported by more than half. It is different from half of all Members of Parliament being able to take a decision. Do you get the difference? If half of the Members of Parliament are as many as 190, those members can take a decision to rescind a decision, but that one is saying that 180 people have to agree to it for it to pass. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: In conclusion, I was of the view that we call it more than half instead of fixing ourselves to two-thirds. I thank you.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Chairman, I think the point for us to understand here is about the half of the Members of Parliament or House. This is regardless of which political party and which side. That is the issue. In my opinion, I go with half because it is not easy to get two-thirds as you are proposing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are two proposals now. I also note that we have already had enough discussion over this matter. The first proposal is that we create an exception to that rule, to the effect that parliamentary decisions can be reviewed in the same session of Parliament on condition that a substantive motion is tabled. That was the proposal from the Attorney-General.

However, also arising from the amendment moved by hon. Ayena Adong – which would now be an amendment – we should insert a phrase that that decision should be taken by two-thirds of Members of Parliament. The Attorney-General, in his reply, said that he would be comfortable with half of the members. 

The rule on deciding motions and amendments to motions is that you start with the first amendment or the one that is furthest from the subject and more relevant. So, the first motion that we need to vote on is, do we do need two-thirds or not? Okay, let me put the question to the motion that the rules be amended as proposed by hon. Ayena to the effect that this resolution can only be passed by two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the motion as amended that we do a revision on a motion by a vote of half of all Members of Parliament participating in that decision. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 95, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I had moved an amendment that we insert the phrase, “half of both sides”. 

MR TANNA: Mr Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification. If a parliamentary resolution is passed by 200 Members of Parliament sitting today and the substantive motion is tabled tomorrow to rescind that particular resolution with 150 Members in the House, will the half be of the 150 or of those that were present when the resolution was passed? I am asking this because you said –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the half should be of all Members of Parliament, the 375 Members of Parliament. That is the half we are talking about.

Rule 60

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, the committee proposes to redraft rule 60 as follows: 

(1) 	Subject to sub rule (5) of this rule, a member shall not refer to any particular matter which is sub judice. 

(2) 	A matter shall be considered to be sub judice when it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination. 

(3) In determining whether a criminal or civil proceeding is active, the following shall apply - 
(a) 	Criminal proceedings shall be deemed to be active when a charge has been made  or summons to appear have been issued by court. 

(b) 	Criminal proceedings shall be deemed to have ceased to be active when they are concluded by a verdict and sentence or charges have been withdrawn.

(c) 	Civil proceedings shall be deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing, such as setting down matters for hearing, have been made until the proceedings are ended by a judgement, settlement or withdrawn.

(d) 	Appellate proceedings, whether criminal or civil, shall be deemed to be active from the time when they are commenced by application for leave to appeal or by notice of appeal until the proceedings are ended by judgement or withdrawn. 

(4) 	A member alleging that a matter is sub judice shall provide justification to show that sub rules (2) and/or (3) are applicable. 

(5) 	The Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub judice or not before debate or investigations can continue.”

The justification given is two-fold. One is to provide an exhaustive definition of what constitutes “sub judice” in respect to both criminal and civil matters. Two, the amendment also requires that the Speaker shall make a ruling on whether or not a matter is sub judice. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the intensity of the proposed amendment is to enlarge the existing rule 60 to accommodate what the chairperson of the committee has proposed. Is there any debate?

MR SABILA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. There are two things that usually happen; first, members have had to debate issues that need not to be debated because they tantamount to sub judice. On the other hand, members have had not to debate some important issues because they think it would be sub judice to do so. 

There are situations where some people have just expressed intentions to sue, forcing members to stop deliberating such important issues. That has left many issues unresolved. I, therefore, support the idea that we make a clear definition of the term “sub judice”. I support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that rule 60, as amended, be part of the Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 60, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 64

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft rule 64 as follows: “The Speaker shall not, while presiding over proceedings in the House, take part in any debate but may give guidance to the House on any matter before it.”

The justification is that we want to make this rule permissive. In the event that the Speaker is not presiding, the presumption is that he or she can sit in the House. That is the sum total of what you have said. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think this is a very dangerous amendment, extremely dangerous even to the Chair. As of now, we have two Speakers, the substantive Speaker and her deputy. What the chairperson of the committee is suggesting is that we could have a situation where the substantive Speaker is in the Chair and the Deputy Speaker is in the House but on the other side participating in proceedings. Can you imagine that sort of scenario? Tomorrow he then jumps from the other side and he sits in the Chair. How will we look at it? Don’t bring the persons of the Speaker in trouble with any of the sides. We know they have their own party but we imagine that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the honourable chairman is withdrawing.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I have just been informed that when the Speaker is in the House and not presiding, he or she will sit this side of the House. That said, I beg to withdraw this. 

Rule 65

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose that in sub rule 7(1), we insert a new paragraph (a) before the current paragraph (a) to read as follows, and renumber the paragraphs accordingly: (a) “Points of privilege.” 

The justification is that a point of privilege supersedes a point of procedure, point of order or point of information. Parliamentary privilege belongs to the House and is not a privilege of any individual member. We so propose. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, could the chairman of the rules committee give us a typical example of a point of privilege. Can he raise one so that we appreciate why it should precede a point of procedure? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, I am surprised that the hon. Odonga Otto has not read the report of the House. The points of privilege are indicated in the report. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Restate for the record. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, for the record, we propose that we insert a new paragraph (a) before the current paragraph (a) to read as follows: (a) “Points of privilege”-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, the issue was, can you give an example of what a point of privilege would be.

MS BETTY AMONGI: One of the points of privilege is in the rules, that the Prime Minister takes precedence. So, someone can say, “point of privilege; the Prime Minister should take precedence over the other members.” That can be one example. 

DR EPETAIT: First of all, we are all supposed to have the privilege or the liberty of being secure in this House. Supposing any member, be it a Member of Parliament or a stranger, is sighted at the reception with a firearm, can’t that become more of a privilege issue than the point – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, a point of privilege is raised on a matter that affects the privileges of the members. It is that simple. If the privileges of the members are at stake, a member can rise on a point of privilege. If the air-conditioning of this place should break down completely, for example, and it is so hot and the Speaker has no way of – because we are dressed differently and we can perspire a lot - on issues like this and issues of security, a member can rise on a matter of privilege. That is what the chairman of the committee is saying should take privilege over any other rule for interruption of debate. 

If safety of the members or privileges of the members are under threat, you cannot say “point of order” or “point of procedure”. If you all rise at the same time on order, procedure, and privilege, the Speaker should give attention to the person rising on a matter of privilege. Is that a good point? Can I put the question?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The example given by the chairman is very interesting but I think that has to do with the environment –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which chairman?

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: The Chairman of the Committee of the whole House. The point raised is very interesting, but to my understanding that has to do with the environment under which we operate. Our rules cover that privilege in procedure. 

MR KATUNTU: I think the amendment will not be in vain. The only problem is that most of the time we abuse these procedural points. Somebody stands up on a point of order but instead gives information. Somebody says, “Procedure” but seeks clarification. I think that is where the problem is. However, if we are looking at privileges, that should not be a big problem. We can have it. 

The only thing I am uncomfortable with, Mr Chairman, and you need to guide us, is that sometimes there is a lot of heckling - (Interjection) - by hecklers. (Laughter) In fact, they are heckling now. Under such circumstances, is it my privilege to be heard? If I am here and I have a few fellows behind me heckling, - let me not refer to those in front me - what do I do? Do I say, “Can you protect my privilege, Mr Speaker?” We should now know that once we pass this particular sub rule, then some of this heckling will be checked by this rule.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the matter is clear. I put the question. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I commend the committee for this amendment but I would like the chairperson to clarify to me the difference between “clarification” and “elucidation”. What is the difference between to “elucidate” and to “clarify”? Are we going to import Roget’s Thesaurus? (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the learned Attorney-General has put the cart before the horse. This matter has not yet been called for debate and we intended to withdraw it all the same. So, you are running ahead of the House, hon. Attorney-General. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Chairman, we are still dealing with rule 65. We have dealt with the issue of privilege; there is a redrafting which has been referred to by the honourable learned Attorney-General and then there is a No. 8. Would you like to cover the whole rule so that we can deal with it at once?
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we withdraw our proposal to redraft rule 7(c); actually, we intend to drop the word “elucidation” for “clarification or information”, which shall be maintained.
   
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is in the rules right now?
   
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I concede that we go back to the old rules. Under No.8, which is the proposed amendment No. 3, we propose to insert a new sub-rule (8) to read as follows: “A member who stands up to interrupt debate on a point of privilege, procedure, order, information or clarification shall, when he or she catches the eye of the Speaker, not depart from it.”

The evil we intend to cure here is that sometimes members rise on a point of order and instead seek information, or on a point of information when they are raising matters of procedure. This has to be cured. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, the only concern is that on a point of information and clarification, the member does not have to catch the eye of the Speaker; it is up to the member holding the Floor to accept. The Speaker is not involved in that. If you rise on a point of information, I do not have to say “yes”; it is the member holding the Floor to accept the information or point of clarification. So, involving the Speaker in this issue of information and clarification would not be proper. You could just leave out “information” and “clarification” but the rest can remain because they are for the Speaker. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, it is true that information and clarification in theory has nothing to do with the Speaker, but what we have been seeing here occasionally is that the Speaker helps exercise judicious discretion and you see that certain information actually helps the whole House. 

That is not why I stood up. I was of the strong view that when a member stands to interrupt - the word is “interrupt” - debate on points of privilege, procedure and order, I think today is the best opportunity to insist that the rules must be tightened. If you say, “I get up on a point of order”, you must say it in line with rule 46. I think this is what will stop the flagrant abuse. 

So, at this particular point I would move that if “information” and “clarification” are removed, then we would say, “A member who stands up to interrupt debate on a point of privilege, procedure and order, shall cite the rules” – (Interjection) - If you could just listen to me. 

The Speaker has just guided that information and clarification are redundant in this provision. So that means that what we are remaining with is privilege, which is a new development, procedure and order. If you are rising on a point of order or on a point of procedure, to stop that abuse of people debating, why don’t we say, “I rise on a point of order; rule No. 46 is being abused.” So, Mr Chairman, I formally move that when a member stands up to interrupt debate on a point of order, procedure or privilege, the rule must be cited by that very member. I beg to move.
 
MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That amendment is harmless except where catching the eye of the Speaker comes in. I think what the committee wanted to say is that when you stand to interrupt a debate so as to provide information, do so and do not change it to order or something else. I think that is what they had in mind. 

However, I think where they went wrong is where they talked about catching the eye of the Speaker. So, I am just asking the chairman of the committee if that can be removed, then I will totally agree with the presentation as it is. There are many times when somebody is holding the Floor and you ask that person to clarify and  he refuses and then you change your statement to order and then to guidance. That is where the committee would help us, so that we could stick to the purpose for which we have stood up to interrupt the debate. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we concede and drop the words “when he or she catches the eye of the Speaker.”
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In which case both information and clarification become valid in this provision.
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is okay. Honourable members, the amendment proposed in rule 65 is to start a new paragraph (a), point of privilege to take precedence; and then the second amendment is that a member who stands up to interrupt debate on a point of privilege, procedure, order, information or clarification shall not depart from it. 

So, honourable members, I put the question that rule 65, as amended, do stand part of the rules. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 65, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 68

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft the head note to read as follows: “Motion for closure of debate.” The justification is that when you read the provision, you realise that the provision is to provide for a motion for closure of debate. The proposed amendment appropriately describes the contents of the provision. 

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think that amendment is ambiguous. Maybe at this moment we could apply the previous amendment where the Speaker can guide.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment is that the title of that rule 68 be changed from simply saying, “Close of debate” to “Motion for closure of debate”. The only way you can do any business in Parliament is by motion. So, are we saying that we take it as the committee is proposing?
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. If you read both sub-rule (1) and (2), they are actually talking about a motion; everything here is about a motion. So the head note should reflect what is in the detail of the rule, which is “motion”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, “Motion for closure of debate” is the proposed debate to the amendment. I put the question that an amendment to that effect be effected on rule 68.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 68, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 70

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to insert a new sub-rule to read as follows: “Notwithstanding paragraph (g), a member may, subject to any guidelines issued by the Speaker for the purpose, bring into the House specific electronic gadgets.”

Mr Chairman, the committee notes that we now live in an e-age and there are gadgets that can aid members during debate. These include laptops and iPads. We move that we amend the rules to allow these to be brought to the House subject to guidelines issued by the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairman, by using the word “specific”, what do you mean?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The gadgets should be specified in the guidelines issued by the Speaker. We do not envisage a situation where a member walks into the House with a radio or a gramophone for that matter.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are now giving the Speaker authority to issue guidelines like a statutory instrument in other situations outside these rules. Would the guidelines be appended to these rules somehow? Would they be printed with these rules or would you want to think about giving the discretion to the presiding officer to rule if you showed up with something and a point of order is raised that it is not appropriate? Because if you say “specified” and the guidelines have to be issued later, maybe not even approved by the House-

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with you that by the time they made these rules, things had not changed. Many of us, even when the rules had not changed, had their iPads and everything. However, I think we need to be specific because when you say bring into the House specific electronic devices without specifying, that makes it ambiguous and leaves it very open. I do not know at what time and at what stage the Speaker, using his or her discretion, will release these guidelines.

Now that we are amending the Rules, I think we can limit “specific devices” to devices like the iPad and laptops. If we abuse this rule, Mr Chairman, you will see people carrying radios and guns here. Some members have them, so we need to specify it today.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, in the Commonwealth there is a standard qualification for these issues, and the qualification is that whatever you are carrying should be able to facilitate your debate. That is the qualification that is always given. Now, would that qualification capture this? If you showed up with a gun, how is a gun going to facilitate your debate? If you showed up with a radio-

MR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to support the amendment by the committee about the gadgets that will facilitate the work of Members of Parliament. However, I also wish to caution that there is need for us to specify these gadgets so that in an attempt to help facilitate our work, they should also not inconvenience other members. I think there is need to specify, otherwise should a member even carry a printer into the Chamber here? This will be a big inconvenience and yet it will also be facilitating. So, I think let us be specific. 

If you leave the discretion with the Speaker and if the Speaker rules that what I am carrying or what a member is carrying is not proper, then I think it will be very unfortunate for the member. So, I think it is good for us to specify so that every time we carry any gadget to the House, we know it is within the provisions that are allowed for the members within the rules. I think this will help us. Thank you.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. Mine is to supplement the amendment. I sit on the Committee of ICT and I remember when we were considering the ministerial statement, we had a presentation, which was supposed to be made using the projector. We had nothing to do apart from breaking this law. We came to this House as requested, under the Speaker’s guidance, and we presented using a projector, which was not in the rules. 

So, instead of doing this continuously - technology has now changed and people can now communicate using their computers, laptops and iPads - let us allow those machines, which do not emit sound. There are those like radios, which can produce sound, but there are also those which do not do so. Maybe we cool it down and say those machines which are input devices, and then give the Speaker a chance to identify those machines, which are dangerous to be brought to the House. That is my suggestion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, an attempt was made in rule 69 to define the dress code and you know how futile that effort has been in terms of actually coming out clearly with what the proper dress code for Parliament would be. Normally it is supplemented by points of order - “Is the honourable member properly dressed?” - and then the Speaker would examine and rule on the subject.

Now, if you attempt to list here, in listing you are limiting and in limiting, you are not projecting what is likely to happen in the future. I am not so sure whether we want to take this line or we want to re-cast and see that a situation be created like guiding principles that would enable the presiding officer to rule, should a matter arise, because this matter is not going to arise every single day.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was trying to reflect as to the reason why this rule was introduced. It means the kind of business that preoccupies us here needs total concentration and does not need members to be diverted. Whereas we may talk of adopting this modern technology, you will find that when I am here concentrating on an issue, my neighbour is opening the laptop and diverting my attention. So I think that if we go on to simplify and allow members to come with gadgets that are convenient to enable them deliver effectively, we may undermine the importance of our concentration. So for me- (Interruption)

MR OMONA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give to my colleague is that as the world advances, there is a lot more information that we can carry and there is a lot more that we may predict yet may not be at our disposal at any one point if we use the traditional sources of information. I will give an example; I do not know how many times a day I quote a Bible, a Koran, an encyclopaedia or something else and yet I cannot carry all these with me. Technology has provided that I can have all these in my iPad. 

So, hon. Ruhunda, the question of interruption is about your concentration. Very many times we make noise - others call it heckling - but we have continued. So I think it is about concentration and not the gadgets. Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Chairman, noting what hon. Omona has said, I am still of the view that we should limit these devices to at least the iPod or iPad or whatever. (Laughter) The crucial issue here is that as members, we are expected to be organised, do research and come with information when we are coming to debate. We shall not do instant research when the session is ongoing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is precisely the point I was making. The honourable member is now talking of iPods – that is purely musical. (Laughter) That is why I am saying you are now going to list iPads, iPods - (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think under (g) we have clearly identified what we do not need. We do not need a camera, for example, and neither do we need arms nor weapons nor a tape recorder nor a transistor radio nor a mobile phone. I think we can stop there and delete “or other electronic device”. That means that we are allowed to carry – I will not say iPods – an iPad or a laptop. 

I think we need now, committee chairperson, to draft another sub-rule that says that “no member shall use the same electronic device to interrupt the proceedings or in a manner that may disrupt proceedings in the House.” Once you do that, then you will be caught out of order either by your colleagues or the Speaker. I think that can sort us out.

MR KYAMADIDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to amend by saying that, “Notwithstanding paragraph (g), a member may, subject to any guidelines issued by the Speaker for the purpose, bring...” – (Interjections) - This is what I want to amend - the electronic device should be hand-held, silent and it does not impair decorum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That will be catered for in disruptions.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I want to provide to hon. Kyamadidi is that all my gadgets talk. So, when I bring them here, they must talk to me. (Laughter) So when you say they should be silent, it means I will not be able to do my work. (Laughter)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The amendment I want to bring is that these gadgets should pass the security test. The justification is that we have the Sergeant-at-Arms here and he has kept here for a long time without incident. World over, science has advanced. When we are at airports, they are now even proposing to screen. So, we may pass and specify these gadgets but at the end of the day, they must pass the security test of the Sergeant-at-Arms. Thank you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairperson, I know all of us want to take advantage of new devices and bring them to the House. We have some of these things in our offices and we have been exposed to them. However, we should be mindful of the fact that these things most of the time distract. If I am sitting here and decide to go to Twitter, Facebook, Yahoo! Messenger and all others, that is not research and it is not helpful at all! 

The issue here is that most of the Order Papers are brought when we are out for lunch. So, if we want to do research in preparation for debate, we must focus on the time when Order Papers are issued to us. That way, we can do research in our offices, use office assistants and go online so that by the time we come here, we are prepared to focus on issues to be discussed. I do not see anyone here coming to do instant research. What time do you have to diagnose the problem and to read a whole essay before reaching a conclusion?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to give hon. Achia some information. There was a time I was speaking here – in fact, I was making my statement as shadow minister for information – and I made reference to the Ghanaian Constitution. One frontbench member of the ruling party went online using his iPad to download the Ghanaian Constitution and wrote a note to me about it. He had asked me for the article I was referring to and after checking, he confirmed that what I was saying was right. That means he was doing research with his iPad inside this House. (Applause)

MR ACHIA: Mr Chairperson, I am receiving further information from people who are carrying illegal electronic devices in this House; that is conflict of interest. Anyway, I will take the information. (Laughter)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I want to give hon. Achia is that the purpose of those devices is to facilitate knowledge participation in the Chambers and increase efficiency and output by Parliament. You can do research from your offices and libraries but this facility gives you real time on-hand access to virtual materials that are not available in the House or nearby at the time. 

As hon. Wafula pointed out about the Ghanaian Constitution reference, it was very easy with the touch of a finger to get to the Constitution of Ghana and confirm what the member was referring to. One would avoid carrying a lot of material to the House like the Constitution, the Rules of Procedure and other reference materials by simply having them on your hand-held device. 

The information I want to give is that the disruption you are talking about - impairing decorum - can be done by many other things other than the electronic devices. It can be done by the way we dress, the way we fidget and sit or talk, the way we heckle, the way we hold these materials, even the papers that we handle or even pictures or photographs. So, the disruptions may not necessarily be from the devices because we can have them by other means. 

What is important, Mr Chairman, as suggested by my colleague here, is three things: One, it should be hand-held, meaning that it is portable and it cannot therefore cause any other problems in terms of space. Two, that it does not impair decorum because our conduct and behaviour in the House matters a lot - how we behave and how we use these gadgets. Finally, it should be silent. The issue of electronic devices is – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Silence? Did you take this into consideration?

MR MULONGO: Yes, even there is limited noise that we can talk about. So the efficiency with which the electronics differ from machines or other mechanised gadgets is if they are silent and therefore they do not cause disruption, or the noise that they generate is so limited. So, I just wanted to give you that information so that we can proceed on the same page. Thank you.

MR ACHIA: Mr Chairperson, I appreciate the contributions of my colleagues but the problem is somewhere else. The problem is that what we come to debate here does not come in time for members to give themselves time to research and to find out the facts. 

Now, relying on these electronic things, of all things - not all content found on these electronic devices is true. You may be distracted with, “I got this from this Yahoo! or I got this from Facebook or Twitter.” Maybe your colleague or your voters in the village are sending you information on Facebook and not all of it is true. You need to establish the source of that information and be confident that it can stand the test of time before this House. You should also be able to lay it - will you lay your device on the Table before us so that we can validate the facts? (Laughter) This kind of instant research will not stand our procedure.

What we need to address in our rules is the fact that the Order Paper must come in good time to allow members enough time to go and find the information that they need to come and present before the House. We are tired of receiving our Order Paper on the way to lunch or after lunch or when we are coming in here every time. Why doesn’t it come, according to our rules, one or two weeks in advance so that we cure the problem? The problem is not that we do not have the facts; the problem is that we are not availed the opportunity to be able to do enough research so that when we come here, we are able to talk with confidence and with full information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we need to bring this to a stop. A proposal has been made by the committee that a new sub-rule be introduced. Another proposal has been made by hon. Abdu Katuntu that in (g) if you took out “electronic device” from that list of excluded items you would have gone a long way to deal with the concerns of the committee that it raises in its amendment in (i). 

I am not ruling but I am guiding so that we can move forward. So the effect is that the chairman has to advise us on whether hon. Katuntu’s proposal will take care of the concerns raised by the committee, and also the second leg of his proposal that we see how it is implemented. 

What we are concerned about is abuse of what has been agreed upon. That act will come to personal conduct of a Member of Parliament because if instead of coming with an iPad to help you do research you decide to start doing Twitter or Facebook and things like that, that goes to your own reputation as a Member of Parliament. We should be above some of these things really, especially if you are in the House.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairperson, I concede that if we take out “electronic device” and “mobile telephones” we would take care of the concerns of the committee. Mobile telephones are also devices that we use for research, so they should be permitted in the House. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In fact, that has been one of the most violated rules. People even answer their calls but now we have to be more specific. 

MR OBOTH: As the chair of the committee on rules is conceding, I wanted to seek clarification from him whether when we say no bringing into the House cameras, tape recorders and transistor radios, we are also aware that these iPads can act as transistor radios, cameras and video cameras. Are we admitting the challenge of catching up with the technological advancement? Maybe not. 

I think the challenge is the abuse because there is nothing electronic these days which cannot do all the above which we are trying to prohibit, including what hon. Bright Rwamirama said. Can we be a little bit cautious even as we concede that even an iPad - of course, I am resisting the temptation to say iPod - can also be a camera, actually even a video camera. You can relay proceedings of this House when you have an iPad. I am one of those who would really love to have them here officially but we should be cautious even as we allow them in the rules. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I still think what would be prohibited is that function of that device. If it can also be like a transistor radio, that function is prohibited by these rules, so you cannot use that function of a transistor radio on the iPad. That would be the regulation. You cannot use that function of a camera as a video camera in the House. If you are caught, you have violated the rules. You cannot use that same device as a recorder. That function would be what is regulated. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairperson, following what hon. Oboth has said, one of the rules all of us have really violated is the rule on mobile phones. If you want us to prescribe the devices to bring here, we cannot prescribe them very well. In fact, even for laptops, there are some big laptops. I will come with it and say this is a laptop and yet it can stretch beyond other people’s seats. So, I would propose that yes we have those laptops, but we need to look clearly at what real device we need to put here and what function it should perform when it is here. I can come with my iPad - even iPod by the way, we can read news and do anything on some of them. 

So I would propose that first we look at the size. We should prescribe the size of the item we want to bring; and two, what are those ones? I would propose that maybe we need to stand over this and we allow the committee to go and look further at these devices and then they come back here and tell us, “For this one we decided this and this is the type we only prescribed.” Otherwise failure to do that, we shall have a problem. I can even carry my desktop here and say it is my laptop. Those are the problems we can have. Mr Chairman, I think we need to sit and think about this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: By the time you begin putting a desktop on your laps - (Laughter) Honourable members, a proposal has been made that we stand over this particular rule. I think let us finish it. Chairman, conclude this matter and we move forward.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose that we delete the words, “Mobile telephone or other electronic device” from sub rule (g) and immediately after (g), insert (h) that shall read as follows: “Notwithstanding the provisions of sub rule (g), no member shall use any electronic device in a disruptive manner”. This is to take care of the concerns of the members -(Interruption)

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before I move an amendment, I would like to inform members. If you look at (g), it says, “No member shall bring into the House any camera, arms, weapon, tape recorder…” What was on the mind of the people who made this rule? (Applause)

My earlier amendment was that the other gadgets to be allowed should pass the security test. It is against the background that some of these gadgets we have can actually be weapons. That is how Savimbi was captured. Somebody can donate an iPad to me, donate another one to him differently but whose devices or switches are controlled elsewhere. With science today, they can know where you are sitting together. If you are wanted and all of them are together, they can do anything. I would like to ask the Chairman, therefore, that the introduction of those gadgets should pass the security test of Sergeant-at-Arms or the institution of Parliament.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: That is conceded, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is conceded. (Members rose_) I am not allowing any new debate on this issue, please.

The proposition is that (g) be amended in the terms proposed - deletion of mobile phones and electronic devices - and a new sub rule be included as (i), that the equipment they bring should not disrupt proceedings. The extended amendment is that they should pass the security test-(Ms Franca Akello rose_)-Let me summarise, please. I am thinking while talking. Let me first summarise what I have captured then you can ask for clarification. The second leg is passing the security test from the Sergeant-at-Arms. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. My only fear with the amendment of the chairman is the word “disruptive”. I can hold an iPad here and I may take a picture of the proceedings of this House without disrupting anybody but it will be offensive. Really, I do not know whether that will have to stand. That is the point of clarification; may you expand a little more on that.

MR SIMON PETER ALEPER: Mr Chairman, just on the same rule. We were proceeding very well but I rise on a point of procedure that whereas we do appreciate that the members would like to use these gadgets in the House, would it not be procedurally right to subject ourselves to what hon. Rwamirama has just submitted -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, that is not a procedural point. You are seeking to amend what the honourable member has proposed.

MR SIMON PETER ALEPER: I am not amending, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you rose on a point of procedure. What is the procedural point you rose on?

MR SIMON PETER ALEPER: The point of procedure I am making here on rule (g) is, instead of adding that any other electronic device, I would put -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the point you had stood to raise is, are we procedurally correct in doing business this way? That is my understanding of a point of procedure. If you are proposing an amendment, rise on a point of amendment and make the amendment. These are the points we are making; do not rise on a particular point and divert from it. If you are rising on a point of procedure, raise the procedural point you want to raise so that the House is orderly, please.

MR BAKA MUGABI: Mr Chairman, the amendment by hon. Rwamirama talks of passing a security test. What does it entail? Does it mean going through - The other metal detector is controlled by the Sergeant-at-Arms; does it mean going through that metal detector and that security scanner and therefore, you enter the Chambers? Will you have gone through the security test or we must prescribe the manner through which security must check those devices and even a letter be given to you to confirm? Nowadays we have to get a letter to bring our visitors to the gallery. I think we need to prescribe the manner through which a security test is handled.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Chairman, those will be details which will be determined by the institution in charge of security - the way they will conduct the search, the testing and what have you - rather than putting it in rules. I think that does not work.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the House that in some places, even these iPads we are using have to be security stamped to confirm that actually they have passed tests. We are lucky we have not had these incidents - (Interjections)- Since the Chairman knows, once we say they have passed the security test of the Sergeant-at-Arms, Sergeant-at-Arms will find mechanisms of how to deal with it rather than making a very lengthy rule that is even too much to apprehend.

MS KATAIKE: Thank you, Chairperson. My contribution towards interacting the hon. minister’s fear and the second one about the size of the gadgets, I would propose -(Laughter)- That one, whichever way you want to name them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, for purposes of the Hansard, you have to be very clear about what you are saying.

MS NDOBOLI: The electronic gadgets. I propose that the House provides us standard equipment which will be used and left here. That saves us the hustle of screening. We are too many - we are over 300 - and I am sure each one of us may want to carry. If the House can provide the standard devices, it would save us of trouble.

Secondly, we have security challenges. We cannot allow an empty check where the motives of people carrying whatever devices we may not be able to ascertain. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we have taken more than 45 minutes on this item. I know it is important that we resolve it, but we are likely to take the next 45 minutes or so on the same issue. Wouldn’t it be proper for us to go to the issue raised earlier by an honourable member that we stand over this issue - (Interjections) - and let the committee look at it again? We said we should not stand over it and we have taken another 30 minutes? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I can imagine the fat imaginations of my friend, hon. Ruhunda. However, Mr Chairman, I think this is not a very big issue that necessitates standing over because we have attended conferences of more than 5,000 where people go in with the gadgets and they are tested within 30 minutes. Technology is at hand. We have the technology, we have everything and at the same time, we are not going to list that you come with this or that. Hon. Wafula Oguttu was referring to me and I was challenging him here using a phone, downloading everything. So, we need these gadgets but not the other ones. We need these electronic gadgets. 

At the same time, let us not prolong the debate as if we are debating something which is from the universe or something very complicated whereas this has been happening. We have been having conferences, gadgets have been tested within 30 minutes and we continue. Most of these parliaments use laptops now. You go to Rwanda, you will find that every Member of Parliament is compelled to have a laptop even during the debate for research, communication, etc. I do not see the reason we should stand over this rule.

Can I, therefore, propose that what hon. Rwamirama has amended be put to question. I am moving a motion. Mr Chairman, I am moving a motion that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is that the question on this matter be put. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to the amendment in the terms proposed by the chair of the committee as amended by hon. Rwamirama to the effect that we amend sub-rule (g) by deleting “mobile telephone or other electronic device”. Also, that we insert a new sub-rule (i), “Notwithstanding paragraph (g), a member may bring in things that cannot disrupt the proceedings of the House and also pass the security test of Parliament.” Is that the position now? I now put the question to the motion that the rule be amended to the effect proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 70, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 73

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to redraft the rule by sub-dividing the rule into two sub-rules (1) and (2) as follows:

“(1)	The Speaker or the Chairperson of a committee shall be responsible for the observance of the rules or order in the House or committee.

(2) 	The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”

Mr Chairman, this is not a departure from the rule as it is now. It is only that we are breaking it down into two for one reason. The first leg of this rule provides for who is responsible for order in the House or in the committee. The second sub-rule provides for how you challenge the decision of that person. We thought if we put them separately, it would make the drafting better, introduce clarity and it is easier to read and understand. I beg to move.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think there was just a slight mistake, chairperson of the committee. In sub-rule (1) you are referring to the Speaker or chairperson of the committee and then in sub-rule (2), the review is only by the House. Does that mean that if there is a challenge of a chairperson of the committee in a committee meeting, you have to come to the House to review? No. “The decision of the Speaker or chairperson upon any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House or committee...” The word “committee” is missing in sub-rule (2) or as the case may be. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you have a substantive motion in the committee?

MR KATUNTU: Actually, you can move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In the committee?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, you can move it in the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, that is no harm really.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, in sub-rule (2) where they refer to the decision of the Speaker or Chairperson, I think appeal and review are questions of statute. I was of the opinion that the drafting could be, “The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson upon any point shall only be challenged by a substantive motion made after notice”. So we delete “appeal” and “reviewed” because they are separate laws. 

Mr Chairperson, you know that handles issues of appeal and review. Actually, appeal is a right created by statute and no amount of refusing it here would amend those statutes that created them. 

MR RUHINDI: I do not have any quarrel with the submission of the learned counsel. I think what we are looking at needs to be understood from the context of its heading. This is part thirteen and it is on order in the House. 

When we are talking about the decision of the Speaker or Chairperson, my understanding is that it is when we have a presiding Speaker in the chair or when we have a presiding chair in the committee of the whole House. So, I do not think there is any contradiction. We are not referring to other committees of the House. 

MR KATUNTU: I would not have any problem with that, but we just need to make it clear that the chairperson we are talking about is the chairperson of the committee of the whole House and that the committee we are talking about is the whole House. Reading this rule as it is, you could mistake it to refer to Parliamentary committees. Otherwise, if it is the committee of the whole House, then I have no objection.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the proposal is to redraft it into two sub-rules; sub-rule (1) is talking about the responsibility of the Speaker or the chairperson of a committee and sub-rule (2) is talking about the decision of the Speaker. In light of that, I would like to move an amendment to the heading of that rule and put it as “Duty and decision of the Speaker or Chairperson”. This is in order to capture both the responsibility and the decision making process. 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, I seek guidance from the chair on whether we are going to amend all, including the interpretation section, of these rules? Taking the line that the learned Attorney-General is giving, which I have no problem with, it is not clear because “chairperson” under the interpretation means a person presiding over a committee. When you look at “committee”, it is defined as committee of the whole House, sessional committee, standing committee, a select committee or any other committee of Parliament. Further, they define what the committee of the whole House is. 

Taking the interpretation given by the learned Attorney-General, are we not limiting the scope of the application of these rules? If you are saying the Speaker or Chairperson, I have no problem but would it not affect – (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you for giving way, honourable Colleague – (Interjections) – Can I be protected from hon. Katuntu?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are protected; proceed.

MR BYABAGAMBI: The information is that, when you read the heading, which is part 13, I think we are talking about the proceedings here in the House. We are not going outside this House to other committees. That is why I agree with the learned hon. Katuntu that we should make it clear by saying, “the Committee of the whole House”.

MR OBOTH: Well, I thought the rules we are amending apply not only to this sitting but also to the committees of Parliament. That is where I need the guidance. I would be happy to receive guidance on that from the chair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, when you look at part 27, which relates to operation of committees generally, they talk about applications and rules to apply generally - removal of chairperson, quorum of committees, decisions by the committee and sub committees, etc. I think the specific regulations guiding committees - standing committees, sessional committees and select committees - are provided for under a different part of these rules. 

This particular part of the rules talks about order in the House. There the application should mean chair of the committee of the whole House. There is a decision made in the rules, if you look at part 27, and it makes provision for specific rules in relation to committees. If it is lacking, then we can introduce it there when we come to that part. 

MR KATUNTU: I agree that part 13 is talking about order in the House. However, when you look at rule 74, the head note talks about order in the House and committees. I think that creates confusion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is some confusion there, but if the part is about order in the House, then it cannot be in committees. You might have to look at it again. “Committees” here may be redundant especially if part 13 is talking about order in the House. You cannot start regulating committees in that part other than the committee of the whole House.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, can we reconsider this matter at the committee level and report at a much later date? I propose that we stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What would be the effect if we deleted, “and Committees”, so that this relates to only order in the House? The committees will come in on part 27. 

So, let us come back to where we were, part 73. Do we take the proposal of redrafting by the committee in rule 73? I put the question that rule 73 as amended do stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 73, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 74

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete the words “and committees” in the head note of rule 74.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, that is clear. We have discussed that. I put the question that rule 74 be amended by deleting the words “and committees” appearing in the head note.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 74, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 79

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we withdraw the proposed amendments to rule 79. 

Rule 80

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we withdraw the proposed amendments to rule 80. It just does not add any value.

MR RUHINDI: With your indulgence, Mr Chairman, I want clarification on whether that was really the intention and that is what we wanted in rule 79(3) - “For avoidance of doubt, the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, a Chairperson or DEPUTY CHAIRMAN of a committee while not presiding shall retain his or her right to debate and vote.” I am imagining a situation where when the Deputy Speaker is not chairing, he comes in the House, sits there, debates, votes on a matter and the following day he is in the chair. I want to really pick your minds on that, colleagues.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, why don’t you propose? We pronounced ourselves and rejected it. So, that would be consequential. 

MR RUHINDI: My proposal is that we delete this provision because we have already provided in rule 69 that – (Interjections) - Did we delete?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. We did not accept the other one of the Speaker showing up to debate or something like that. 

MR RUHINDI: Can I propose, Mr Chairman, that we stand over this and I consult?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is easy; let us delete.

MR RUHINDI: So, I propose that we delete. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 3 of rule 79 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 79, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, are you proposing something under item 38? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we withdraw the proposed amendment No. 38 in respect to the procedure for the removal of the Vice President. The Attorney-General indicated to the House – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Does that apply to the Prime Minister?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: As well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we go to rule 94?

Rule 94

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft sub-rule (9) of rule 94 to read as follows: “A member of the Commission, other than the Speaker or the Leader of Government Business or the Leader of the Opposition, may be removed from office by Parliament for - 
(a) 	incompetence; 
(b) 	misconduct; 
(c) 	insanity; or 
(d) 	inability to perform the functions of his or her office arising from infirmity of body or mind.” 

The justification is that the Speaker, the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition occupy these offices by virtue of their offices and the various laws that create them also provide for how they can cease to hold those offices. The amendment provides for how other members of the Commission may be removed from office. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is clear.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Article 107 of the Constitution provides for the removal of the President, who happens also to be the highest placed person of the land, in this case the Republic of Uganda, and the fountain of honour. When we come to what the chair of the legal committee has just submitted on the vice presidency, I would like him to tell me why he has withdrawn it. 

Under Article 108 on the Vice President, it says that there shall be a Vice President of Uganda and the President shall, with the approval of Parliament have a Vice President. Therefore, this Parliament has a say and the same of course applies to the Prime Minister. I want him to convince me as to why he had decided to withdraw it without our input. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, this matter came up for debate when we were debating the report of the committee on rules. We made a presentation that we intended to move this amendment to allow this House have a say in the removal of the Prime Minister and the Vice President. It was the view of the committee that this House must actually have a say in the tenure of Office of the Vice President and the Prime Minister. That was the view of the committee. However, the learned Attorney-General made presentations to this House that Government is considering constitutional amendments to provide for this particular subject and we took the view that that would still cure this evil. If it is placed in the Constitution, it is even much better. It is the supreme law of the land and we shall have more solid ground. So, we saw no reason to contest that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Could the honourable member that raised the constitutional point cite for us in the Constitution because we have a clear provision on how a President can be removed. Could you cite for us where it is stated on how the Vice President should be removed?

MS KABOIJANA: Mr Chairman, the law is silent on that, but I sought clarification because the Vice President is appointed with the approval of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, even judges are appointed with the approval of Parliament but there are clear procedures for removing judges. Now that you say it is silent in the Constitution, do we make it talk in our rules? 

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Chairman, thank you. Whereas our Constitution is silent on the removal of the Vice President and the Prime Minister and whereas under Article 108 the vice presidency can only become vacant when the appointment is revoked by the President and when he or she dies, - God forbid - there is the Office of the Vice President and the Vice President himself which are approved by Parliament. Because we have powers to approve, we also have powers to disapprove. We may not have powers to remove the judges, but we can prescribe their conduct because they are part of us. 

Secondly, you will agree with me that even the provision for censure for a Prime Minister is not there but we have provisions in our Rules of Procedure. So, what is wrong with us having provisions in our Rules of Procedure and when the Constitution gets amended to the effect, it takes over?

Mr Chairman, I wish you to guide me; assuming the Attorney-General is genuine on Government’s plans to table constitutional amendments, shall we again go back to amend our rules on how we shall remove them?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I never made any assurance here that I will bring constitutional amendments in respect of the dropped provisions in these amendments. I only said that in principle, some of them were worth following when we are considering amendments to the Constitution. 

Two, we all agreed during the debate, including the shadow Attorney-General, that for most of these proposals, for instance, the Panel of Speakers, the deputy Leader of the Opposition, removal of the Vice President and Prime Minister, we cannot certainly fill lacunas in the Constitution using the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We were actually in unison with each other.

With this issue on how Parliament relates with the Executive, maybe the best would be to come here, at an appropriate time, and present a statement arising out of the recent case in the Constitutional Court, the popular Salverino case. It highlights how Parliament should relate with the Executive. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think we had moved away from this. Can we make progress? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am just concerned with the drafting because it reads thus: “A member of the Commission, other than the Speaker, Leader of Government Business and Leader of Opposition, may be removed from office.” I thought that we could probably talk of a backbench commissioner because this one can easily be misconstrued – (Interjections) – I do not see the value of having those underlined – Speaker, Leader of Government Business. Let us just state, “a backbench commissioner may be removed from office.” That will help us to avoid that kind of phrasing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the term “backbench commissioner” described somewhere in the laws?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, in an unlikely event that it is not defined, then I would like to propose that the definition section takes charge of defining it, just in case it is not provided for in the Administration of Parliament Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We need to be clear on this term. Is it used anywhere in the law? If it is not used anywhere, then it would not be proper to import it here.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, it is defined under rule 10 at page 23 where the rule talks about Parliamentary Commissioners and four backbench members.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is Section (2) of the Administration of Parliament (Amendment) Act, which provides for the composition of the Commission. It says thus: “The Commission shall be composed of the Speaker, Leader of Government Business or his or her nominee, Leader of Opposition or his/her nominee, the Minister responsible for Finance and four Members of Parliament one of whom shall…” 

I think we can use the same – a member of the commission - other than the Speaker, Leader of Government Business, Leader of Opposition or the Minister responsible for Finance. Even in this one, that minister is missing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal by hon. Odonga Otto is that we should have redrafted it to talk about backbench commissioners. However, that term does not seem to be captured in the Act; it is captured in the Rules of Procedure. So, it might be clearer in the sense to keep it this way. Hon. Katuntu is proposing that we also include the Minister responsible for Finance with hon. Odonga Otto conceding to that. In the circumstances, can I now put the question to the amendment to rule 94 as stated?

(Question put and agreed to)

Rule 94, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 96

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, the committee proposes that we insert a new sub rule (4) to read as follows, and the consequential renumbering of the provisions: “The decision of the Speaker in sub rule (3) shall be in writing.”

The justification is that the decision of the Speaker for leave of absence for a member should be in writing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that this be inserted as paragraph (4). Is that proper? 

MS KABAALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I do not know whether this rule also applies to members who may be away on personal business. If it is going to apply to committees that go abroad and members of the Pan African Parliament, it will be too much to have everyone writing to the Speaker; for example, if a gender committee is going to Sudan, it must write! Sincerely, that will be too much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a requirement of the rule. You have to get express permission from the Speaker to be out of this House. If you have not been doing it, that was breach of the law. What the committee is proposing is that the response of the Speaker in granting that permission should be in writing. 

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am seeking your guidance; in a situation where I write to the Speaker and the Speaker does not reply and I go away, what happens? I want your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you write asking for permission, the response will be there. Whether the Speaker is there or not, that response will be there. If it is in writing, it will be responded to in writing. We have been doing that every single day. 

MS ANITE: Thank you. I just want to seek clarification on this particular matter. Supposing a member is upcountry, say in the constituency, and calls the Speaker or sends a text message, how do you think the Speaker should handle such a situation?

MR LOKII: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification on the matter of members or committees going out. Do members have to write as individuals to ask for permission or the chair of the committee gets the permission?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Not necessarily. If you are going as a committee, the chairperson of the committee writes listing the people who are going. 

The amendment is, the decision of the Speaker in sub rule (3) – sub rule (3) talks about granting leave – should be in writing.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am in a dilemma. In the case of a Member of Parliament like me who is also a minister and I am directed by the President that I should be in Nairobi within five hours – like I was in Arusha recently and I was directed to be in Arusha within 12 hours - do I need to wait for the permission in writing or I notify the Speaker and then I travel?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The rule is saying it will be in writing. Whether you receive the reply is not important, but the request should be in writing so that there is record of that. So, you might go and come back and find your authority waiting for you in your office. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I was sharing my concern with hon. Byabagambi. My concern is, a minister is a member of this House; he is a Member of Parliament. You are saying -(interjections)– I am not talking about going outside the country. Of course, normally when you are going outside the country, you notify the Speaker. However, when I am within the country doing ministerial work and have missed some sittings, do I need to write to you?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Bakabulindi, yes. If you have not been doing it - (Laughter) There is a rule that ministers should attend sittings of the House. If you do not attend, you must show reason as to why you are not attending. That reason must be on record so that you can be protected by the House. 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much. Since we have agreed on the technology, I seek your indulgence that we also use e-mail, so that when I am in Fort Portal, I can send an e-mail to the Speaker. Is that allowed?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it in writing?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Did I hear the honourable from Fort Portal Municipality saying, “Can I write an e-mail in case I am in Fort Portal?” But who allows you to go to Fort Portal first before you write an e-mail to the Speaker. (Laughter) You must have first sought the permission of the Speaker to go to Fort Portal. 

Secondly, to allay the fears of hon. Anite on the issue of the Office of the Speaker and in the event that he or she is not in office, it has always happened to me. Both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker might not be there but the office is there. So, whenever you write there, you will always get a response. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is very true.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think we go back again to the Constitution. This applies to all of us as Members of Parliament irrespective of the positions we hold, whether you are a minister of state for works or you are an ordinary Member of Parliament for Bugweri County. Article 83(1)(d) says: 
“(1) A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament — 
(d) if that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker …”

So, once you continue absenting yourselves, whether you are on ministerial duty, and you are caught up by 15 sittings, you will automatically vacate your seat. 

The point here is, the Speaker should monitor where all his members are at any one time. Actually, it is in your interest because should I eventually become naughty, I can only get that book which we sign and I say you should have vacated this seat under Article 83, and I am sure the Speaker will not give you retrospective permission when you are in trouble. You need to guard yourselves against some naughty people because that is the law. The point of leave of absence – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I can assure you that this rule of people who absent themselves from Parliament and the requirement that members write to the Speaker is very important. There are some Members of Parliament, even in the Opposition, from Mityana whom I have never seen. We do not know whether they are Members of this Parliament - (Interjections) - Even those on this side. 

We have some Members of Parliament who do not appear in this House but I am told they are Members of Parliament. (Interjections) I can even mention a name now, Mr Chairman. Let me give an example. I have never seen hon. Kaddumukasa and I do not know how he looks like. We need this thing strengthened, Mr Chairman. People should write to you. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Chairman and honourable members, we are the people passing these rules. We should not be excited and then tomorrow we regret. I am not saying that members should not attend, but I am looking at the drafting of the rule. Hon. Katuntu quoted a constitutional provision where they are talking about 15 consecutive days and yet here it is not numbered. So, I would like honourable members to get this clearly.  The rule is saying, “leave of absence may be given by the Speaker” and some people are saying they intend to use their e-mails to communicate and yet it is not saying that you should notify. 

She gave a very good example in a situation where the Speaker and her deputy are not in the office. You are not supposed to set your foot on a mission until the Speaker or Deputy Speaker has responded; that is what the rule means. It is not saying that you notify the Speaker, it is saying she is the one to respond and give you permission to go. I do not want you to start saying you did not know what rule you passed. So, we have to be careful about that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, let us close this. We are looking at the tail end of this procedure. I think the drafting should have made this No.5 and not No. 4 because here it says, “Application for leave of absence shall be in writing unless the Speaker in exceptional circumstances otherwise permits.” However, sub rule (4) says, “In exceptional cases, the Whip of a political organisation or a political party may inform the Speaker of a Member’s absence and the circumstances leading to such absence.” 

Yesterday, for instance, I received a note from a party whip in this House about a member who was going to be absent because he was attending to his father who is in hospital. Those are part of the exceptional circumstances we are talking about, and in that case you grant permission. We are not casting this thing in stone where there are no discretions and so on. They are saying that the response in order for the member who has sought leave to be protected should be in writing. That is all that the provision is saying.  The rest of the rule is not under review. 

MR KYAMADIDI: Mr Chairman, you see, we are making rules that are going to govern us; they are not necessarily our rules but they are going to stand the test of time. The other day hon. Grace Ibingira made the Public Detention Order of 1967 and the next day the same rule was used against him - (Interjections) - No, what I am saying is that you should not enact a rule because you want to punish someone. You should enact a rule that will stand the test of time.
 
Mr Chairman, in this case, I feel we should amend and say it can only be formal, where the word “formal” may mean even the Speaker sending you a message or you sending an e-mail. If I am in the village – for instance my mother was sick - and there is no way I can come here to request for a leave of absence in writing and I have only communicated by e-mail –(Interjection)-  We may not be in good terms with my Whip, as usual - (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I have just read to you sub-rule (3) - “Application for leave of absence shall be in writing unless the Speaker, in exceptional circumstances, otherwise permits.” So, you are even permitted to call the Speaker. What the proposal is now extending is that the response of the Speaker should be on record. That is what it is saying. 

Honourable members, I  put the question that rule 96 as proposed be amended by including a new sub-rule (5) that the decision of the Speaker in sub-rule (3) shall be in writing. 

THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Edward Ssekandi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to thank you for the work you have so far done with our rules. I am sorry I have not been in time due to some other engagements, but I have followed part of the debate. If you would permit me, I would like to remind members that when you are considering these rules under the powers given to you, it is important to internalise the provisions of Article 94 of the Constitution because the rules cannot give you the mandate which the Constitution does not give you. However, I followed and appreciated that that was considered. 

In respect of this particular rule, which the House is following, I think members should be comforted by reading the entire rule 96. If, for instance, you are unable to write so as to get the permission of the Speaker, there is provision (4): “In exceptional cases, the Whip of a political organisation or a political party may inform the Speaker of a Member’s absence and the circumstances leading to such absence.” I thank you very much. (Applause)
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 97

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft sub-rule (3) as follows: “If after a warning under sub-rule (2), the Member continues to be absent from the meetings of the committee, the Speaker shall suspend the Member from the committee.” The justification is to give the Speaker the authority to suspend a member from a committee.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, would you like to explain this particular one before members contribute? Why would you need the authority of the Speaker to suspend a member sitting in a committee meeting in Room 139, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: If you read the provisions of sub-rule (2), it says: “The Chairperson of a committee shall report to the Speaker any Member who misses fifteen consecutive meetings of the committee without permission, and the Speaker shall give a written warning...” After the written warning, what happens? This is what we are now addressing. After the written warning, that Member should be suspended and since sub-rule 2 requires that the chairperson only reports to the Speaker. I think it is only the jurisdiction of the Speaker to take that action.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is that clear now? Can I put the question to it?

MR AKENA: Mr Chairman, I am wondering why the chair of the committee is using a different standard to absence from the House because the circumstances are - in Rule 96 especially, if you read sub-section 6, where, if a Member is consistently absent from the House without permission, the Member first receives a warning, and where a Member persists, he is then referred to the Committee of Rules, Privileges and Discipline. There is a whole procedure of how to handle a Member, but when it comes to committee, I am wondering why the chair has left out the procedures, which are present in Rule 96 and gone straight for suspension? I hope to get some clarification from the chairman.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Chairman. On the same note, Rule 96 gives the Whip the authority to inform the Speaker of the absence of the Member, but when you come to Rule79(7), we do not see the Whip coming in; it is direct from the committee chairperson to the Speaker. So, I need some clarification on that. Why are we leaving out the Whips?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, Rule 97 sub-rule 1 reads, “The provisions of Rule 96 shall, with the necessary modifications, apply to the meetings of the Committee of Parliament.” That also means if a Member is absent from the sittings of the committee, a Whip may notify the chair of the committee of the circumstances under which that Member is absent.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I think Rule 96 is giving the Chairman powers to grant leave to a Member not to be in the committee. Instead of the Speaker, it is the Chairman. Having said that, I do not think it is right for the chairperson not to have powers to discipline its members, otherwise why should you give him powers to give permission and not give him powers to discipline if a member is absent?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am not talking because I am a chairman of a committee, but I think business at committee level is fairly less formal compared to parliamentary proceedings to the extent that you must really be very notorious that you miss 15 parliamentary sittings and you do not even have the courtesy of mending fences with the chairperson of that committee. This is because, by the time the chairperson of a committee submits your name to the Speaker, it means all the remedies have been exhausted.

So, I think let us not fear or try to insulate ourselves. We should just be disciplined because there are some parliaments where they pay you per sitting. If you do not attend, you get zero. So, the fact that we have even left that dangerous direction and we are here, what remains is only the discipline required. So, Members should not talk out of fear as if they have intentions of absconding.

In any case, even if you abscond for 15 days and you go and make good of your absence in the Speaker’s office, these are human beings like us, your situation cannot be taken so badly. However, if Members are insisting, then people like hon. Saleh Kamba should not be Members of Parliament because you just mentioned some Members this side. Also, for the other side, the list is endless.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal from the committee has been sufficiently explained, that in the absence of a sanction under Rule 97, this particular insertion they are proposing, takes care of that. Is there any problem with this proposal from the committee? I put the question that the proposed amendment by the committee be adopted by this House to amend Rule 97.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 97, as amended, agreed to.)

Rule 101

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, we propose to delete the words “and accompanying matters” from the head note of Rule 101. The justification is that accompanying matters like policy matters are never gazetted with the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal is that we make the title of Rule 101 clearer by stopping at ‘Bills to be published in the Gazette’ full stop; instead of putting accompanying measures, which do not actually show up in the publication of the Bills. I think that is sufficiently clear. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 101, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODOI-OYWELELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to introduce a new rule on subsidiary legislation to read as follows, “All statutory instruments laid on Table shall be accompanied by an explanatory note stating the purpose or object of the subsidiary legislation.” The justification is to enable Parliament understand the intent and purpose of subsidiary legislation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I thought all subsidiary legislation starts by citing the law under which they are - This instrument is made under Section – of the Administration of Parliament Act or something like that. So, what would you need beyond that? Would it be necessary because it states the section from where the authority is drawn?

MR ODOI-OYWELELOWO: Mr Chairman, I am advised that this is redundant, I will withdraw it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you.

Rule 102

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend sub-rule 1 of 102 as follows:

1.	Every Bill introduced in Parliament except a Private Member’s Bill shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after its coming into effect.

2.	The certificate shall set out: 
(a)	The specific outputs and outcomes of the Bill.
(b)	How those outputs and outcomes fit within the overall policies and programmes of Government.
(c)	The costs involved and their impact on the budget.
(d)	The proposed or existing method of financing the cost related to the Bill and its feasibility.

3.	The certificate of financial implications shall be signed by the minister responsible for finance.

4.	The certificate of financial implications shall be issued within a period of two weeks upon application.

The justification is that Article 94(4)(b) gives a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member’s Bill. The introduction of the certificate of financial implications in respect of Private Members’ Bills, curtails this right. It is also an imposition not envisaged and neither contained in this article.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi would, at every one moment in the middle of any debate, get up and make reference to Article 93 which says, “Parliament shall not…” In other words what I am raising concerns the Private Member’s Bill. I know we should protect ourselves against bringing a Bill and when you go to the Ministry of Finance, no one gives you that certificate because they want to frustrate you. However, how do we relate that to Article 93? 

Suppose the Bill may have a direct financial implication or a charge on the Consolidate Fund, what is the Attorney-General’s advice on the provisions of Article 93, which talk about imposing a charge or a tax on the Consolidated Fund vis-à-vis the right of a Member to bring a Private Member’s Bill? Especially if he has to keep on knocking at the door of the finance minister just because the government or the Executive is probably not interested in the Bill; how do we strike that balance?

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, first of all, to remind ourselves that Article 94 of the Constitution gives Parliament the right to move a Private Member’s Bill. The requirement of a certificate of financial implications on all Bills, including Private Members’ Bills, is provided for under Section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001. 

The provision is grounded on what you are citing – Article 93 of the Constitution – which prohibits private Members from moving motions or Bills which have financial implications. The rules cannot be used to amend an Act of Parliament or Constitution; it would require an amendment to the Constitution and the Budget Act to dispense with the requirement of a certificate of financial implications for any Member to move a Private Member’s Bill. Suffice it to say that when you look at this provision carefully, it says, “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the government-…” 

By the way, this calls upon us to work together. I do not know how many times Government has worked with private Members to encourage them to bring Private Members’ Bills here. Ask the Chairperson and he will tell you that during the Seventh Parliament, he brought here the Copyright Bill and he worked closely with the then Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs in bringing that Bill. There was also a Bill introduced by the late hon. Okullo-Epak on the abolition of Graduated Tax and so forth. We can cooperate and encourage each other. 

But the principle is that how do you, as a private Member, introduce a Bill, which has financial implications without consultation with the body that is in charge of ensuring the generation and disbursement of revenue. How do you mobilise your own resources to support your Bill? It would even be ridiculous, to say the least. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you, the Attorney-General. But would you like to guide us; do you have objections? Should this amendment be disregarded completely or just modified?

MR RUHINDI: The crux of the matter in this provision – if you see the justification – the chairperson is saying that “Article 94(4)(b) gives a Member of Parliament the right to move a Private Member’s Bill. The introduction of the certificate of financial implications in respect of Private Members’ Bills, curtails this right.” That is what they are trying to capture. Otherwise, most of it is in the Budget Act – what a certificate of financial implications should entail. In other words, it should just be dropped. That is my suggestion.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I must say I am persuaded by the arguments of the Attorney-General and I will withdraw it.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move an amendment, to insert a new section 103 to provide for a certificate of gender equity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, did you consult with the committee? Committee chairperson, did your committee consider this matter?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, UWOPA made representations to the committee in respect to a certificate of gender equity to accompany all Government annual budgets, ministerial policy statements and Government Bills. The committee considered this matter and we had no objection. Unfortunately, it was not captured in our report, which was an oversight on our part. We made other recommendations in respect to gender representation and equity and I have no problem accommodating them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Was the principle debated here in the House so that we do not have to exhaust the principle?

MR EDWARD SSEKANDI: Mr Chairman, I welcome the proposed amendment, but suggest that a proper procedure be taken to effect what hon. Amongi wants to achieve by the proposed amendment. I think the best way is to amend the Budget Act. And for your information, the Budget Act was a Private Member’s Bill. Therefore, we can use it to effect what you want to be included in this rule. The rules cannot amend the Constitution; so the best way is to start the process of amending the Budget Act so that we can include – 

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, we had discussions with several stakeholders and the consensus was that we include it in the rules, but afterwards also amend the Budget Act. This is because currently, the certificate of financial implications is both in the Budget Act and also in the rules. It is Rule 102 of the Rules of Procedure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the question raised by His Excellency is that, which one starts? Where do you start from?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think all the points raised in this brief by hon. Betty Amongi are pertinent, but they are not procedural. Actually, they are substantive. There is no way you will provide for all this in our Rules of Procedure. It does not and you are sort of amending the Budget Act because the Budget Act has already given the requirements, and so the rules cannot provide further requirements under the Act or even in the rules themselves. Once somebody has fulfilled the requirements set out in the Budget Act, then there is no way you can stop him from bringing that law. 

So, my view, and to agree entirely with His Excellency, the Vice President, is that these matters should be addressed within the substantive laws, for example the Budget Act. They can all be captured. It will be very difficult for them, in fact it is not being difficult, but it is not correct to capture these under the rules.

MS AMONGI: Maybe if you can clarify to me why the certificate of financial implications appears both in the Budget Act and the rules. If the issue is to reduce and make the principle only in the rules, I am agreeable to the amendment and these particular details can be in the Budget Act because somebody can ask, “If it is not in the rules, why are you bringing it? Can you clarify to me why the certificate of financial implications appears both in the rules and in the Budget Act?

MR KATUNTU: I think it is where to start from. You do not start from the rules then you go to the Budget Act -(Interjections)-just one minute honourable member. As you may realise, there are many constitutional provisions that we have transplanted from the Constitution and put directly under our rules. You do not do it the other way round. So, why the certificate of financial implications appears in the rules is because it has been transplanted from the Budget Act to the rules and not the other way round.

MR EKANYA: I want to thank hon. Amongi. The Bill to amend the Budget Act is already before the finance committee. So, I would like to invite you. I will strongly support you because I cherish my father and my mother. So, there should be equity.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, from the submission of hon. Ekanya, I will concede and make it in the Budget Act. Thank you. 

Rule 115 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, our amendment to Rule 115 is withdrawn.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Withdrawn. Next.

Rule 116

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: We propose to delete the words “of the House.” The provision should, therefore, read as follows, “The committee of the Whole House to which a Bill is committed under this part shall not discuss the principles of the Bill, but only its details.” The justification is to remove the uncertainty as to which committee is being referred to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you explain again?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, Rule 116 as it stands now reads as follows, “The committee of the House to which a Bill is committed under this part shall not discuss the principles of the Bill but only its details.” It would mean that if the Bill is committed to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, for example, it cannot discuss the principles of the Bill, but it must only discuss the detail. Now, you know for a fact that our committees discuss both the principle and the detail.

It is the view of the committee that this rule was meant to cover only the Committee of the Whole House and should, therefore, be applicable to the Committee of the Whole House. And that is what we capture in the amendment. The Committee of the Whole House to which a Bill is committed under this part shall not discuss the principles but only the details.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Wait. This is what happens. The motion for second reading is carried and the Bill goes to the Committee of the Whole House like we are doing for the rules now.  We have been dealing with the Committee of the Whole House.  Now there is a leg of this particular provision or a motion that has been carried for second reading, the Bill can be referred to a select committee not a committee of the Whole House. So, which one are you talking about? 

Because there are two committees in this particular provision; Committee of the Whole House, which goes to discuss because at the motion for second reading they will have discussed the principles of the Bill and the motion has been carried. So, the Bill is now supposed to go to the committee stage. The other avenue is that if there are some complications, it will be referred to a select committee. Now, in this proposal what are you seeking to do?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The view of the committee, Mr Chairman, as I have already explained, was that this rule applies to the Committee of the Whole House -(Interjections)- Rule 116 sub-rule (1). And the committee also held the view that there must have been missing words, “Committee of the Whole House,” to make this rule relevant - because in the view of the committee, any other committee including a select committee is not precluded from discussing the principles of a Bill. It is only the Committee of the Whole House that is stopped from discussing the principles of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think 116 is talking about a Bill that is referred to a select committee. In fact, what we should be removing is in sub-rule (1). The Committee of the Whole House should now be the select committee to which the Bill has been referred. That would clear that.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: That clears it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, because the Committee of the Whole House finishes its work; when the motion for the second reading is carried it goes to committee stage of the Whole House. Now, if it takes the other route, then you cannot be talking about the Committee of the Whole House because the rules governing the Committee of the Whole House are such that there is no debate, but you go to the specific provisions and we start adopting them. So, there might be just a mistake in the wording of –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: By the omission of the word “select committee.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: By referring to the committee of the House instead of select committee to which the Bill has been sent.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I agree with you entirely because when you read from Rule 115, it is actually talking about a Bill being referred to a select committee. So, consequently, we should be clear in Rule 116 and say, “Functions of a select committee on a Bill”. That would be the sub-heading then sub-rule 1 and say, “The select committee to which a Bill is committed”, just for purposes of clarity. Even under sub-rule 2, we say, “The select committee may propose and accept proposed amendments” and the same for sub-rule 3. “The chairperson of the select committee may accept proposals for the correction of obvious...” - just for purposes of clarity because the issue of the committee of the whole House is actually being dealt with in Rule 117.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that is the correct position.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the danger I see there is the phrase “select committee”. The understanding of the phrase of a “select committee” to me is like a committee put for a particular purpose; for example, go and investigate Bujagali Falls. The moment that is done, your mandate expires. So, the committees being referred to under Rule 116 are the committees created by the Rules of Procedure like the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and any other committee.
So, I would feel it is very dangerous to start importing the phrase “select committee” at this particular stage. My understanding is that select committees are for the specific purposes in which they have been created.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me try and guide again. This is the situation. Let us say the Bill is a constitutional Bill, the Bill has gone to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, they have discussed and they have come back with a report and the minister has moved a motion for second reading of the Bill, it is debated and it is finished. The motion is carried. The Bill is from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee; the motion is carried. Now, instead of the Bill going to the Committee of the Whole House, a motion is moved that this Bill is complicated; so many issues have not been covered; should it again be sent back to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs or should a special committee now be composed to deal with the specific issues; and that is where the issue of a select committee now comes up.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the situation you are describing is different from a situation being described under the rules because under Rule 116, we are talking about functions of committee on Bills and my understanding of that is like hon. Odonga-Otto was describing the ordinary committees to which Bills are committed. I think what you are describing, Mr Chairman, is really a different situation from that being envisaged in Rule 116.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, We are not reading these provisions together, because if we did, we would see the difference. There is an interplay of select committees and also Committee of the Whole House, and I tend to agree with the committee chairperson. My feeling is that in Rule 116, we are actually referring to a Committee of the Whole House because if you read, for instance sub-rules 2 and 3, you will see that certainly this is a Committee of the Whole House considering amendments or details of a Bill. 

The select committee has already been covered in rule 115(2)(3)-look at (3), for instance, “The committee chairperson may accept proposals for the correction of obvious misprints and punctuation errors and may instruct the Clerk to make necessary amendments to the Bill without any formal amendment Bill being moved by a Member of the House”. That is it.
In (2), “The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit if the amendments including new clauses and schedules are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill”. That is the Committee of the Whole House and certainly in (1), we are referring to the Committee of the Whole House. That is my understanding.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu, because you see this part is - if you look at part 19, we have reached a stage of “Bills Second Reading”. Before that first reading and reference of the Bill to a committee, if you look at part 18 - progress on “Bills First Reading”. So, you have Rule 112 - first reading; Rule 113 - reference of a Bill to a committee; and then when it comes now, it comes to Second Reading of the Bill. Second Reading of the Bill is when the committee is reporting. They are now describing the process that happens after the committee has finished its work and now the Bill has come for second reading. That is what they are describing in this preceding provision.

MR KATUNTU: I think to appreciate this, Mr Chairperson, you need to go to Rule 115. Actually, Rule 115 is talking about business in the Committee of the Whole House, but during that process on a motion, a select committee may immediately be nominated in consultation with Government and Opposition Whips. You proceed to the second one. “The select committee under (1) shall take into consideration...” and it goes to (3), “A motion for the committal of a Bill to the select committee under this particular order - (a) - does not require notice and then you go to (b), “May be moved at any time before the House has resolved into a Committee of the Whole House and may be proposed by any Member”.
 
Then what happens thereafter? That is in Rule 116 and that can only be the select committee because it is flowing, you can see. It is just flowing. When you go to Rule 116(1), “The Committee of the House to which a Bill is committed”; it has been committed under Rule 115 under this part. In fact, it is says, “Shall not discuss the principles of the Bill but only its details”. 

Now, the select committee is being guided on what it should do and what it should not do. Then it goes to (2) and continues. My view is actually that the reference in Rule 116 is to the committee that has arisen out of the Committee of the Whole House under Rule 115.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Chair. I think Rule 116 does not refer to the select committee but the ordinary sessional committees. If you could move ahead - it is because you have not reached - if you read Rule 119 which says, “Procedure in select committee on a Bill” and it goes ahead to give the way a Bill can be handled when it is referred to a select committee. So, Mr Chair, I am seeking clarification or guidance - but I have strong feelings that in case we are supposed to put in place a select committee on a Bill then it is Rule 119.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. By the time we reach Rule 115, the sessional committee has finished its work. So, we are no longer dealing with policy issues. After the sessional committee has reported, the Committee of the Whole House is examining the Bill and some complex technical issue emerges. (Interjection) Yes, I am giving you an assumption. A technical issue emerges and the House in its wisdom thinks that at that stage, we need specialised examination of that issue. So, a select committee is set up under sub-rules (2) and (3) of 115. It is set up by a motion. This motion is committing the bill to the select committee. You go to 116, (1) which says, “The Committee of the House to which a Bill is committed...,” already committed by the House and this is the select committee, in my opinion. Also, the chairperson referred to in 116 cannot be the chairperson of the sessional committee because the chairperson of the sessional committee has finished his or her work; he/she can’t be the Chairperson of the Committee of the Whole House because that one is provided for in 117.

So, Mr Chairman, I would like to support the amendments moved by Dr Epetait that to avoid the ambiguity - and I do not blame the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules, because I think he is trying to cure an apparent lack of clarity between 116 and 117. But hon. Epetait clarifies it better by emphasising that in sub-rules (1), (2) and (3), mention of the word select committee should be made. I think that will make it clearer.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I am seeking clarification. (Interjections) I thought that the business of discussing the principles is the business of the Executive. So, the committees only discuss the principles of the bill by way of wanting to familiarise themselves with the background of the bill, but the committees are supposed to discuss the details rather than the principles because at this stage, they cannot change the principles of the bill. I am begging for clarification.

I thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Before I sat down to give way to hon. Kamateeka, the question was whether I am Kamateeka, and I said,” No, I am Rwamateeka.” (Laughter) 

Mr Chairman, I do not intend to disagree with my colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige, but even if it means standing over this provision - we have stood over others so that we understand them better. Because Rule 115 refers to both a select committee and a Committee of the Whole House - Rule 115. You see how it starts. It says,”If a motion for the Second Reading of a Bill is carried, the Bill shall stand committed, immediately or on a date to be fixed...” one, “...to the Committee of the Whole House...” unless the House otherwise by motion decided to take it to a select committee. Then it handles the part to do with the select committee up to the end of that rule. Then it goes back to the Committee of the Whole House and what happens in the Committee of the Whole House. So, what is in 116 is actually Committee of the Whole House. That is what I submitted. I need - I request – in any case, in a select committee, however much you bind it, however many terms of reference you give it, to say that you are not going to deal with principles and you are a select committee, what type of select committee will that be? This is why I am submitting, there is a Committee of the Whole House, because here they are saying in the Committee of the Whole House, do not discuss principles but details.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I am seeking some clarification from the learned Attorney General. Let us look at 116(3). It says, “The Committee Chairperson may accept proposals for the correction of obvious misprints and punctuation errors, and may instruct the Clerk to make necessary amendments to the Bill without any formal amendment being moved by a Member of the House.” There is no way a Committee of the Whole House may not have formal amendments. It is not possible. Why are we having this restriction? Because these formal amendments can only be moved in the Committee of the Whole House. In the select committee, you cannot move formal amendments.

Look at – what is your reading of sub-rule (3) and why is the rule restricting formal amendments?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I thought this was the right knowledge because what our guiding principles have been in our debate is that when we are in the Committee of the Whole House, a person should not smuggle in an amendment which will not have gone to the relevant committee. This has been a flexible arrangement to enable Members, for instance, where there are typographical errors and punctuation errors, to ensure that those are corrected. By the way, this is a practice. It happens even when the Bill leaves here. The  way we debate here, when the Bill goes back to the secretariat, there are certain stylistic corrections that are made to make the Bill neat. (Interjections) This is a fact. We all know this and this is a flexible arrangement to allow that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let me just re-state what we have stated and then, it might be proper for us to stand over it. This is not just about our rules, this is also the standard Commonwealth practice. 

Let us start from Rule 112. That is under Progress of Bills First Reading - Rule 112. Rule 112 is when you do First Reading of the Bill, and when you do First Reading of the Bill, you go to Rule 113: Reference of a Bill to a Committee.
“(1) Whenever a Bill is read the First Time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate Committee appointed under the provisions of these Rules.” That is the sessional committee responsible for that sector and it is given 45 days, and sub-rules (2) and (3) make those distinctions. 

You come to 114, Second Reading of the Bill.
“(1) Subject to this rule the Vice President, 	  Minister or other Member in charge of   	  the Bill shall move that the ‘Bill be now read a Second Time’ and may speak to the motion. 
(2) 	The Chairperson of the Committee to which the Bill is referred or a Member of the Committee designated by the Committee or by the Speaker shall, after the motion for the Second Reading has been moved under sub-rule (1) and seconded, present the report on the Bill to the House.
(3) A debate shall then ensue on the merits and principles of the Bill on the basis of the explanatory memorandum and the report from the Committee. 
(4) 	If the motion is carried, the Clerk shall read aloud the Short Title of the Bill, and the Bill shall then be taken to have been read the Second Time.”

Now, you finish that stage, the rest goes like that. Then you come to Bills Committee Stage. In other words, the motion for second reading where you have discussed principles of the Bill has been carried. Now you are going to Bills Committee Stage. Now you are going to Bills committee stage, because normally, the motion is moved and you come down and things progress. 

If a motion for the second reading of the Bill is carried, the Bill shall stand committed immediately or on a day to be fixed for the Committee of the Whole House. But there is the other leg or motion; it will commit it to a select committee, which shall immediately be nominated by the Speaker in consultation with the government and the Opposition whips. In other words, the Bill is about to go for committee stage. But then a matter has arisen and the Speaker has to announce there and then that this is the composition of the select committee because of the technicalities that have arisen.

Now, when that happens and such a select committee has been constituted, then you come to Rule 116. Rule 116 should govern the operations of the select committee. When the select committee finishes, you go back to Rule 117 where we come back to the Committee of the Whole House. That is the common world practice and that is what these rules are saying. So, I do not know where the problem is. It would be a good thing to support what Dr Epetait has proposed. That instead of saying “Functions of the committee on a Bill”, that would be functions of that select committee which is nominated here in the House. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, on my part, I appreciate your guidance and I concede to that. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, I did ask for clarification on how Rule 119 relates to this; I have not yet been clarified. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, if Rule 116 relates to the select committee, I seek your guidance on which previous rule relates to how business is conducted in a sessional committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is from Rule 112 and 113 –

MR BAKA: That is just the chronology of how the Bill moves, but how business is conducted in the sessional committee is my question –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In Rule 113(2) “The committee shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within 45 days from the date the Bill is referred to the committee”.

(3) Except in cases of very minor amendments, and subject to Rule 116, all proposed amendments to a Bill referred to a committee shall be presented to the committee by the person proposing the amendment and the committee shall scrutinise it together with the Bill”. That is the procedure for the select committee.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Chairman and honourable colleagues. Mr Chairman, I entirely agree with you that the chronology of events starts from Rule 112. I think what Members are grappling with is that Rule 115(1) has never been applied here. There has never been a case where we reach the second reading and the Bill stands committed to a select committee – that is the only thing that is giving us headache. But I agree with the Chair and I want to support that amendment by Dr Epetait, and I beg to move that the question be put.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the motion is moved that the question be put and I am bound by the rules to put the question as such without debate. I now put the question that the question be put.
                 
(Question put and agreed to.)

I now put the question to the amendment by Dr Epetait to Rule 116 –

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I beg for your indulgence. I have been reading Rule 119 and 118 and actually, it creates more confusion. I do propose that this seems to be the right time for us to adjourn. We go and reflect on Rule 115, 116, 118 and 119 and see how we can harmonize them. 

We might again create more confusion and contradictions with rules 118 and 119. In fact, I would further propose that the chairperson of the committee takes a thorough study of Rule 119 because Rule 119 says, “A select committee on a Bill shall be subject to the provisions of part XXV that are relevant to select committees…”. But before reporting the Bill to the House, it shall go through the Bill as provided in Rule 118. Again it has pushed to Rule 118 and when you look at Rule 118, it creates more confusion. So, Attorney General and the committee should have a little bit more time to harmonize the three rules; I really seek the indulgence of the chair. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I would now propose, therefore, that you examine rules 112 all the way to 119 and 116(2). Look at all those procedures and also look at the standard procedures which we use in the Commonwealth for guidance. It is possible that we may have picked too many things and put them together without working out the details of the chronology of how it will work in its application.

Honourable members, it is the appropriate time for us to – it now looks like the issues that are pending and need proper resolution are not few. So, let us see how to proceed. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.35
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.36
THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, DISCIPLINE AND PRIVILEGES (MR Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the proposed amendments to the rules and handled rules No.32 to No.116 and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.36
MR ODOI: I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members,  the motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report, adopted)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for my big brother, hon. Amama Mbabazi, to report when we are closing the House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you would have assisted the chair very much if you cited the rules which have been violated. (Laughter)  Honourable members, those issues that have been stood over are important. We have stood over key issues relating to the East African Legislative Assembly Elections, Pan African Parliament and several other matters, and these issues that we stood over are equally important. The time to consult with the committee and the time to consult with the government side and the Opposition side to come to harmony might not be sufficient tomorrow morning for us to resume at 2.00 O’clock. House is, therefore, is adjourned to Tuesday, 2.00 O’clock. Thank you. 

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 March 2012 at 2.00 p.m.) 
