Wednesday, 25 February 2004

Parliament met at 2.41 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, a week ago I presented a very bitter case of experience, which occurred in Ndeeba when the Police and Kampala City Council harassed my people. You humbly directed that the Ministers responsible namely of Internal Affairs and the Local Government should come here and explain. I beg to know why that explanation has not featured on the Order Paper of today since a week has already elapsed. 
 
THE SPEAKER: Maybe it will be business to follow. Let us deal with the business, which we have not completed yet. The procedure is that normally business, which is not completed, must be completed before you handle another unless there is a reason not to do so.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of national concern. If you would glance through the House you would see Members of the Acholi Parliamentary group are just coming in. There is an -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Could I know under what business on the Order Paper you are bringing this?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I am just utilising the provisions we usually have after the communication from the chair to raise a matter –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have not made any communication, apparently.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Could we proceed with the business of yesterday? Let us wind up, honourable minister, and then the mover of the motion.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

(Debate continued)

2.45
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, in response to the debate members raised a number of questions, which I thought were important to respond to. 

The first question, which I dealt with yesterday, was the question of international intervention, which was the dominant theme in the presentations by many honourable members. I think I really responded to it quite adequately.  

The next question, which I wanted to deal with, was that of welfare because there was a lot of talk about the Army, ghost soldiers, and the transfer of Lt Col Mulindwa. And there was a call by almost all Members of Parliament from that region that the Commander–in-Chief should reconsider that decision. I thought I could respond to that and then finally brief Parliament about the state of this situation, which is going on, and what in our assessment is the situation and how it is likely to be resolved. 

Let me begin with Lt Col Mulindwa. Mr Speaker, I want to confirm what all the Members of Parliament from Lango and Acholi were saying about Mulindwa. He has been a good commander and he enjoys the respect of the people in the area. That is true and the decision that has been taken is fully cognizant of that fact. However, it is under the command of Lt Col Mulindwa that in the recent past, since the Abia attack on the 4th of this month, the most recent one in Ogur sub-county happened. The conclusion of the Commander–in-Chief was that, whereas Lt Col Mulindwa is still relatively young, he was very effective as a battalion commander. He had not displayed the same competence as a brigade commander and the reason for that is that a battalion fights as a unit and the commander is in direct control of it.  

A brigade does not fight as a unit because it has three battalions. So, the brigade commander is actually some kind of manager. He must co-ordinate the actions of others who are in control of the fighting unit. Therefore, the fact that these have happened in his area of operation is indicative of the fact that maybe he had not learnt enough about co-ordination of several units. So, the decision that was taken was to recall him to the headquarters in order to send him to train to be able to handle that question of management at a level higher than he had the experience. That is the reason. Of course, if it had been to punish him, he would not have been recalled in order to go on a course; he would have been dismissed or even arrested, but that was not the case. So, Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the Members that the decision is in the interests of command and actually of the area.  

The other question was about the welfare of soldiers - I think many questions were raised about uniforms and things like that. It is true of course that Defence, as you know, operates under very serious constraints in terms of budgetary provision. It is also true that once in a while we are unable to do certain things on that account. But we have improved tremendously, especially on uniforms, which people talked about. We have distributed uniforms, we actually do not respond to crises as used to be the case in the past because we have uniforms in stock and we send them out to the troops. 

That picture, which appeared in the newspapers of our soldiers after a battle and after they had inflicted very heavy defeat on the enemy with torn trousers, is not indicative of poor welfare of soldiers; not at all. It is indicative of the work these soldiers go through. (Laughter). 

I would like to invite honourable members, I had an indication that Parliament would like to visit the North and the President, the Commander-in-Chief is happy to welcome Parliament to visit the North to see what is happening on the ground and -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Minister could you confirm or deny that the first batch of Lords Resistance Army rebels that attacked Achuka-Dek IDP camp were wearing UPDF uniform?

MR LUKYAMUZI: At this point in time, Mr Speaker, I would urge the hon. Minister of Defence to speak more seriously. I am saying so because if the people in the camps in that area in Lira could be insecure and even lose trust in security, what guarantee could the Minister holding the Floor give to this House that in case one day we were externally invaded, we would not be suppressed as an army?

DR MALLINGA: Further clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I thought I was the one to give way and since I have not given way, Mr Speaker, I would like to continue with the statement.

I was talking about uniforms I am not aware that the uniforms, which these bandits who attacked this camp were wearing, were similar to the uniforms of the UPDF. At any rate the question of similarity is not a big issue because we have been buying these uniforms, as you know, from outside the country and when we go to any uniform manufacturer and give them our design they actually comply with our request. So, it is possible that people can get uniforms, which are similar. But I can assure you that even if it were similar; it did not come from the UPDF.

The point I was making was that these soldiers who are in the field fighting are in the bush and not on the road. I had instructions from the President that we should buy only locally manufactured uniforms from Nytil and other local manufacturers – we did. Unfortunately, the uniforms that we bought from here could not last long. In the case of people in the field, uniforms last for more than one to three months maximum, depending on the area they are operating from. The uniforms simply gave way due to the conditions – the dew in the morning makes the uniform wet and then you have very hot days, and then you are going through thorns and things like that. When you see soldiers wearing torn uniforms, it is indicative that they have been busy in the field. Otherwise, we have tried our best to ensure that the UPDF troops, especially in operation areas, are properly provided for.

On the question of ghost soldiers, I told this Parliament before that the leadership of the Ministry of Defence, the Commander-in-Chief himself could not stand the idea of ghost soldiers being in the UPDF. Because we had reports that there were ghost soldiers, it has been an ongoing investigation, eventually leading to the establishment of a committee to inquire into it. The committee, which I chaired, did present a report and hon. Aggrey Awori raised a question here and I answered it that the action that you saw was a result of that report.  

The leadership is totally determined to purge any possibility of ghost soldiers in the Army. I just want to assure the House that the Army is fully established, we do not have ghost soldiers in the field and even those who attempt to create ghost soldiers know what is in waiting for them -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Do you have ghost guns? In light of the fact that guns are issued according to the number of soldiers you have; if I have 5,000 soldiers or 5 battalions, I must make sure I also have 5,000 guns. Does it mean that if I have 3,000 soldiers instead of 5,000 soldiers, I also have 2,000 extra guns?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Theoretically, that is possible, but our findings in the investigation established that units, which were not fully established, had armories where all guns could be accounted for. Therefore, there are no ghost guns.

Let me turn to the question of the effectiveness of the UPDF and how far we have gone in fighting these groups. In summary, as I said yesterday, the little money that we got and which Parliament approved - and we are very grateful for that - has brought about tremendous change. I told you of the helicopters, which we acquired following that. And of course the armament for them, following the extra US $17 million, have really had a very significant impact.  

When Kony and his group came into Uganda, they were 15 fighting groups. As we speak now, only five are remaining –(Interjection)- I know because that is my job. I am employed to know and as hon. Aggrey Awori said in his statement yesterday, I have proved that I actually know. Out of the 15 groups that entered Uganda, only five remain.  These five –(Interjection)- I can tell you where they are. Of these five, Mr Speaker, one is led by Kony himself - I am feeling a bit feverish, as I told you, so I hope you will understand why –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry about that.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you. One is led by Kony himself and it is in Sudan; the next one is led by Vincent Otti, and as you know, it also went into Sudan. The third group is led by Ochan Bunia, and actually has recently been trying to cross into Gulu District, so it is inside Uganda. The fourth one is led by Odhiambo. I told this Parliament yesterday about Odhiambo. He is the guy who was in command of the unit, which committed the massacres at Abia and Ogur sub-county the other day. The fifth is led by Raska Okwiya. So, of these five groups of the LRA, which are remaining, two are in Sudan and three are inside Uganda.  

Hon. Betty Akech yesterday in her presentation told the House that actually the attack on Achuka-Dek was as a result of the suffering this group had received at the hands of UPDF and actually they were acting in revenge. I am going to write out for Parliament what actually happened in the days leading to that attack on the 21st of this month - last Saturday. During that week, 39 of the LRA rebels were killed by UPDF near Patongo and 25 around that time were killed in Umot.  

On Friday, the 20th of this month, 50 were killed also in a remote area and it is after that this group went to Ogur and attacked that camp. As I said yesterday in my statement, that camp unfortunately was not well protected. What actually happened is that a group of Amuka men were deployed in that area in order to do some kind of – that was known to be a crossing area for these rebels. So, they were on some kind of reconnaissance mission and the problem with Mulindwa is that he put them there again, as I said yesterday, without command of an experienced commander. The population then gathered around there, they came and found them there and the Amuka men allowed these civilians to congregate in that area and about four to five thousand did congregate. Of course, when these guys came they knew very well that there were only Amuka men and they attacked them. 

And the population unfortunately, believing that Amuka had the capacity to defend them, simply remained in their homes. But of course Amuka men did not manage to defend them and, therefore, they carried out this attack. But since that time the UPDF has, in pursuit of these people, had several contacts with them. They followed the group on the 22nd and there were a number of contacts, killing a number of these people.  

On the 24th, yesterday, eventually the UPDF caught up with a bigger group and they found 16 bodies they had left behind, and they captured 12. Around 5.00 p.m. the same day, in another contact, five were killed and two were captured. So, the operations are going on very well and the two groups of Raska Okwiya and Odhiambo, who have been in that area, have been reduced by very many men. Many of them have been captured and I hope that when Parliamentarians who visit go in the North, you will be able to talk to those people who have been captured to get an idea. They will give you an idea about what is happening to them, looking at what is happening from the side of the rebellion.  

Of course, I have no doubt and UPDF has no doubt whatsoever, that we are going to finish off these groups. As we have finished off others before, we will finish them off. It has taken long but by looking at what we have been able to achieve in the encounters we have had with them, the only way they can survive is to run into Sudan. But even in Sudan they will have nowhere to hide because we will go to Sudan.  

I said yesterday that I would be leading a delegation to Sudan to have a meeting with President Bashir to work out the final arrangements on the co-ordination between the two governments to see that Southern Sudan is no longer used as a base to terrorise Uganda. I do not want to talk about details, of course, because it is not wise to do so, but I have absolutely no doubt in my mind that even in Sudan they cannot survive. 

Therefore, looking at the assessment one has, because yesterday I could hear in the presentations by some Members of Parliament a bit of doubt as to whether UPDF has capacity to win, I want to assure you that we have capacity. We have demonstrated this before and we are demonstrating even now in the management of this situation, which is there.  

There was a question that someone raised yesterday and which I saw in the papers, and I felt we should respond to it. It is the issue of support weapons - big weapons. The idea was that the rebels were better armed than the Amukas because they had what was called “big guns”. What they mean by “big guns” is what we call support weapons in the military. Support weapons are things like RPGs, rocket propelled grenades and other bigger guns. 

I would like to assure you that these could be effective only in given circumstances. Those guns are only effective if they are used in built-up places like when they attack a house in order to attack those who are in or vehicles which are on the move. If you have a vehicle that has soldiers, you can hit it with an RPG and you can cause maximum damage. But in an open field, these weapons are ineffective. In fact this was demonstrated by the NRA, because when we fought the war in Luwero the Government force then had not only RPGs but all manner of support weapons you could imagine and they would use them against the NRA, hit as much as they could and then they would advance in the belief that the NRA had either cowered down or had been beaten. But actually the NRA would be lying in waiting and they would really inflict maximum damage on those forces, and that is how we won the war. These so-called support weapons will give you false confidence –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg the honourable minister to confine himself to areas about which he is clear. To deploy infantry without support weapons nowadays does not happen. There are other military officers here, I would be interested to see any of them stand up and say that it is standard to deploy infantry without support weapons and face the enemy. The purpose of support weapons or artillery is really to clear the way for you on the other side so that you can advance. What happened in Luwero, we do not know, but the way he is describing it, it is just impossible to imagine.

The other point I wanted to inform the Minister about, which he brought up earlier, is that it is impossible to put somebody, and it should not happen, to command a brigade who has risen to the rank of a lieutenant colonel, without having been trained to command a brigade. You are saying this officer, Mulindwa, was given a brigade when he had no experience in commanding one? And -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it now information or a submission?

DR MALLINGA: I was still informing him. A battalion, it is true, fights in the same area but usually there are three companies and they can advance in different directions, because each one of them has its own commander on the field. There is an overall commander. But to say that Mulindwa could not transfer his experience of a battalion to a brigade at the rank he rose to; he is not telling the truth. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Further clarification.

MR MBABAZI: Let me answer that one first. Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the English have a saying that “The taste of the pudding is in the eating.” There was a member of the military, so what you need to do in order to – I do not know how we are going to judge what he says against what I am saying, you simply need to look at the results. The Army in which he was and the Army, which I am talking about -(Laughter)- obviously the answer is clear. 

But the problem actually, I hope I did not give the impression that we do not use support weapons. Of course we do. The reason the Amuka boys did not have these support weapons is that we did not have experienced people, as I told you yesterday, who can take charge of that. Because we need to have people who are knowledgeable, who have the experience to use support weapons effectively. It is not because we do not have them.  

If these people have machine guns, and even AK-47s, it is really adequate and what we are planning to do is, if I can give you that detail, to teach them on multiple grenade launchers. This will be the way forward for such troops. Anyway, relying on what you call support weapons which are not effective on open ground especially, is simply amateurish and can lead to the results, which I am sure my friend there can tell you about.  

We referred this matter of Kony to the ICC and instead of making the point that we deal with Sudan directly, which we were doing, we should mobilise the international community through the ICC. The moment the ICC indicts Kony and his group, then of course they become international criminals and the burden of handling them in order to bring them to justice falls on the hands of the international community. Sudan will also be obliged to act like that and particularly those that give him support even as individuals will be taken as accomplices and will be handled not only by us, but by the international community. So I have no doubt that this approach plus our ground action, which obviously is going to continue, will bring an end to this problem in the North of Uganda.

MR WADRI KASSIANO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the Minister for at least allowing me to seek this clarification from him. He is giving us the impression that Uganda has now referred Kony, who has been a thorn in our flesh, to the hands of the international community so that he can be brought to justice. But at the same time we also know that recently in West Africa Taylor was also indicted for crimes against humanity and when he stepped down, he went and he is living comfortably in exile in Nigeria. He has never been arrested, neither has he been brought to book. How sure are we, with these statements by the Minister, that if Kony is indicted sooner than later he will be arrested? What convincing message is he sending to us?

Secondly, at a certain time my colleague, hon. Dr Mallinga, whom I respect as a retired Major of the Uganda Army – yes, he is a Major, he is here and he can attest to that. He did at length inform the Minister of an issue that I wanted to seek clarification on, that is, the use of support weapons. If these unfortunate people who were slain in cold blood, who in total by the way numbered over 4,000 in that protected camp, had entrusted their security to the ill-trained, ill-prepared and ill-equipped Amuka boys; Kony came and overran them without any resistance. Do you not think it was suicidal, first on the part of Amuka and on part of the UPDF who are already in protected camps, to have been left in such hands when you very well know that the LRA had support weapons? Where was the hope for these people? Could the Minister clarify on that?

MR MBABAZI: Hon. Kassiano Wadri Ezati, a Democratic Party member, unfortunately was not present yesterday. I will refer him to the Hansard to find answers to his question. And for hon. Dr Mallinga, I have settled definitively.  

The question of peace talks, which was raised yesterday and which has been consistently raised, is one that the Government has responded to many times. The answer is that when the NRM Government took over power in 1986, it introduced the practice of resolution of political questions through dialogue by political means. It is this government that has introduced in the history of this country the practice of people that have taken up arms and committed treason through negotiations to be rehabilitated, become full members of society, including being Members of Parliament. I have many colleagues –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I know that at that time you were not living a normal life and you may not have appreciated that fact. But when Tito Okello took over as President he was the first to talk with the NRA; they negotiated even in Nairobi. He was the first person to talk with the West Nile Group who returned to Uganda, and maybe the Minister has forgotten that Tito Okello’s Government was also for Uganda. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I appreciate the point being raised by hon. Latigo and of course I know the things he is talking about. I was talking about a practice. You see, a practice is not a one-day thing; it is something, which is consistent over time. Something qualifies to be a practice once it is repeatedly done. The old man, who was my great friend, Gen. Tito Okello, attempted but he did not have the time. So, I could not say that he qualifies to be treated as someone who had a practice, a tradition of doing this kind of thing. 

I am saying, on the question of peace talks, this Government has proved itself over the last 18 years that anyone who wants to take the route of peaceful dialogue is welcome. And in the case of Kony as well, we have no problem. The President even wrote to Kony to say, because Kony so demanded, that the Government is willing to talk to him –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much. I would like to thank the Minister for giving way on a point of clarification. I put it to the Minister and the Government in general, that the Government of Uganda has never openly shown any political will to talk to Kony outside Uganda. Practically speaking, is it possible for anyone to believe that talks of meaning related to the rebels fighting us can take place within Uganda? 

It is on record that I personally moved a motion, which was passed unanimously by this House that the Government of Uganda is urged to endeavor to talk to the rebels possibly outside Uganda. The Government of Uganda, under the leadership of President Museveni, openly remarked some time last year that if there are any talks to take place, they must take place within Uganda. Which rebel would surface anywhere to talk to government? Let us be serious. Otherwise, the Minister should stop talking.

MR MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, I want to pronounce to this august House that I will never tire of educating my honourable colleague, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, because I always find it a pleasure and fruitful when I educate him about a few things he is ignorant about. Let me use this opportunity to do what I usually do once again -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament, representing the people of Lubaga South. I have been elected to Parliament on two consecutive occasions. I am also the only Member of Parliament holding several international awards on the environment. I am also a known mobiliser in serious terms I recently mobilised people to demonstrate against unfair tariffs amounting to over 10,000 people in Kampala. Is it in order for the Minister holding the Floor to impute motives namely that I am ignorant, ignorant of what? I am even capable of taking over the mantle of this government and become the President of Uganda. What is he talking about? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, modesty demands that sometimes we agree that we do not know everything.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you, Mr speaker. I rise on a point of clarification on a matter that the Minister has already passed over on the reference of Joseph Kony and some other people to the ICC. I happen to be a Member of the Consultative Assembly on the ICC and I know that the ICC operates on the principal of complementality. 

I also know that Uganda has as of now not enacted a law that would bring in force the Rome Statute in this country. I have in my file here the South African law, which has brought the jurisdiction of ICC in South Africa. The principle of complementality operates in this way. If somebody is indicted by the ICC, the country filing the complaint must be able to offer complementality in terms of services because Kony could easily be prosecuted in Uganda by the ICC. We do not have this law in Uganda; we have not passed it; there is a gap.

Secondly, I have been trying to look through my file to confirm whether Sudan has certified the Rome Treaty. You are aware Mr Minister that for example the United States of America has for the last so many months been signing bilateral agreements with states, including Uganda, for non surrender of their own people to the ICC. By saying that by the ICC issuing an international arrest warrant Kony would be arrested, are you sure that Sudan is within the jurisdiction of the ICC? If it is not, are we saying anything serious or are we just buying time? Please, honourable minister can you clarify to me this situation?

MR MBABAZI: I will finish the other question about talks inside Uganda just to give information to the House that indeed many of the rebellions that have ended through negotiations followed talks inside Uganda. The latest is Bamuze. Bamuze led a group called the UNRF II and the negotiations were internal. Earlier on, in 1989 we had negotiations with Uganda People’s Democratic Army - something like that - which was led by a Lt Col Okello. These negotiations were done inside, in fact the UPDA talks were held in Teso through the Teso Commission. The pacification of Teso was done in negotiations internally done.

The only negotiations that have not succeeded are the negotiations, which took place outside Uganda, and I have had occasion more than once to tell this House that in fact this government has engaged in dialogue with Kony outside Uganda under the auspices of the community of St Egdio in the Vatican. I happened to lead that delegation on the Ugandan side and it has not succeeded. I was simply doing what I felt duty bound to do, to educate my brother about these facts.

On the question of the ICC, if I may respond to that again, I made a point yesterday - maybe my brother was not here - that we have had full engagement with the ICC. The Attorney-General, the Solicitor-General, others and myself have had full engagement with the ICC. I informed this House that after the meeting in London between the President and the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, I had a follow up meeting in the Hague where I met the entire prosecution team and the President of the ICC. I have no doubt that what we are doing is within the law and we will achieve the objectives, which both sides are aiming at.  

The law that you talked about - this is a process. It takes time. By the time the question of indictment comes up, which is a follow up of investigations, the law that is under preparation by the Attorney-General’s Office will have been presented to Parliament and hopefully passed by then.

On the question of peace talks, we have been ready. We have been engaged by all people. The Carter Center for Peace, which is led by former President Jimmy Carter, was heavily involved in this. We had a delegation from government, which was dealing with them and this was in the Sixth Parliament. Dr Rugunda led that delegation. It had some Members of Parliament on it, like the hon. Absolom Ongom and many other people some of whom are here. Hon. Omwony Ojwok was also on it. So everything has been done. All attempts have be made to try and exhaust every channel available to us to bring an end to this problem. And certainly the peace route, which we have followed, has not borne results. We will continue in case Kony and his group change their mind, but what we are concentrating on now is using the stick.

Finally, Mr Speaker, because I had made a statement and the motion –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for giving way. I have been persuaded to stand up again because this House is discussing a very serious point, a point about war, a point about death. Our people are dying as if they are insects and we cannot keep quiet as representatives of the people.  

The clarification I am seeking from the Minister is as follows. It is true that the Minister is talking about what is referred to as peace talks but in serious terms, could the Minister cite any event, which demonstrates government’s political will to talk peace with the rebels outside Uganda with respect to the international protocols that govern the concept of peace talks? 

I am saying so because when the NRA was fighting a protracted war in Luwero, it is on record that there was an attempt for peace talks to take place between the NRA and the Lutwa Government. When the talks took place, they never took place in Gulu or Teso; they took place in Nairobi. When those talks were opened, they were international enough to be respected. For example in those talks we had observers, we had mediators and we even had a neutral ground. The point I am making here is, in terms of challenge, let the Government of Uganda know that no meaningful talks of the nature he is talking about can take place if those talks do not take place in a –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the position of Kony on talks?  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for that challenge. I can only say this: it is not the Government of Uganda that should judge itself about its capacity to talk. Let it demonstrate international willingness to talk to the rebels. I can only answer the Speaker’s challenge with the words of John F. Kennedy, the late President of the United States, when he said –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I am not challenging you. I am asking you, do you know what the position of Kony is on these talks? Just assist us.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Kony would like to talk to the Uganda Government outside Uganda.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course I had answered hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. If he wants me to give him details, I will do so but I am sure that other members followed. 

I was saying that yesterday after I had made my presentation, a motion was presented by hon. Dora Byamukama and hon. Fred Ruhindi. As the sector minister on these issues, generally speaking I made the point yesterday that I was very happy with the tone of debate in Parliament. I made the statement that this is the first time when I have seen unanimity. Although we had quarrels with my good friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, calling on me to resign, when of course he knew the answer I would give, that I can never submit to terrorism because that is what he is asking me to do –(Applause). But generally, even hon. Aggrey Awori clearly placed the blame for this terrorism where it should be.  So, I thought there was unanimity and that in the end. We would come up with a common position on this situation.  

Looking through the motion and the proposed resolutions, Mr Speaker, I had some queries, especially on proposed resolution, paragraph 8, which reads as follows: “That areas ravaged by war –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: The problem I have is that the debate on the motion ended. During the debate on the motion, nobody moved an amendment. If you have queries, what do you want us to do with these queries when you do not have an amendment of the motion? But you can make them.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I made a presentation and there was debate. So, I thought my reply was part of the conclusion of that debate. What else is it? I imagine that we will be going through the resolution, paragraph by paragraph, or if we adopt it then I do not know.  But I thought I was within –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, after you had made a statement arising from the debate on your statement, because we are supposed to limit the debate for 30 minutes according to our rules, somebody who wanted to bring a practical solution should have moved an amendment. We had a long debate to which over 20 people made a contribution. During this debate nobody indicated that he wanted to improve on the text. You should not expect me to open the debate for other members to come and talk about this amendment. If you had reservations, as hon. Omwony Ojwok did, you could have moved an amendment and we would have considered it. After you have presented, I will ask the mover to wind up and then we pronounce ourselves on the motion.  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, I have a procedural issue because -(Interjection)- I have the Floor. When you look at rule 44, which is on the manner of debating motions, it is very clear and it says: “When a motion has been moved and seconded in the House, the Speaker shall propose the question on the motion in the same terms as the motion, and debate may take place upon that motion and may continue for a period not exceeding one hour.” 

Rule 44(2): “The Speaker may at the beginning of any debate, specify the period that each member contributing to a debate may be given.” This was done. 

Then rule 44(3): “The Speaker may call upon the Mover to reply at the end of the period allocated for debate and immediately the Mover has concluded his or her reply, shall put the question to the House.” Mr Speaker, I do not appreciate –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no doubt about that, what you have said is what I had said. I was informing the honourable minister that what do we do with the reservations now that the debate had been concluded? 

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, when you are putting the question, are you going to do it on the omnibus basis, or are you going to put the question on –(Laughter)– excuse me, I am only seeking clarification.

THE SPEAKER: You will raise that question at time of putting the question comes. Honourable minister, you can proceed. 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, in my attempt to say what I wanted to say, I was very conscious of the rules. I suppose when we start looking at the motion and passing it, then amendments can come in. 

Rule 42(5) - amendment to the motion, reads; “Any amendment to the motion which a Member wishes to propose under this rule may be moved and seconded at any time after the question upon the motion has been proposed by the Speaker and before it has been put by the Speaker to the conclusion of the debate upon the motion.”  What I was trying to do now –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourables members, anybody who wanted to make an amendment should have done that during the debate. Now you are just winding up, how will others participate in the proposed amendment? You want to open up the debate again?  

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, of course, I have no choice but to submit to your ruling, Mr Speaker. I will reserve my comments until –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER:  I think it is backed by the rules.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay, I am not challenging that at all.

THE SPEAKER: You can put forward your reservations, may be you will influence others too.

MR MBABAZI: Yes, I was not going to raise an amendment now. When you look at No.8, which says; “That areas ravaged by war should be declared humanitarian disaster areas.” –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Now that the minister is putting his observations, are we saying that thereafter anyone of us who has a rejoinder to anything that he would have said will also have an opportunity to do so?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have been very clear that the debate ended. The Minister can make his observations and the last person will be the mover of the motion. I do not intend to open the debate on this issue.  

MRS MUSUMBA: The clarification I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is on the matter that will proceed after the mover has spoken, that is the voting. I seek clarification on how we will vote given that in voice voting we are going to have ex-officio members in the House. This is the clarification I am seeking, because there are precedents in this House where it has been difficult to tell who voted using which voice. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: At the beginning of the last session there was a case, which was decided when we were on our Christmas recess. When I came back here I said I would continue to conduct business as I have been conducting it. The position, which you are alluding to is what was said in the judgment that ex-officio members can also participate. You must have seen the statement by the Chief Justice who cleared that their judgment did not outlaw “Ayes” and “Noes”. This was said when we were swearing in the tribunal. This is what I told you that the Constitutional Court has never said “Aye” or “No” is unconstitutional. I am going to use that.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, you have just ruled that according to our Rules of Procedure the debate on the motion on the Floor was closed yesterday. I am wondering what the purpose of the Minister’s observation on this motion is. It looks like the debate is continuing because if you are not going to have an opportunity to cross examine whatever issue we may rise, then where is the opportunity for this to be done when you have closed the debate on this motion?

THE SPEAKER: Well, as I have said, the Minister has the Floor. He is free to say what he wants to say, including his reservations. His reservations may influence your voting in one way or the other, but that will not tantamount to amendment of the motion over which we ended the debate.

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, I rise again to seek clarification on the voting method to be used after this debate. We know that the motion on the Floor now is a matter of life and death for some of our constituents, and we know when we use voice voting our voters back home will not know what position we have taken. Could it, therefore, be possible for us to have a division lobby? I beg to move that we vote using the division lobby so that our positions are made clear.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not want to use voice voting? I am in position to say, “the ayes have it or the noes have it”, and if you challenge me there is a procedure to follow. 

MRS AKWERO ODWONG: Mr Speaker, right now I do not have the Rules of Procedure in my hands but it is on the basis of what our constituents, particularly me from Kitgum the people would want to know what stand I have taken. They have told me the area should be declared a humanitarian disaster. They would want to know how I have voted. If we are to use the voice voting –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I hope you will be either saying “Aye” or “No”. In case you are for “Aye” and I say “No”, have it. What you can do is to challenge my position. If I am challenged then we go for the division lobby. But I will not go on with the debate.  

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am really surprised. Yesterday I was not here but I was briefed about the consensus that had been generated in this House. I was excited about all of us looking at this issue nationally. I had expected that consensus would lead us through to the end. But it appears now there is going to be a winner/loser by people demanding for a division lobby. It is threatening because yesterday we had moved as Ugandans realizing that this is a problem and all of us were moving to solve a problem. 

It appears now people are demanding to be seen as Mukwaya, representing Mukono South and there is a winner. But whether you are seen voting on this side or the other side, the issue is we can find a lasting solution to this problem. So, let us also respect the Speaker because consensus had already emerged. So, why do we want to divide ourselves at this point in time?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us listen to the Minister. When it comes to time for voting then we shall deal with that, in case it is necessary, but I do not think it is now.

MR WAMBUZI: Can I be clarified, Mr Speaker? I get worried when the Minister for Defence stands up and he is winding up, and if what he says is not going to be palatable to the other Members of Parliament, or says that we forgot something in the motion. You are saying it is too late yet we are moving forward to vote on the way forward about an issue, which all of us have got a consensus on. I am saying that it would be inhuman of me as an engineer particularly, if I knew a machine did not work and I still ordered that it be assembled; because you have ruled that it must be assembled and we go with it even to a war front. 

If from what the Minister is going to say it will necessitate us to do something about this, then I am begging, Mr Speaker, for us to actually revisit it. Can I be clarified?

THE SPEAKER: How many times am I going to say this? The debate on the motion ended yesterday. It is about time, because yesterday we were here up to about 8.00 p.m. I said the Minister would make his closing remarks and the mover would do the same, and we shall pronounce ourselves on this. If I change now, then what is the position? I do not intend to. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like the Minister to clarify further so that we avoid repeating the mistakes that were made in the past. In 1986 some soldiers from here were deployed in the North and carelessly made reference to the fact that the soldiers from the North made a triangle in Luwero triangle; they will now make a rectangle in the North. It causes considerable distress. As we speaking now there is fear in Lira that people could be killed as you can hear the rumours. I want him to dispel this really –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You are now contributing. Let him say what he wants to say, and then we hear from hon. Byamukama.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, that is exactly what I want him not to miss out in his clarification. In fact this is to help him dispel this fear, if it is imagined, to give the Minister the opportunity to dispel it so that our hearts are at comfort; we feel pain.

THE SPEAKER: I have allowed the Minister to say what he wants to say. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, with humility, I am standing on a point of procedure. I thought the Minister of Defence should officially wind up his response, and if he has any substantive point to make, then he can make it on a different note, but not to confuse the two. This is my area of concern in terms of procedure.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I simply had this to say. I had partly made mention of it because I was reading paragraph 8, which say; “Areas ravaged by war should be declared humanitarian disaster areas”. The principle reason is in (a): “Access assistance in terms of security and relief that would otherwise be inaccessible.” The others are just amplifications of that.  

Mr Speaker, this call - because it had come in the presentations made by many speakers - this call for international intervention, especially in security matters has a problem. The first problem is that you give out the impression that you have no capacity yourself to do this.  When you want to say that you do not have capacity to handle your own security matters in an area -(Interjection)- for 18 years we have defeated all of these people and I will list them again. We defeated Obote back in Busia and we brought back their leaders; we defeated UPA in Teso; we defeated UPDA in the North –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, you have guided this House competently. We have referred to the rules; we know what we are discussing. We are not discussing the history of Obote, Amin or anybody. We are discussing the current humanitarian disaster taking place right now in the North. Anybody with a conscience would be talking about the current situation. Is it in order for the Minister to muzzle this House by making reference to things, which are totally irrelevant? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I have now realized this is a different day from yesterday and we are trying to create heat where it should not be. I asked you yesterday that when we are making a point let us not hit at anybody. Let us not be personal, but handle this matter to achieve results. Maybe the Minister is giving his preamble, but the let him conclude. I cannot tell him what to say. Let the Minister make his remarks then we move.

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, obviously, anybody who is listening to me talking about the capacity of the UPDF to defeat these terrorists would recall that what the UPDF has been able to do is relevant to what they have done before and they will do it again. There is nothing more relevant than that. The point is that - I wish I could be protected from hon. Mwandha because I listened to him when he asked, and he is simply behaving like a – I am making the point that this proposal was –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Debate on this important motion has officially ended. The Speaker has been good enough to direct and advise the Minister on how to go about his remarks. All the points the Minister is divulging are provocative and would call for challenges from the other side. Is it in order for the Minister to continue provoking us when the decision has already been made by the Speaker on how to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Please wind up.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you. I made the point yesterday that this question of calling for international intervention has very many problems and the first one is what I have talked about. 

The second one –(Mr Wagonda rose_)- no, thank you. (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Mr Speaker, because the Minister is misinforming the House –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He has declined –(Interruption) 

MR WAGONDA-MUGULI: Yes, but this could help him to wind up properly –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, he has declined, let him wind up.

MR MBABAZI: Really, calling for international intervention is not an answer to the problem we have. I demonstrated yesterday in the cases I cited that international intervention has never worked. I made the point even in the recent phenomenon of international terrorism; there is an international coalition against terrorism. The greatest powers in this world have been fighting against terrorism however great a power maybe it goes to another area, the chances of fighting successfully against the terrorists in that area are very minimal. So, why should we call for that when we know that it will not happen and yet it has very many dangers? 

My point is that we should not really call for something we know is not going to work when in fact it has other consequences.

Finally, Mr Speaker, maybe you can help on this one because of –(Interruption) 

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I have had to intercede but the Minister is talking about this motion calling for international intervention and is referring to point No.8 in the motion. I have looked at it several times. I do not see any area where this motion calls for international intervention. Could the Minister tell me specifically where the motion talks about international intervention in respect to security that he is talking about?

MR MBABAZI: Yes, hon. Ben Wacha. I think he is reading –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: I can assist by reading –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I know how to read –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: No. 8: “That areas –(Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I know how to read and I will read it in order –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: No, I was doubting your ability to read it correctly, Sir -(Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am glad hon. Ben Wacha has given me the opportunity to prove that I can read. I read it again because I had read it earlier. No. 8 says: “That areas ravaged by war should be declared humanitarian disaster areas in order to: (a) Access assistance in terms of security and relief that would otherwise be inaccessible.” 

I said this was the main thing then what follows are simply amplifications of that. When you look at for instance (c), it says: “Mobilize the international community to come to Uganda’s assistance in finding ways of ending the war.”

That is what I was reading. I was saying that from my reading of what you are talking about -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Clarification, Sir.

MR MBABAZI: I would like to finish then I will give way. Let me answer that I will –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I had refrained from seeking this clarification waiting for the honourable minister to give us what it means, or what it implies to declare an area a humanitarian, disaster area. I have patiently waited and I have not yet got the answer in all that he is giving, and I think before he sits down because he was almost like winding up.  

It is very difficult, Mr Speaker, as you know when we went to Kitgum – in the report we shall table here, one of the demands there is, the community is calling for that area to be declared a humanitarian disaster –(Interruption)- yes, it is a fact. It is a fact and what we would have wanted to find out, myself and my colleagues with whom we went, is that if it is declared, it means denying an opportunity for our troops to be able to pursue the very issue they have been pursuing. Maybe that one would make me abstain from voting. 

That is why this time, honourable minister, we are pleading with you to be categorical, having realized that at one time a motion similar to this was presented on the Floor of this House and we voted against it. We would like you to say, “disaster” and “human disaster” are different and this is the way they are different then we shall be able to give you support.

MR MBABAZI: In fact, that was my next point. Mr Speaker, maybe you could guide us on this one, because when I looked at the constitutional provisions, the laws that we have, regarding the question of declaration of disaster areas and therefore the implications of that, the things I found out are the following. In Article 249, it talks about disaster preparedness and creation of a commission for purposes –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MR MBABAZI: Parliament is supposed to pass a law to clearly set out the functions and procedure for implementation of the Disaster Preparedness Commission. The only thing that can happen is for the President to declare a state of emergency. 

In Article 110(1), it says: “The President may, in consultation with the Cabinet, by proclamation, declare that a state of emergency exists in Uganda, or any part of Uganda if the president is satisfied that circumstances exist in Uganda or in that part of Uganda – 

(b) in which the security or the economic life of the country of that part is threatened by internal insurgency or natural disaster.” 

This is the only reference I see to a declaration of disaster and how it is to be done. Of course, I know that Parliament has not passed laws for enabling the handling of such situations. So, I was saying that when you look at this, maybe what Parliament wants to do is to ask the President to consider declaring an emergency on account of a disaster -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hold on, he asked me for clarification. Honourable minister, maybe the Attorney General will assist us here. You read Article 249, it you says; “There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and man-made disasters.” The operating principle is that there is a commission to manage the disaster. So, this Constitution recognises that there could be a time when there is a disaster –(Applause)- that is why you have a commission to manage a disaster. 

In this motion they are saying, “This is a disaster, let the management commission go to manage a disaster”. What is wrong with saying there is a disaster? (Applause). I do not know whether the Attorney General wants to say something about this.

4.18
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Article you have just referred to, Article 249, should in my opinion be read together with Article 110. Article 110, as the Minister says, refers also to disaster and in essence it talks about the President’s power to declare an emergency –(Interjection)- that is correct, I can read it for you if you want.  

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR AYUME: The Article reads as follows: “The President may, in consultation with the Cabinet, by proclamation, declare that a state of emergency exists in Uganda, or any part of Uganda if the President is satisfied that circumstances exist in Uganda or in that part of Uganda -
a) in which Uganda or that part of it is threatened by war or external aggression; or, 
b) in which the security or the economic life of the country or that part, is threatened by internal insurgency or natural disaster.” 

I take it that it is in connection with this that we are required, under Article 249 to ensure that there is a management committee for disaster. That is my understanding of precision.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, Attorney General. Could you proceed?

MR MBABAZI: That is the point I was making. Maybe what this Parliament could do, from the interpretation one can give to the provisions of the Constitution, is to request the President to look or to consider the possibility of declaring a state of emergency on account of disaster. I was not saying that there is no disaster. I did not mean that at all. If that is the case and in light of the constitutional provisions, I thought that paragraph 8 as it is framed does not do that. Maybe it can be rephrased in order to achieve that one.  

Finally, paragraph 9 says: “That the Government should appoint a day of national mourning to remember all people that have been killed at the hands of Kony and all his rebels.” I am fully sympathetic to this, and I think we should do it. I simply wanted to raise this to Parliament. We know that there have been all these massacres before in Atiak, Lokung, Kichwamba and all the other places. It is right that at one time this government and this country should have a day to remember all those that have perished on account of terrorism. The critical position is, when? Can it be done at a time when it will not be misunderstood by a section of society?  

It is with a sad heart, Mr Speaker, that I report to this House that in Lango today two people died. Some people asked for permission from the Police to demonstrate their anger at the criminal acts of Kony in Ogur sub-county and permission was granted. But when it came to demonstrations instead they attacked the Acholi people. As we speak now, we have decided to deploy the Army; in fact Gen. Katumba had undertaken to send in the riot Police to control that situation. But it was clear that the situation was so explosive that the riot Police alone could not manage it. They have blocked the road from Lira to Kitgum; the Army is going to unblock it. They have deployed people in Kamdin to stop people from travelling and the Police had to shoot in the air and two people in the latest report I received, were dead. So, there could be serious situations arising out of sentiments and situations can get out of control.  

I am saying, therefore, that in light of that, whereas this is a good idea, in order to avoid any misunderstanding we should wait until the time when we have mobilized everybody so that nobody sees this as a special treatment of one section and not another. I speak this out of information I have and the interaction I have had with the people concerned. I say that for the time being, while we are waiting to handle that at an appropriate time, we could of course have things like national prayers and things of the kind. But this one in order to avoid those kinds of problems, I wanted to suggest that we reconsider it. 

Otherwise, I support the motion and I think it is given in good spirit. I hope that when we come to the particular paragraphs, the points that I have made will be taken into account in formulating those paragraphs in order to take care of those concerns I have raised. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

4.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I would like to start off by noting that in our African culture when you lose someone, or when you have been attacked in your house, you make an alarm. When you make an alarm, people come to your aid and reinforce you.  You do not choose who comes to your rescue as long as they can come to your rescue.  

I want to thank Members of Parliament especially the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which discussed this issue and gave me the go ahead to table this motion. I want to thank all the people who have contributed to the motion and those who have sat here and listened. This indeed shows that we are united in the fight against Kony. 

When there is death there is no winner; we are all losers. I do not want to make capital out of this, it is wrong to make capital out of this in any way. 

I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. There was one major omission, which we made: we did not note the fact that the President is on the ground in the hospital. We should acknowledge that and thank him for his selflessness. (Applause).

Mr Speaker, honourable members, it is a pity. We should respect each other because if I come to your house to mourn with you, then you should really accept me. I would like to thank the Minister for his statement and for supporting the motion. I think the issue of contention is illusionary and I will be frank with you, Sir. When you look at the motion, we sat down and drafted this motion without emotion while at the same time taking into consideration that for the last 18 years people have died. 

I remember the very first incidences of noses and ears being cut off; I remember incidences of people being cooked in pots; I remember incidences of people being burnt alive; I know of incidences where women, children have been raped and defiled. If they ask us what we did, what shall we say? When the leaders of this region and other regions walked out in support of each other, some statements were made. 

Again I want to thank the President for his wisdom and magnanimity by coming out with a humanitarian response to this problem. We must appreciate that. It is not everyday that you see hon. Dr Okulo Epak crying; he is a man! It is not everyday that you see hon. Margaret Ateng crying. This is serious! 

A lot has been said but I want to just say a few things, because I do not like sweeping things under the carpets, not security matters. A case of this matter like I said, when someone comes to assist you, you do not give them any terms In this case we are looking for medicine. If you are looking for medicine you must use every means possible to make sure that you get the right medicine to cure you. 

Mr Speaker, we are very careful, we said it should be declared a humanitarian disaster in order to access assistance, create local and international awareness, to mobilize the international community, enable the international community to access funds reserved for areas categorised as such; we were very specific.  

This is not new. If you have been hearing the news in the case of Swaziland, 20 percent of Swaziland is threatened by famine and they have declared it a human disaster. In the Unite States, when you have hurricanes on the West Coast, these are declared disaster areas. What does it mean? It means that the Government marshals all resources and gives special consideration to those areas in danger. (Applause). It does not take away the sovereignty of the Government, not even one inch! 

We say we do not want international intervention, but here we are with 50 percent of our budget funded by donors. Is that not international intervention? I do not want to go into this. 

There was a case here in this Parliament, which made me weep. We talked about sanitary towels and women in camps going around with bloodstained dresses; they have no sanitary towels. I want to commend UWOPA, which has given 500,000 sanitary pads to camps in Soroti to make sure that these poor women have sanitary pads. If we get more resources and these kinds of tragedies are removed, what is wrong with that? What do we have to hide at this point? When someone dies in your house, you cannot hide it!  

I would like to conclude by asking all of us to support this motion. I leave this decision to your conscience. You all know the truth, the world knows it; there is nothing to hide. Parliament has done its work; the onus is now on the Executive to implement it. I thank you. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Dora Byamukama. Honourable members, since yesterday you have heard various submissions and I must say I am glad that we moved together as backbenchers and as frontbenchers. This is very impressive and it sends a good signal to anybody who is interested in this particular subject. Now is the time to pronounce ourselves on the motion.  

The motion is drawn in such a way that things are tied in one unit; it is a packaged deal. But there are suggestions that we vote on each - I do not know. Is that what you want?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: The consensus is that we vote on the motion as it is. You have read the details of the motion. It is now my duty to put the question on this motion. I am going to use the voice voting because I am permitted to use it. I am not fighting a decision of the court. The decision of the court, as I told you, did not outlaw it. And yesterday the Chief Justice cleared this. He is the one who delivered the judgment. So, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Order! Let us proceed with our business.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER
QUESTION 32 OF 2002 TO THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE PRESIDENCY

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I do not think the Minister is around and as the rules provide, I should have the answer 15 minutes before the question is put.  

THE SPEAKER: Then we can skip it.

MR MWANDHA: Okay, Sir.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON:
I) VEGETABLE OIL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN KALANGALA DISTRICT
II) NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES (NAADS)
III) PLAN FOR MODERNISATION OF AGRICULTURE (PMA)

THE SPEAKER: The item is No.5 on the Order Paper. This is the report, which we considered last week and we did not complete.

4.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and the honourable members in this House for giving us ample time to debate this very important report, which we presented last week in this House. I also want to thank the members for giving full attention to the sector. As we indicated, this is part one of our report and many more will come. I beg that when such a report comes up we give it the attention that is required because agriculture will continue to remain the main stay of our economy and our country for some time to come. And it is our responsibility as Parliament to give guidance to the Executive and Government to do what the people of Uganda want in that sector so that it can propel us to improve our lives as we look forward to fighting our poverty. 

At this stage, Mr Speaker, I do not have much to say apart from extending our appreciation to you. However, there are one or two areas that needed simple clarification.
  
One honourable member did not know the difference between Vegetable Oil Project and the Palm Oil Project. The Palm Oil Project is just a component of the broader programme that government and this country have adopted to promote the production of edible oil in this country. As far as our sector is concerned, this is a government-registered project under Vegetable Oil Project - AG49(b).  

We looked at policy statements of government and we were satisfied with the report and we went to the ground and indeed we were happy. Our concern if you can recall, is that we should be able to choose whether what we presented was basically the issue and indeed, we agree that we were tackling the issue. The agriculture component to which this House charged us with responsibility is what we handled. We have found no serious controversy and we urge the House to support this report and encourage the stakeholders in this industry to proceed as per our recommendations. 

We never found any problem with environmental factors in Kalangala, and we know that NEMA has also prepared its report. It is our hope that the country will be satisfied with NEMA’s report so that it can pave way for the implementation of this programme. Moreover, Mr Speaker, this project is now six years old and we do not see any encumbrance as far as the agriculture part of it is concerned. 

Simple response to issue No.2, which the representative of the workers emphasised, was the need for water for production. We shall continue as a committee to urge government, through this sector, to seek the best way and sell the best technology for this country to harness and harvest water for production. Mr Speaker, you recall that part of our committee visited Egypt and we do not want to pre-empt the report. We presented it to you to have a look at it and when it is appropriate the House will share of it.
 
But briefly, water for production is seen as the heart of agriculture in countries that value water. For instance, Egypt knows that the upper repellent states have 1600 billion cubic meters of water every year and they get 55.5 billion cubic meters. The rest are kept here, retained and we use less than 1 percent of it for agriculture production. We are charging this sector with that responsibility to make sure that we get as much water as possible for agricultural production, particularly in the area of irrigation so that our people can transform agriculture for the betterment of our lives.

The other concern was expressed by people who come from Mt Elgon on two DFIs Bulengenyi and Buginyanya. We want to assure the honourable members who come from these sub-regions that we are encouraging the Minister of Agriculture and NARO to repossess and take charge of these DFIs. Because these are the only district firm institutes that were charged with the responsibility to research on Arabica coffee for highland regions and there could not be reason for government to divest both DFIs. So, we believe that the next report to come concerning the coffee sub-sector will confirm the decision taken by the agricultural sector and NARO in particular, on whether or not they have repossessed these research centres for coffee and particularly coffee for the highlands known as Arabica coffee.

Mr Speaker, with these few responses, in addition to what the Ministers responsible for agriculture presented as their response to issues raised in this House, I do not have much more to add. I urge the House to support this report and adopt it. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson.  Honourable members, this concludes the handling of that report because the Ministers made their submissions and now the chairperson has made his final submission. It is my duty to put the question to the motion that we adopt the report of the Sessional Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on Vegetable Oil Development Project, National Agriculture Advisory Services and the Plan for the Modernisation of Agriculture. I think this was called part I of their report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 1999

4.53
MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I recall yesterday we had an Order Paper, which had business to follow and the Public Accounts Committee was not on the Order Paper. We are very interested in public accounts but we have not come with our reports. So, could you guide us on this?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, before we adjourned last time, some of us had raised serious concerns about some of the recommendations in the report. It was my expectation that the Ministry of Finance would have made a response to some of those concerns. For purposes of reminding my colleagues, I had raised a specific issue about Shs 107 billion being written off. I do not remember that there was any satisfactory explanation given by the Minister of Finance. So, I wonder whether the Minister is now in position to give a response or an explanation to my concerns. Because I take it that once the chairman gives his concluding remarks, then you will be putting the question, and I do not know when else I will get a response to that concern. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that the report you are considering was a report of the Public Accounts Committee handling the Auditor General’s report. If we have come to that stage of the Auditor General’s report and there is a recommendation that you write off the Shs 107 billion, is it the Minister to answer that or it is the owners of the report to answer you? 

Is the committee not in position to answer that question because it is handling the Auditor General? And I do not think the Minister has answers for the Attorney General or vice-versa. Why can you not put that question to the committee itself? Could the chairperson assist us on that?

MR JACK SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this question was raised on this Floor of Parliament and was thoroughly discussed. The committee clearly informed Parliament that the money being talked about is an accumulation of the money that could not be accounted for, and it is an accumulation from many years back. The Treasury had no proper documents to account for this money, this is the period between - I think the last three governments, that is, the UPC Government, Lutwa’s Government, Binaisa’s Government and the current one.

In order for the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) to start from a clean plate, we felt that it was necessary that this be written off so that we start from somewhere new. We do not have enough evidence to incriminate anybody or any regime. Therefore, we are recommending that this money be written off.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Maybe the Chairman PAC was trying to answer us. But at that time when we left we had not completed the debate on Public Accounts. The clarification I want to seek again from the Chairman of PAC is, assuming the money was taken during those governments; did they take into consideration the currency reform? I want to give an example. Supposing those governments stole Shillings one trillion, that is Shs 1,000 billion divided by 100, which is Shs 10 billion, multiplied by 0.7, which is Shs 7 billion. Could you compare it with the Shs 108 billion? 

Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking from you is, can you try to aggregate and tell us that in such and such a period we lost this?

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, it is not possible to come up with such information because the Treasury has tried its best to do so and it was not possible. In the wisdom of the committee, we felt that as Parliament has already passed the Finance and Accountability law, we are saying that the Bank of Uganda and the relevant ministries now should adhere to this particular law. In future, we shall not accept such write-offs and we have been assured by the Treasury and the Bank of Uganda that actually as we talk now they are up to-date.  Therefore, as a committee, we feel that this money should be written off.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, the accumulation of those figures over a period of time is clearly an indication of failure in book keeping, both in the Ministry of Finance and at the Bank of Uganda. These are very important institutions over which the economy of this country rotates. The Minister of Finance had given some indication that they were having problems of qualified manpower. Clearly, if this is a once and for all action, to write off these figures for the Treasury to be able to balance books, what assurances are there that they now have the right staff in place both in the Ministry of Finance headquarters and also in the Bank of Uganda? 

This is a serious matter particularly when the Bank of Uganda is the supervising institution for other financial institutions. If the Bank of Uganda cannot balance the accounts of the Uganda Government, then it is a very serious matter. It raises a question: what moral authority do they have to discipline other errant financial institutions when they have a problem in their house? That is why, Mr Speaker, I had wished that the Ministry of Finance should give assurances to this House that what has happened is now history and we shall not have such instances again. I thank you.

PROF. PETER KASENENE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Chairman of PAC has indicated, the period when the correct figures and accounts were not available, as we all know refers to a period of the turbulent days of Uganda. At this juncture I would like to say on behalf of the Ministry that we shall endeavour to make sure that all accounts are properly checked. Thank you.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, in the report I recall they said they appointed a consultant who came out with a report on this value. For Parliament to exonerate the Ministry of Finance or the Treasury, we should be availed a copy of the consultant’s report and the recommendations made there. It could be that the recommendations in the consultant’s report are pinpointing to the culprits, which have not been declared to Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, to write off Shs 108 billion is not easy because Bank of Uganda has accountants, who are keeping records for Uganda; Ministry of Finance has accountants who keep Uganda’s money. They are the trustees. If you write off Shs 108 billion, that means the Ministry of Finance, who are the trustees, have lost the trust for this country. We should go ahead to find out what happened to the Shs 108 billion.  

MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think for us to stand here and say we have written off Shs 108 billion, shows a lot of unseriousness to Ugandans. He has told us that in the last three or four governments - can we begin from 1986 up to 1999 and you see who lost what? If there are documents, then there are some people who were in those places. But for us to stand here and say Shs 108 billion has been written off, that one means that another Parliament to come will be also write off something. That is how we shall continue borrowing. 

So, this House cannot really accept the report given by the Public Accounts Committee. We should request them to go and do a lot of interaction with the people who were in those places by then, other than us saying we write off Shs 108 billion. The Minister of Finance has told us that a committee has been constituted. I happen to be on the Government Assurances Committee, what assurance do you give us? What time limit do you give that we shall have this committee in place? Because you have told us that the committee has been formed and next time you shall not repeat such mistakes. I thank you.  

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate the concerns of the committee and the issues they have raised. But it may be setting a very serious precedent that posterity may judge us harshly for that kind of condition. My view is that the matter should be investigated further. Definitely, there is a record of Public Service here and who was occupying which office at a given time. Let us give it more serious thought in terms of even retrospectively dealing with officers who were handling that issue. 

That money is too big an amount to be struck off by a stroke of a pen! I think the committee could do us justice. We could give them more time so that some people are invited to give evidence as to how the developments led to that kind of situation. When looking at how government is losing money and abuse of office here and there, we should also extend to those other periods as long as we have people available who may have been occupying such offices. There must have been a governor at that time; there must have been accountants and a Secretary to the Treasury - all those people who could serve as useful witnesses to investigate this problem. 

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin from the historical point of view. This government came into power with the support of the people of this country. The reason was that the other governments were making mistakes. So, we ushered in this government because we wanted to stop the other mistakes that were happening before. But what is happening now is that the very mistakes the other governments did, are the very mistakes this government is doing. 

I would not like to be party to those mistakes. So, Mr Speaker, I support my colleagues that we have to make sure this thing is done thoroughly. Whoever was responsible for the loss of the money should be brought to book. Because if we do not do it now as Members of Parliament, who will do it? We should be the ones to do it. Thank you very much.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, PAC took up a job that should have been done many years ago. As you are aware that the NRC left a lot of work undone and we have tried our best as PAC to look at all those years? And in arriving at this decision, we had to consult both the Bank of Uganda and the Treasury. We looked at the relevant documents available and we came to the conclusion that the mismanagement that was in those institutions at that material time was too much. If we were to move ahead, we should put more emphasis in making sure that we have the right managers in place now. 

For example, there should be recruitment of many accountants who are qualified to make sure that most of these institutions have computers; they have the right staff so that we do not move without information. To ask PAC to provide information, which is not available in the Bank of Uganda, or provide information that is not available in the Treasury, would be asking for the impossible.  

Therefore, I request - and I am sure the decision we took may help this Parliament in future - that we have a cut-off period because the Treasury has done its best since 2000, and we are about to present the report for 2000. You are going to see how much we have unearthed a lot of rot in the management system and that is where I think this Parliament should come up and take drastic decisions. But those areas, which we cannot provide information on, surely I recommend to this Parliament on behalf of the committee that this money be written off.

The money we are talking about is not Shs 108 billion as hon. Mafabi puts it. It is Shs 68 billion. It is a lot of money but this is an accumulation, which cannot be accounted for. Therefore, I would recommend that in order for us to start from a clean plate, let us write off this Shs 68 billion and then we move ahead. This is what we are recommending to this Parliament.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the chairman of the committee. Is he trying to tell us that the information that they have been looking at ended in 1985 say July or January 1986? If the period of the current government say 1986 onwards is involved in this report, then we should begin from there other than saying we should leave that one apart and begin from 2000. We would like to know the period the report covers.

MR FRED BADDA: Mr Speaker, writing off is like forgiving. If the chairperson is saying we cannot implicate individuals, then let us implicate regimes so that we can know that people in this regime – Obote I - lost so much. How come you know the cumulative total and you do not know the blocks? How did it accumulate? We can excuse the individuals but implicate the regimes. Thank you.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to ask the chairperson of the committee: because the documents are not available then we cannot really take up action? How did they come to find out that amount if the documents are not available? Then, does it mean that PAC, in doing their work, will continue forgiving because the documents are not available? 

MR SEBALU: The chairperson has given a reason that they contacted Bank of Uganda and the advice was that the records were not available. The information we have is that Bank of Uganda is one of the culprits. So, I wonder what they would have done in the circumstances where you were asking for evidence that would incriminate them. So, I think you needed to do a little more than asking whether they had the records or not, because you would never expect any affirmative answer. So as a committee, you need to do more than that.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the chairperson could help us and guide us because the period immediately running to 2000, he was a bureaucrat in the Ministry of Justice. Does he mean even during his time the documents cannot be traced? I need to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: Why do we not go back to the Auditor General’s report? I think they were acting on the Auditor General’s report. From what he said they came to that conclusion after interviewing those people and found that the documents were not there. Is that not what the chairperson is saying? What do we do or we keep it pending?

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am surprised because if we had information as Members of Parliament, we should have visited the committee to assist the chairperson. Having not visited the committee to assist and now we demand of the chairperson as he is reporting, are we being fair to him?

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have the Auditor General’s report here. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR NANDALA: I will read it: “Debits in the bank statement not credited in the cashbook stated as Shs 108,542,962,336 is not supported by documentary evidence.” What the Bank of Uganda means here is that it debited the consolidated account and they do not have evidence for having debited the accounts, which signifies that Bank of Uganda is responsible for this money in conjunction with the Treasury, because Treasury has accepted this to continue. They have a consultant who did the report. 

I repeat it here that there was a consultant who was appointed to do the reconciliation. Did PAC have a look at the consultancy report? And is the Minister of Justice fair to come and tell us that we should have gone to the committee to air out our views, when we know that we appointed them to do the work for us and we shall come here and debate?

MR JOHN ARUMADRI: Mr Speaker, it will be helpful to us if we knew whether the figure includes that of recent times. You will remember recently we were trying to send some money to Makerere University Business School when students were striking and the Minister stood here to say that a document must be originated before money can be moved. Now we have a situation where big sums of money have moved without documents. 

Secondly, the same minister was here also trying to explain away this money. He did say actually that this money was available on the account. Until he was asked whether we can write off money, which is in the pocket. That is when he rescinded that information. So, something is not correct here. We need to move carefully to find out the origin of these matters. Otherwise, anybody can move into Bank of Uganda and carry away big cartons of money and say, “We do not have documents.” How shall we protect against this? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But now, how do we proceed with this matter?  

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, we should not confuse this money with individual ministry money. This is the Treasury account, that is, the reconciliation of the documents available in the Treasury and Bank of Uganda to know how our Consolidated Fund stands. Hon. Mafabi should know that the money being talked about initially in that Auditor General’s report is Shs 779.2 billion. But later after reconciliation, we came to discover that only Shs 68 billion could not be accounted for –(Interruption)
 
MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I have a report here.

THE SPEAKER: Let him finish then you come in, please.

MR SABIITI: As my chairman stated last time, we wanted the House to note that this has been carried forward for many years. We have been insisting that we need the accountability of the funds of 1986 to 1999. And we have been informed that actually during this period all accountabilities had been done and, therefore, all this is money accumulated over a long period. 

Therefore, there is no way even if you had the magic, and I am sure hon. Mafabi, even if you were sent to the Bank of Uganda and the Treasury, I do not see any magic you would use to get an answer. That is why we are saying that in order for us to move forward, in the absence of these documents, in the absence of the people who actually may have messed up the Bank of Uganda and the Treasury - most of them are not available, most of them are dead. There is no way we are going to actually get an answer. 

The committee looked at this matter seriously, we looked at every document, and in fact this very issue took us more time to make sure that at least we come up to this point. I, therefore, recommend once again that this House takes the decision of the committee and then we start from a clean plate.

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, I want to clear something, which hon. Jack Sabiiti has put up. In their PAC report on page 30 they say; “Debits in the bank statement not credited in the cash book stated as Shs 108,542,962,336 is not supported by documentary evidence”.

The accounting officers say that the reconciliation was done by the consultant and it revealed some difference with the Auditor General’s report as has been reported in his report of the year ended 30 June 2002. He explained that there was a problem with the bank reconciliation due to lack of skilled staff and poor record keeping. This resulted in a difference of Shs 107 billion being carried forward. It is not of the Shs 68 billion, hon. Jack is talking about. He is still talking of the Shs 107 billion, which you are recommending to this House to write off.  

Even if a person who committed a crime is dead, we rather condemn him. People have been around. Many of these cases, which we are talking about, took place in the period between 1986 and 1998. Roughly if you want to confirm this, I gave a simple arithmetic illustration. If the earlier government stole a trillion shillings you must come to currency reform and you will find that it is not more than Shs 10 billion. Where does the others go when we really came in power and said we shall account for every penny? It is time we account now.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, who is going to investigate, CID –(Interjection)- IGG? He acts when there are documents. What do we do?

MR SABIITI: I would like to inform Parliament that actually we assigned this duty of investigation to the CID. They reported back to us as a committee that these documents are not available. They gave us a lot of information that is why we took this decision that this money be written off, and I do not see what magic we are going to use to get the documents. Unless we do this, we shall just continue talking about it and as I have informed this House, a lot of work has been done, a lot of recruitment has been done, a lot of equipping. Since most of this has been done, I request this House to take our recommendation seriously so that we move ahead.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Mr Speaker, we are talking about a very important issue. For a long time governments have mishandled funds of this country and many of them have gone away with it. I was told when the chairman was responding to queries that in fact the monies we are talking about span the period from UPC, I think up to NRC. I am quoting what he said on the Floor of Parliament here.  

Mr Speaker, agree with the chairman that it may not be possible for us to trace the details of the money we are talking about, but I think we can trace the years when this money was lost. For example, from the time we started accumulating in our accounts, from this year to this year we can be able now to say in such a year we lost so much money. I am saying this because I feel time has come for us to be able to pin down people who have been responsible. If we can be able to know in one particular year how much money was lost from the Treasury itself or Bank of Uganda, we should trace officers who were responsible for handling the books of account to tell us why this situation arose. 

What I suspect is that because there is nothing for us to go by, some monies seem to have been taken and no request was made, so it could not be traced. Mr Speaker, this is a very serious matter. I request my brother Sabiiti that it is necessary sometimes for us to go back though we are starting on a new plate. The fact that this money may not be written off now does not mean that we cannot keep our records clean as from now onwards. We can go back and pin down the people responsible if we can trace them. 

It would be right for this Parliament to decide and say that because of certain circumstances for this particular year, this could not be done. I know in this country there have been people in authority who just walked to Bank of Uganda, packed money and went off. Even if you are an officer, you could not stop them. If he explained that situation then we can understand but those who cannot explain their cases I think we should hold them responsible and demand for fair return of what they have done. Thank you, Sir.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I get the impression - may be I am wrong but somebody needs to clarify that to me as well. It appears that honourable members are concerned about the idea of writing off this money. My layman’s understanding of writing off this money is essentially to clean up the books. To make the books clean or to start afresh does not mean in my opinion that investigations into who was responsible are abandoned. 

In fact, that is the point I was going to make until the chairman said, just a few minutes ago, that they came to that conclusion of writing off this money because the CID whom they had commissioned to help them in preliminary investigations came back and said, “Sorry, we do not have the records and we have made no headway.”

What is it that we now want as Members of Parliament? We have received the report that money cannot be traced and the records are not there. The committee has come here to tell us, even the Auditor General probably did not discover who was responsible apart from apportioning responsibility in general terms as explained by the hon. Mafabi that Bank of Uganda ought to have kept its books better than it did. Similarly, the supervising Ministry of Finance should have done the same. 

Nobody can trace this money. We have received a report, and according to the experts we should write it off. Is it not writing it off, as the chairperson has explained to start on a fresh note? We should accept the chairman’s report provided that investigations still continue maybe to a larger scale as to who was responsible for disappearance of this money. I thank you.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to speak from an accounting point of view. Much as we say that we should actually write off these debts, normally in accounting we have to first of all know the root causes of such a debt, then we can move on to establish whether it can be actually recovered. If it cannot be recovered and all the underlying factors have already been clearly given out, then we can think of moving in that line of writing off. I thank you.

MR GEORGE WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me the opportunity. In issues of financial management, normally the most critical part is bookkeeping. But also in bookkeeping, we find that they are the least staffed in terms of quality, in terms of numbers, in terms of motivation. And in all local governments or ministries there is always a problem in bookkeeping.  

When you look at PAC’s recommendation we are looking at supporting documents, receipts, vouchers, LPOs. These are bulky documents and my seniors know this in administration, normally the people who handle documents are not the senior officers, not the accounting officers, not the ministers, but mainly clerical officers. Because of this some of the documents get destroyed in transit. When we are moving offices from Ministry of Public Service, Crested Towers, to another one, many documents get destroyed. 

But, we also have in practice –(Interjection)- in many of our areas computers were recently introduced, we have been using manual methods. That is why the makers of the law, both the Local Government Act and the Public Finance Act, have put there a provision for writing off because the law anticipates these problems  

I support the idea of the Chairman PAC. For purposes of putting records right, let it be written off, otherwise we shall be doing the impossible. We will not be able to get documents if documents have been destroyed, and that is why the word “writing off” exists. Unless Parliament is going to make a law to say the word “writing off” does not exist in the laws of Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Kiwalabye, hon. Balemezi and Dr Nkuuhe, then see how we end because we may not be in position to decide on this. But let us get their views.

MR KIWALABYE MUSOKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern here is not whether or not we shall go and recover the money. That may not be possible, it is agreed, but we want to apportion political responsibility to this. The committee finds it very difficult to apportion this amount of money, which is not accounted for, to each regime and as one honourable member was saying this would give us some more information. 

As hon. Mafabi was arguing, if this money was lost before the currency reform, then the figure should have been so huge. So, if the committee does not find it very difficult to apportion this figure within regimes, why do you not do it? It could help us very much.  

However, Mr Speaker, I also wish to say that it is not always, when you are doing accounting, that you find the documents ready. There are times when the documents are not ready and you can use methods of using incomplete records also to reconcile accounts. I do not know whether all these were exhausted. In any case, we want to apportion responsibility to each particular regime. I thank you.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. Just like my colleagues, I wish to see the committee specifying exactly which period is involved and which particular people, whether dead or alive. These were senior officers in government who were involved in these matters. The committee should perhaps also categorize what amounts were unaccounted for, for which department or ministry or institution, so that we can really know where we lost and how we lost; and why those people never accounted for these sums 

I would like to defer from my colleague here who said that documents could get lost on the way. Let us not even put this in our vocabulary as far as accountability is concerned. First of all, these records are not kept in one office; there are so many parties involved because so many signatories have to endorse before the end person who sanctions the issuance of these funds  -(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, hon. Balemezi, for giving way. I would like to inform you that actually it is not good practice always to take advantage of the worst-case scenario. Even where the option of writing off is available, it should not be taken as the first opportunity, and if anything, someone must take responsibility. Even as you write off, someone must take responsibility and action appears to be seen. So, I do not know whether in some districts they were always writing off.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Actually the documents we are talking about are between the Ministry of Finance, the Treasury and Bank of Uganda. So, it does not include documents from districts and government departments, which even have receipts for accountability. These are Ministry of Finance, Treasury releases and Bank of Uganda payment vouchers. So, the specific documents we are talking about are limited to those two offices and Bank of Uganda. The Bank of Uganda has not shifted and the Ministry of Finance has not shifted. So, even if that were true  -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But did the Bank of Uganda not get a new building?

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Speaker, it was an expansion of the building. So, there is no document, which got out of the building.

MRS BALEMEZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for their information. I would like the chairperson of the committee to at least categorize the types of funds lost so that we know whether there are even borrowed funds because we are borrowing heavily. I do not know what we are writing off, because much as it was borrowed to do some work and it never got accounted for. So, with good explanations, I would also support the idea of writing off, but let us first exhaust those avenues so that it is clarified to the nation and to Parliament in particular as to how these funds were used. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: I thank you, Mr Speaker. My contribution is very brief and I intend to go along with the Attorney General that you can write off but still investigate.

MR NANDALA: I can help you with a balance sheet.

DR NKUUHE: In fact I am seeking clarification.  

MR NANDALA: Mr Speaker, it is possible to maintain a record on the book as the provision is pending. There is no error of maintaining it; it will not affect any figure. It will only be a debit here and a credit pending investigation. In fact the complete record, which honourable member talked about, exists. We have bank statements, which are dated; they will tell us the period when it was done.

DR NKUUHE: I wanted Attorney General to clarify to me. First of all, how does he recommend that we proceed when there is no one to carry out the investigation? 

Secondly, I understand that the loss occurred between the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Uganda. Is it not possible to establish who was the Governor at that time; is it not possible to establish who was the Minister of Finance and is it not possible to establish who was the Permanent Secretary so that as we prepare ourselves to write off this debt at least we can apportion this blame? In future we will know how to –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, let us understand what this money we are talking about is all about. It is not money that one has taken out and embezzled or used. What we are talking about now is a problem of reconciliation. If you use money in an office, which has been released to you officially and you have performed your duty and work has been done, but at the end of it you may find that a receipt, for example, was misplaced -(Interruption)- yes.  In this report if you look at page 30, we said that the reason, which the honourable member was asking for, is that poor bank reconciliation due to lack of skilled staff and poor record keeping resulted into what we are talking about. So, it is not that someone took money and used it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have really made our contributions on this issue. Unfortunately, we cannot pronounce ourselves on the matter because of the numbers. Do you need some time to think about this so that you sit as a committee and then come to a final conclusion? I want to be advised.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, we are going to debate the report of 2000 and this same query is pushed to 2000. I would, therefore, request that this report be adopted so that when we move to the report of 2002, which I think is coming next week, we handle this matter in detail. I shall be able at that material time, after having consulted the Treasury and Bank of Uganda, to come with more detailed information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter will come again as the chairperson has said. Maybe other good ideas would have developed so that we can pronounce ourselves on what to do in view of various views that have been expressed on the matter. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 February 2004 at 2.00 p.m.)

