Wednesday, 24 February 2010

Parliament met at 2.55 pm in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oaths were administered to:

Mr Jack Wamai Wamanga

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Wamanga, I would like to warmly welcome you to this House and congratulations upon your victory. As you start your work, I would like to hand over the tools of office. First, I would like to hand over to you the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which you have used to take your Oaths. I also hand over to you the Rules of Procedure of this House, which I encourage you to read and use them to facilitate your work. Obviously, you will be sitting on this side of the House. (Applause) 

Part of your responsibilities will be done in the Chamber here; others will be done in the committees. After some time I am sure the colleagues will advise you on which committee to sit and through the whip, the Speaker will be informed before allocations are made; you have to be a member to a standing committee and one sessional committee. However, I would like to say that all these members are your friends. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s meeting. However, I would like to express my displeasure at the conduct – I think Members forgot the Rules of Procedure of this House. How could you make noise in this Chamber like you did? That is not done – please the excitement should be communicated in the way we normally do it.

The second one is I would like to remind Members that the VIP waiting room is a Speaker’s VIP waiting room; it is not a waiting room for anybody. I have said this several times; I am saying it again – the VIP waiting room is the Speaker’s waiting room. It can only be used in the presence of the Speaker or with permission of the Speaker. So, I would appreciate if those instructions were respected.

Thirdly, hon. Members, today we attempted to do some work but a number of committees were not fully constituted. I think you understand what I mean. I am aware that everybody is under pressure –(Laughter)– but you know you took an oath to do your work for the good of this country. So, at least between Tuesdays and Thursdays we should be doing state duties; you can do the other duties on Mondays and Fridays. So, please attend to your committee work and also the plenary. Thank you.

3.06
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last year we raised, on the Floor of this Parliament, the question of jobs in Government. The Prime Minister who is also the Leader of Government Business promised to bring the details to this House. However, it is now about a year without him availing this information.

You are aware that the population census of 2002, the projection shows that the highest growth rate was in Northern Uganda followed by that of Eastern Uganda, Western and Central Uganda. Also when you look at it you realise that the population does not vary greatly. 

However, when it comes to job distribution, Madam Speaker, it is badly tilted, and sometimes that is why some people feel they are not part of this country because when it comes to job representation in government circles, they do not see themselves. I am not talking about political appointments like ministerial posts. Those ones, whether they come from the same region or not, I do not mind; those are political appointments. I am bothered with public service jobs in government.

I took off my time waiting for the Prime Minister to respond by bringing this list to Parliament, but in vain. So today I am glad to report that I tried my level best to get and avail a list of government jobs. I would like to request that you allow me to lay it on the Table. This is intended to challenge Government to bring their list so that the Ugandans can know how Government jobs are distributed in this country.

Although I had a lot of difficulties in accessing this information, I finally got it. The list shows government jobs in respect of all permanent and under secretaries; heads of public universities, heads of commissions and statutory bodies; chief administrative officers and town clerks; top leadership of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces, which shows all the Generals; Lt. Generals and Brigadiers in the Army; the top brass of the police, showing the Inspector-General of Police; his deputy and all the assistant inspector generals therein; the prisons top brass; and a list of all presidential advisors who are also appointed by the public service and earn a lot of money. 

I am doing this because when we talk about distribution of national resources, it is also about jobs. Some people talked about in this list earn close to Shs 28 million as basic salaries. Others earn Shs 30 million. Now if you have five of these from the same village, definitely you will not be fair to this country.

Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to lay this list on the Table to help the Prime Minister come here and tell this House why there has been this kind of disparity for all these years. For the Army, I can say it is because they fought, but how about the other sectors? If other people have also gone to school, why can’t there be equitable distribution of job opportunities in this country? I beg to lay this list on the Table.

3.12
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, let me on behalf of the government side take this opportunity to congratulate our brother Mr Jack Wamanga Wamai upon his election victory. (Applause) You are most welcome to this august House. Our doors are wide open and I would like to say, please take advantage of government services and facilities so that you can be in a position to serve the people of your constituency of Mbale Municipality very effectively. 

The services should go to both those who elected you and those who did not because we believe that once one has been elected, he/she has the duty and responsibility to serve everybody in that constituency. You are most welcome, Ndugu Wamai.

Regarding the submission by hon. Reagan Okumu, I would like to say, yes, there has been talk about the appointments in various institutions and departments of Government – the issue of equity in job distribution has always come up. But all I can say, on behalf of the Prime Minister, is that we are going to take off time, study the information you have laid on Table. I would also like to assure you that as Government we have information regarding the arch appointments that have taken place. We shall be in a position to compare what you have tabled with what we have. I am sure the Prime Minister, at an appropriate stage will be in a position to come up with an authoritative statement on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Leader of Government Business, you know this matter arose several months ago. I think the country would like to know answers to these issues; the matter outstanding.

MR MIGEREKO: Yes, Madam Speaker, I am aware this matter came up when we were discussing the issue regarding the appointment of Ambassador Onen. I am also aware that within Government circles, a study in regard to these appointments has taken place and a report is available. But as I have indicated, very soon the Prime Minister will come up with an authoritative statement on all these. If you could permit me to consult with him so that I can state, with certainty, when that statement will come to the House?

3.16
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I have been struggling to catch your eye – I thought this House was building a culture that requires the Leader of Government Business and Leader of the Opposition to welcome every new Member who comes in. I am happy to mention that I am standing in for the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition Chief Whip. I am sorry for disturbing you in an effort to catch your eye –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, it is also customary to consult the Speaker about what you want to do at 11 O’clock in the morning, which you did not do today.

MR KIBANZANGA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I thought it had been the tradition and culture in this House. As Members of the Opposition, we have a statement to make in as far as the election of Hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai is concerned. I take this opportunity to make the statement, with your permission.

For the achievements and successes of the Opposition in the recently concluded elections in Mbale Municipality by-elections, sincerely speaking, glory goes to God and thanks go to the people of Mbale Municipality and Ugandans in general. (Applause)  

Let me, therefore, take this opportunity to congratulate hon. Jack Wamanga Wamai and the people of Mbale Municipality and all those who participated in this exercise in their different capacities amidst utter abuse of our democratic process in the country. Despite those problems, I would like to congratulate you and thank you.

Hon. Wamanga and the entire Opposition fraternity, this success is not ours. This is the success for the democratic forces in this country. It is a success for justice. It is a success for equity. It is a success for freedom. It is a success for human dignity and it is a success for Uganda.

What on earth can cause one to draw a gun against his fellow man in the name of politics? What on earth can cause leaders of integrity to stand in public and admit having bribed and corrupted a Member of the Opposition to resign his seat?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kibanzanga, I think you are trying my patience. First of all, it is not part of our rules for Members to discuss a welcome. It is the Speaker who welcomes the new Member. That has been the position and I have already welcomed him. I have given you an opportunity to welcome your colleague and now you are bringing in controversial issues. I do not have your statement. What do you want me to do with your statement?

MR KIBANZANGA: Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, if I have offended you and the House, I am really sorry but I thought that in an exercise like this, we should be able to speak out and let the country know what is going on. If the House is not comfortable with this document, with your permission -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. When our brother and colleague, hon. Kajeke took the decision to resign, he came here and he was given all the time to address this House and he stated the reasons and the grounds over which –(Interjections)- can I be protected from Mama Mabira because she is threatening me with a big demonstration? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Raise the point of order.

MR MIGEREKO: Our brother, hon. Kajeke, was given time. He came to this House and openly submitted the reasons and grounds on which he had taken the decision to quit the House. Out of his own freewill, he decided to quit this House. 

My dear brother, hon. Kibanzanga, the Acting Leader of the Opposition and Acting Chief Whip, has asserted that the Member had to resign out of inducements in form of bribes. Madam Speaker, is it in order for an honourable member to make such a serious statement without substantiating it? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reasons for which hon. Kajeke resigned are on the Hansard. He resigned and the seat became vacant and another Member was elected. Just welcome him and stop there, please.

MR KIBANZANGA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I welcome our colleague. But democracy demands that you listen to what you do not want to hear. All said and done, I request this House to conclude the reports that were submitted to this Parliament regarding electoral problems in this country.

Hon. Jack Wamai, I sincerely welcome you to this Chamber. As I had said earlier on, this success is not ours alone but for the whole country including the people of Mbale. And we have all the reasons to rejoice. The process of developing and building democracy in this country is on. I think you have tested the real situation. I thank you very much and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

3.25
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Madam Speaker, I am rising on an important issue. The Ministry of Finance has laid on the Table Supplementary Schedule No.1. He is now bringing an addendum. Recently, the Ministry of Works took over 10,000 kms of roads all over the country. We realised that there was no single coin in the budget for those roads. As we talk, all the roads are impassable. (Applause) I have done good research in a number of places but there is no single coin at the Uganda National Roads Authority for those roads. 

Parliamentary procedures will demand that we should not stop people from presenting, but you would rather go back and have a supplementary for those roads before we consider anything else. 

Madam Speaker, when you go through the supplementaries, you will not believe it. This supplementary - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Byanyima, it has not yet been presented.

MR BYANYIMA: I am rising on a point of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want to pre-empt?

MR BYANYIMA: Yes. My concern is, if the Ministry of Finance cannot think of getting money for the roads but they are instead thinking of money for Phenix –(Interjection)- yes, the Yellow Girls! I am of the view that the Minister of Finance should go back and consider the priorities of this country and puts in money for the roads, the 10,000 kms, so that we can move together. Otherwise, it would be unfair for this Parliament to approve money for non-priority areas and we leave issues that affect our people. I thank you. 

3.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I want to support the issues raised by hon. Nathan Byanyima. We sit on the committee of works but I think we are also failing in that committee and that is why you see hon. Byanyima getting to this House. This is a big problem.

The other issue that calls for the attention of this Parliament is the talk of the Bukungu-Kagwara-Kaberamaido ferry. Our ferry –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our ferry?

MR OKUPA: Our ferry. (Laughter) We have looked at this supplementary and we do not see anything. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance must go back and bring it in this supplementary schedule too. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe we should allow the Minister to lay the papers first because he has not done so - they do not want him to lay the papers?

3.29
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): I am rising on a totally different matter and I want to seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

A while ago soon after the new Member was sworn in, one of the Members of this House laid information on the Table whose authenticity we may not be sure of. We have a way we conduct business in this House. Once information becomes the property of this House, it is presented to a relevant committee to find out the nitty-gritty, a comparative system, and then make a report to this House so that we can make an informed decision and input as Members of this House. May I ask your indulgence and ask that the information, which was laid by hon. Reagan Okumu, be referred to the Committee on Public Service so that it can find out whether the information is authentic? 

Secondly, so that it can make a comparative analysis with other governments. What do other countries do in the conduct of public affairs?

Thirdly, so that they can provide a report for us to make an informed input so that we can make recommendations on how Parliament can improve the administration of public structures. Madam Speaker, I would like to ask for your indulgence on this. I thank you.

3.31
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the concerns raised by hon. Dombo. But I also would like to remind him that this is a matter that was forwarded to the Leader of Government Business to come up with a position and a while ago the Government Chief Whip did assert that after all Government has the information regarding the various appointments. 

I think the onus is now on the Leader of Government Business to come up with a statement. If anything, I would prefer that since the Leader of Government Business has now entered the Chamber, they give us a timeframe by which they would bring a clear position regarding the appointments. Otherwise, if we refer this matter back to the Public Service Committee under this pressure that you all understand, I think we might not get answers on time. Since last year we have been waiting for responses in vain. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Member for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague is that quite honestly the situation is tight but I think hon. Dombo was acting out of good faith for one good reason. In the not so distant past there was a cry from our side, by hon. Ben Wacha. The Minister of Public Service made an undertaking specified for two weeks to bring a report in that regard but it did not happen.

So, if hon. Dombo is worried about the action of Government directly through the Cabinet and ministers present here or those that are absent, I think he has a point to make. Maybe you can find a way that is going to harmonise this position. Otherwise, Government has already made a commitment which it did not fulfil. 

I have also not been persuaded by the words of the Government Chief Whip because I felt he was only shading the burden for a while. Otherwise, the commitment that was given by the Minister of Public Service had not been honoured at all. So, what do we do under such circumstances? 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I think in order for us to get these responses very fast, let the Leader of Government Business give us a timeframe here and now. I do not think it is prudent again for us to start going backwards and yet Government had earlier on made a commitment through the Minister of Public Service. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, there is some outstanding commitment on your side.

3.34
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a pity the Minister of Public Service is not here and normally when you are asking someone to do work, it is important to consult him or her to know the timeframe required. You see what I mean? You know you do not just give timeframes in a naked manner. You must be professional. Under the circumstances, I will request the Minister of Public Service to provide the information within three weeks from today. 

MR WACHA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Leader of Government Business must have forgotten. The matter was raised on this Floor and it was me who asked the Leader of Government Business to provide information in respect to various public servants, where they came from and how they were recruited. The Speaker ruled that the Leader of Government Business should provide this information within one month. I think he has forgotten. The matter had nothing to do with the Minister for Public Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, this matter is outstanding.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, as you know I have the right to delegate functions to my colleagues and it is my position that the Minister of Public Service will bring this information within three weeks. I cannot be everywhere. I have a lot of work -(Interjections)- please, listen. I do assign work to my colleagues.

MS ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are discussing a very pertinent point which is causing a lot of discomfort across the country and this is not the first time that it has been raised on this Floor of Parliament. It has taken nearly six months now, since it was raised in this House and the Leader of Government Business is quite aware that it is not the first time. Is the hon. Prime Minister in order, instead of answering the long standing query to come and say, he is too busy, he cannot use the six months while Ugandans out there are all crying for the answer which we need? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister has other ministers working under him. What he was explaining was that the one to whom he delegated to has not yet given his response. Prime Minister, if you are saying three weeks, it is now Government assurance and we shall take you up on that one.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM NO.2 TO THE DETAILS OF THE RECURRENT SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE FY 2009/2010, SCHEDULE 1

3.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, whereas clause 2(a) and clause 2(b) of Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda allows that:

“If in respect of any financial year it is found-
(a) 	That the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act; 

(b) 	Or that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by the Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the money is spent.”

In execution of the above legal requirements, I beg to lay on Table Addendum No.2 to supplementary expenditure schedule 1 amounting to Shs 11,433,950,000 for the Financial Year 2009/2010. I beg to lay on the Table.

3.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, hon. Nathan Byanyima raised a point here regarding what has just happened of which I seconded. We want to beg your indulgence and that of the House that these issues of the roads affect all of us; about 10,000 km of Government roads at LC V level were taken over from July 2008 but to date, there is no money provided for the rehabilitation and re-development of these roads.

Today, we are receiving this addendum but it does not take care of that. We are in the rainy season; these roads are going to be impassable. We want to beg this House that the Minister of Finance takes this addendum back and brings it with amendments that include the roads and our ferry.

3.42
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to hon. Byanyima’s concerns and my colleague across. This is a time for us honourable members to remind ourselves of the three cardinal roles: appropriation, oversight and legislation. Today, we are being called upon to continue appropriation on issues very unclear to some of us. Issues clear to some of us are roads, schools, health units, drugs and what have you, certainly not Phoenix Logistics. I am totally opposed to that. If it is one of them, hon. Members, let us for once put our feet down and say, “Enough is enough and no”.

Just the other day I hosted his Excellency, the President of this country. His Excellency, the President of this country had to go through a terrible patch of road and he almost got stuck; it was very embarrassing. 

Whereas, if you have a medical problem you may run to a Government hospital and fail to get drugs, you may run to a private clinic. If you cannot get satisfied with a USE school, you may have to choose a private primary school, secondary or even nursery. But for goodness’ sake, we do not have a private road. We do not have private schemes to work on roads. They are a very important component of our day to day lives. It is for our livelihoods. Look at our communities for instance -(Interjections)- yesterday, those of you who watched TV must have seen a patch of a road within Kampala from the Old Taxi Park up to Kalitunsi Road; you may take the whole day trying to cross through; it is very unfortunate and village roads are even worse. Why should we continue lying to our people?  

Just the other day, as my colleague was saying, we received letters and we went home excited, telling our people that the roads had been taken over by Government, but what did we get? We received a very raw deal. Let us now sit down and say, enough is enough, before we get a supplementary for these roads today, tomorrow or the other day. We can put everything aside until we make our roads clear. I think we shall not have done too much against our Government.  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that I have not yet committed this request to the committee. It is not coming for debate today; it is going to the committee for discussion. 

3.46
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate that all of us have serious concerns regarding the quality of our road network. This supplementary is totally wanting in that area, but I want to remind Members that the health sector is also having a lot of problems. For me, I am utterly perturbed, especially regarding the increased maternal deaths. The maternal deaths –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, it is common knowledge for those concerned that though the level of maternal mortality in this country is unacceptable, it has progressively fallen since 1996. When this Government took over, maternal mortality was 620. As I speak now, it is 435. Therefore, there has been a progressive decline. 

The honourable member has said that maternal mortality is increasing. That is not true. Is he in order to mislead the House and report that maternal mortality is increasing when in fact it is declining? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is embarrassing to have to accept that 400 are still dying and you think that it is a matter to celebrate about. (Applause)

DR EPETAIT: Maybe the honourable minister ought to appreciate that on average we lose about 18 mothers per day - for maternal mortality which translates into about 6,570 mothers dying per year. That is not acceptable! You have even stated on the Floor here that it is not acceptable. So, I would be happy if –(Interruption)

MAJ. GUMA: Madam Speaker, what has sparked off all this debate about resources and supplementaries is hon. Byanyima’s point about a company that siphoned money and it collapsed. We all know it; those of us who have been here. However, although I see here 11.4 billion for food relief for Karamoja and Bukwo, in our usual procedure, Madam Speaker, I thought that you would commit whatever has been presented here to the relevant sessional committee and then after discussing, rejecting or supporting, is when hon. Byanyima’s point would come in to refuse and sort out our priorities. And that is when the maternal health business would come on board and all these issues. 

DR EPETAIT: There is one Speaker in this House. So, Madam Speaker, the reason why we are extremely upbeat about this supplementary is to even propose that the Minister of Finance first gets back to clean it up, because the way it is now, it has a lot of gaps. In fact, again on health, what the Ministry of Health requested for is not what they are providing for in the supplementary. So, I think that the Ministry of Finance should go back with the supplementary and clean it up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we send it to the committee and dissect it from there because the committee can come back with a recommendation saying either yes or no. 

MR BYANYIMA: It is true that the Supplementary Schedule I was on the Table. It went to the relevant committee, but why do we have to wait to reject the issue when we would have done it much earlier? In the first instance, the supplementary has gone beyond three percent; it is 5.8. It has never happened in this country. That is why they have come here. We are saying, why don’t they go back? Here is money for Basil Reeds; Basil Reeds is claiming Shs 36 billion for working on Jinja-Bugiri Road.  

We are told here that we won the case but they are compensating them Shs 36 billion! Why don’t they go back, put things right and come back? It is going to be very difficult for this Parliament to take it back. I know what has been happening here. Let them go back and look at the roads and many other issues and then bring them back. We cannot refuse it; there will be a chorus answer here - say aye - which I do not really want today.
 
3.53
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think there was a problem with the preparation of the Supplementary Schedule. Just yesterday, the Social Services Committee met and we were interacting with the Minister of Health and his team, but what we found out was that what the Ministry of Finance presented as the requirement for Health was 2.2 billion for non-tax revenue for some equipment. And when the minister appeared before us, he said he was not aware of that requirement by the Ministry of Health.  Instead, the minister presented different requirements. So, it appears Cabinet still has a problem of sorting out what requirements they need to bring to Parliament. 

So, I want to agree with hon. Byanyima that they should go back and reconcile some of these figures because it was an embarrassment when the Ministry of Health came and disowned what the Ministry of Finance presented to us and gave different requirements. So, you need to sort yourselves out before you come back to Parliament.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would wish to get a clarification from the minister, particularly in regard to the question of the health sector. When they were formulating this supplementary, did they take into consideration the Abuja Convention? The Abuja Convention of 2000 makes it mandatory to all party members and signatories including Uganda – Listen! You don’t know; receive information - I am seeking protection, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Speaker, I don’t understand what the frontbench on the other side is up to in this matter because this is serious and they are interjecting.

I was talking about the Abuja Convention of 2000. It is well known to all of you, I presume. It makes it mandatory for all of us signatories to commit 15 percent of our budget to the health sector. It is mandatory and it was signed in 2000. When you look at the contributions and the percentage we are making to the health sector, it is less than ten percent. So, the clarification I wanted is, when you were preparing this supplementary, did you put this into account that we have this obligation? Also, when do you hope to comply with this obligation under that international instrument, which is so significant? Because it was meant to fight Malaria and all these manageable diseases and nothing is being done about that protocol.

So, if we are to comply with that protocol, go back and revise the supplementary in view of the requirement that we should make it 15 percent and make sure that it covers that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KAMUNTU: Let me comment on these protocols with percentages to put this matter to rest. There are many protocols; Abuja is one of them, Maputo is another one, there is Addis Ababa and some people are adding Mbale. That Mbale Declaration, I don’t know, but the clarification I want to give in form of information is that all these protocols, which give percentage allocations on national budgets, need to be domesticated first because if you don’t, all these percentages would exceed 100 percent of your budget and it would not operate. 

Consequently, it is not that Government is ignoring these protocols, it is simply that when these protocols are made, they have to be domesticated and when that is done, a more realistic allocation of budget sectors is reflected in the national budget when it is presented to this House.

May I also add that procedurally, the supplementary addendum put on the Table - I am sure you will direct its commitment and all these issues will be raised in appropriate committees. We are willing to discuss them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have identified the areas we want to deal with and the areas we don’t want to deal with, but we cannot take a decision until the committee reports back to us that we are rejecting this or accepting this.

3.59
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the Members for your indulgence. Madam Speaker, you recall that you attended the funeral service and burial of the wife to a Member of Parliament who died while she was giving birth. The simplest reason as to why this lady died was that for six hours in the apex unit of our national referral hospital in the country, there was no blood. I have a document here and it has been circulated by hon. Tashobya to selected Members just for information, because he intends to move a motion on the Floor of the House about blood. 

One of the observations is that Red Cross, which is purely privately funded, cannot collect enough blood and we are here apportioning money for compensation when we cannot apportion money to save the lives of our people. Wouldn’t it be right that the hon. Minister of Health supports this so that this is referred back and he is enabled to present his issues to the Minister of Finance so that we are able to save lives? 

If this happened to a Member of Parliament, how much more is happening to people who are downtrodden and cannot afford this? Whereas we can refer this to the committees at your discretion, we would have preferred that if it was referred to the ministry right now, it will give an opportunity - these ministers are seated and their issues are not provided for them to have a shot on this issue.

Madam Speaker, we beg to request you that this issue is deferred so that the ministry comes up with a better composed thing. I thank you.

4.01
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whenever the minister is appearing before committees, they will always say we asked for this money but Ministry of Finance - as backbench members of parliament, this is an effort to help the ministers because they know that if they have failed with the Ministry of Finance, they have the support of Parliament.

You remember very well that we agreed that we shall not pass any loan here as Parliament until the US$100 million that the Ministry of Finance promised us for maternal health is passed here. Is this a trick that now they have decided to come through supplementaries? We also ought to understand as they may be moving faster than us.

On the issue of roads, the Minister of Works, Hon. John Nasasira, already wrote to the chief administrative officers and chairmen LC V informing them that there is no money in this financial year to cater for the roads that were taken over by Central Government recently. In the communication that was written to the chief administrative officers and chairmen LC V requesting them for those roads, they told them that they will be considered in the financial year of 2009/10, which is about to end. Now this financial year again he has written that they are not taking on those roads because there is no money. These are the very roads, which are across the country.

Honourable members, I want to inform the ministers that for where you have failed, we want to help you and show you that we are ready to help you and work with you as members of parliament because this excuse of saying Ministry of Works failed, I asked for this and they didn’t give - that has been a lullaby in the committees.

Now, the addendum has been brought. I want to request that instead of accepting this addendum to go to the committee, let them take it back and consider our issues because that is the only language they will listen to. These are the main roads in our districts and we are the people dying on the roads. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that the Minister of Finance has heard the sentiments of this House. They are not satisfied with the priorities you have presented. Please go and review them in view of the discussion. (Applause)

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, about two weeks ago, the Speaker of this House did instruct my ministry to come before this House and present a statement as regards the various types of uniforms that we dress the Police in. We have been ready for more than a week to do this and we are happy to do it now.

The Uganda Police Force, like any other Police force the world over, has different uniforms with different colours. As we speak, we have eight different colours, namely: khaki, plain white, Police blue and black, light blue shirt with white blue trousers, khaki brown camouflage, blue camouflage, plain black, white shirt with a black trouser and red jacket with blue Police trousers.

The reasons for the different colours are historical, traditional, cultural, functional or a combination of these reasons. One is the regular khaki fabric. This is for general duty Police and Very Important Persons’ Protection Unit. It is historical because it was introduced by the colonial governments as a general duty uniform and we have retained it as such without seeing any reason why we should change it. It was worn by Police force of a number of commonwealth countries, for example Tanzania, India, Pakistan as well as some Middle Eastern and North American countries like the United Arab Emirates.

I have photographs here as well as actual samples so if it is the desire of this House, I could call for the samples to come in so that we can see them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, this matter has been of great concern to the Members. Please, bring the samples so that we know which colours we are talking about.

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

This is the ordinary khaki we are talking about. This is for general duty, this is for officers and this is for Training Police -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister just to show us the thing in the concealed paper sacks that this is the uniform? Why can’t he spread and raise it and we see other than just pulling them from the box and putting them on the Table? This is because the more reason -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let me ask the chamber steward to assist the minister. Once he introduces the uniform, the steward will lay it in a particular corner with its title until they are all complete.

MR OKUPA: Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: The hon. Member of Parliament for Kassanda is ready to wear some and demonstrate before this House. (Laughter) I will also lay before the Table this photograph.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, introduce those others so that they are laid one by one.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we use that for training at Kabalye or anywhere else we are training.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you asked the minister to explain the uniforms and that is what he is doing. Why don’t you allow him to introduce them? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am part of you and I am a bit slow and would like to be helped in such a way that the slowest among the group follows. I think that the way the minister has made his paper is very clear and the reason I am struggling is that I want to have a very clear distinction of these uniforms. I would have loved that he says as he puts it in the paper that, “regular khaki fabric” and then he picks the sample after the description like he has outlined in the paper. When he begins lifting all of them at once, I will still go away from this House confused.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Members that is what I had instructed him to do. That is why the box was brought there and he has just started. So, Minister, start again. 

MR KASAIJA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. Regular khaki for general duties; but in khaki, we do have shades and these shades are just functional. Even among the regular khaki, for example, we have one shade basically meant for training. Still under item No.1 for those of you who have the paper, we have got three shades of khaki. 

I now proceed to item No.2; plain white fabric. This is for Traffic Police. It is both traditional and functional. It is important that Traffic Police are seen by motorists from a distance and that is why we say it is functional. This clear visibility enables motorists to quickly see and recognise the Police officer on duty. In addition, many Traffic Police forces the world over use completely or partially a white uniform. Examples are Tanzania who use full white, Sudan who use full white, Malaysia who use full white, Kenya use partial white and Japan use full white. 

Item No.3(a) is the Police blue fabric. This is used by the Mobile Police Patrol Unit or Anti-Riot and the Marines Unit. It is also the colour of the Police for ceremonial uniform -(Interjections)- there is no teargas business. (Laughter) 

Item 3(b) is the blue, grey and white camouflage. We shall leave these uniforms with the clerk and any one Member who wishes to really fully look at them at close range will have that liberty to do so. This is worn by the Mobile Police Patrol Unit as a feed force. These officers sometimes perform duties of paramilitary nature in areas of conflict throughout the country. These duties may include physical combat, hence the need for the camouflage. Blue is characteristic of Police uniforms throughout the world as we have said before. 

Item No.4 is light brown, amber green or dark brown. It is used by the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU). This colour was chosen for the concealment in the Savannah grasslands where the unit is now operating in the North and North Eastern parts of our country. 

We also have khaki maroon plain that is still worn by SPCs in the countryside. This however is now being phased out to be replaced by the regular khaki, which has an armband with insignia of SPC which simply means Special Police Constables. We have not brought that one because we know it is dying off. It is going to disappear completely in a very short time.

Item No.5 is the plain black fabric. This is used by the Counter Terrorism Unit. It is functional and is consistent with the International Police Anti-Terrorism Unit. 

Item No.6 is the light blue shirt with Police blue trousers. This is won by our Aviation Police. It is also functional and consistent with international Police practice and culture. Many countries use similar uniforms at their airports. If you go to Entebbe, most of our Police officers will be dressed in that manner to match the aviation culture. 

Item No.7 is the white shirt with police blue trousers. It is won by officers of the Police Air Wing – the pilots. It is functional and consistent with international practises and culture again, just to fit in with the aviation ways of doing things.

Item No.8 is the Police blue fabric (ceremonial). This is used generally by all Police officers for ceremonial activities and duties. The jacket has shoulder applets which are six inches long. It has a slit behind, four silver buttons, four pockets in front with silver buttons and there is a tiny shallow pocket on the left between the two big pockets. It has a long belt with stiff material and plastic buckle worn with a white shirt and a necktie. The trouser has two inside pockets; trousers for other ranks have got a red band on the outer side.

Police brass band uniform; the colours are red and Police blue. This is for the Police band. The reason is historical. The jacket has a closed Police neck with a Chinese collar, Police blue shoulder epilates with golden plate, red wings detached from the shoulder with golden strips.

There are other specialised units within the Uganda Police Force such as medical, dog handling section, fire brigade which also according to international practices may have different shades, but within the general outlay here.

The various colours used by Uganda Police are commonly used by Police forces worldwide mainly because of the differences in functionality. The tasks of the general duties Police are different from those of the specialised units. In addition, each specialised unit has a unique task which may require attire that befits its functional requirement. For example, our neighbours in Kenya use khaki tunics for officers; blue skirts and white blouses for women officers. General Service Unit has green camouflage and jungle green trousers and shirts, then dark blue trousers and jackets with white shirts are used for ceremonial duties. White shirts and dark blue trousers/skirts are used by Aviation Police.

Our neighbours in Tanzania use white uniform for traffic, blue trousers and white shirts for officers, green uniform for field force units, white shirts and dark blue trousers for Aviation Police, cream khaki for general duties, cream cotton shirts with cream khaki for weekends, to mention but a few.

In this statement, we have summarised what I have said above which you can keep as your record and future monitoring as and when you wish.

Lastly, we have introduced a system, although it is not fully operationalised; every officer on duty must have his name tugged on his uniform on the left hand side and his number on the right hand side. The point I am trying to make is that every Police officer in not too faraway from now will be bearing his name on his uniform right or left. Should you wish to identify an officer who is doing wrong and you want to report to the appropriate authorities, you can pick the name and you can pick the number and do the needful.

I beg to submit and thank the Members for giving me the opportunity to clarify on this matter. I hope I have now rested this issue of Police uniforms, but we are open to any advice you may wish to render to us.

4.27
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): I want to thank the minister for having at least listened and brought the statement because on several occasions, ministers have been instructed even by the Leader of Government Business, but they never come to make these statements.

Hon. Minister, I only have a question. As a teacher, if you pulled out one uniform and asked the MPs what it is for, I want to tell you I am one of those who will fail except khaki the original that I know. If you do it now, you will get many of us failing. How do you expect the local Musoga in Bugiri to internalise all this and be able to differentiate this from that. How will people be able to differentiate this new uniform from that of a thief or a thug in the village and be able to report. 

Hon. Minister, I want to ask you, the way you have gone on introducing new uniforms, where are you going to end? Because these days I hear you have a unit in charge of land eviction; a unit in charge of election violence. Are you going to get uniforms for all these units? Will Ugandans internalise all and be able to know whether these are policemen or not?

4.29
MR TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): I think the minister has satisfied Members of this House that the request which was passed to him to bring all these uniforms and display them has been done. I think he has done a wonderful job and I congratulate him.

My only worry now is how these uniforms are going to be maintained, especially white. You remember that Police used to have Police canteens and in the Police canteen, a policeman could access items like Omo and use that soap to maintain his white uniform. How will you manage to keep this uniform white before it degenerates from white to brown given the rains and the dust in Kampala? This is the biggest problem that I have.

Secondly, I have watched the traffic Police especially when it is very hot and he is wearing the black cap on the head – first of all it is very hot and that cap as you know is woolen and it can be extremely hot. I would like to advise that you find a way of finding a big hat like the Kenyan Police that can shield the Police from too much sunshine and rain because they will be on the road up to 8 O’clock in the evening in the case of traffic police as you know. 

The other problem is the rain coats during the rains. It means that the policeman will wear a blue raincoat that will shield him because the public will not see him in the normal white during the rains. Do you intend to introduce white raincoats for the traffic police?

Finally, I must commend the traffic police in Kampala today for doing a wonderful job –(Applause)- I know because I once in a while drive myself –(Member timed out.) 

4.33
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): I thank you. There are two points hon. Butime and hon. Lumumba mentioned. How would we know – some of us are saying that we are their representatives but are we going to carry the boxes around with us so that we can take them to our constituencies and show each one of them what each uniform represents? I do not know the reason why we have decided to have more confusion than understanding especially in regards to the public because we have lived for a long time with the khaki. So what is the good reason that we have to have all these colours for everybody to be that confused? 

Secondly, some of us have actually hardly been able to tell the difference in colour because they are extremely dirty. I was travelling from Entebbe today - actually I was coming from Kalangala and I found a police person – I would like to remind everybody that some of them happen to be women because the minister seems to think they are men only. I found a very dirty police man seated by the side of the road with a stick as though the vehicles that were passing were cattle. You know how we go and look after our cattle with a stick? I do not know whether that stick is also part of uniform or official – you know I looked at him and wondered whether the officer was doing his duty. Are they too sick to stand up and do their duty properly? What is happening because I do not think they are being very responsible? I hope that when we get into the East African Federation, we will harmonise especially the police so that all of us, if possible have the same uniform. We need to rethink the fact that we have to have so many in order to confuse the public. I thank you.

4.36
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you. I appreciate what the minister has done in bringing these uniforms to us. For me the issue is the usage rather than the uniform. I know that distinction in itself is helpful – so I know that this uniform is ceremonial or regular. The real problem I have with police uniform is the abuse of it. 

Today in the countryside and in our police stations, there are people putting on that regular khaki who are not police officers. This uniform has therefore been abused and it is important that the minister puts an end to the abuse of police uniform in this country. For those of us who receive reports of torture we will be told that, “The person who tortured me was putting on police uniform.” And yet it is in a place that is not gazetted as a police station. So how come persons are putting on police uniform and doing things that are not ordinarily expected of the police? 

Hon. Minister, this should be checked because it is the wrong thing. There are so many people masquerading as police officers and I think they are operatives. Hon. Minister, you know that they are in your police stations and you need to go to the Central Police Station here and you will find people – even the police will whisper to you, “Mind what you are talking.” You have to be careful to know that you are talking to a real policeman or an operative who is putting on police uniform. If you have to maintain the integrity and the name of the police force, you have to guard your uniforms and their usage very well.

I am concerned about people who also work side by side the police. In most of our by-elections, you find people not necessarily putting on those uniforms but have the courage to put on a yellow something in order to be in the yellow brigade and they are carrying an SMG; and they are working with our police who have uniforms; and the police respect them. They cause havoc in the name of police. They beat up voters; they harass all of us, yet they are working side-by-side with the police. So, can the honourable minister put an end to such abuse?

Madam Speaker, I have an issue about the black uniform the minister has presented. That is the uniform the Black Mambas put on to defile the courts of judicature in this country -(Interjections) (Member timed out_)

4.40
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you. I also wish to thank the minister but I would like to know how many sets of uniforms you give the traffic police in view of the fact that keeping them clean is a big challenge. 

I know that you have observed that in other countries just as we do, the white uniform is worn by the traffic police force. But I would like to remind you that we reside in a very dirty, dusty city, which is not comparable to Malaysia or even Nairobi in Kenya.

I would also want to find out from the minister whether training uniform is used by the regular police. I have observed policemen patrolling the streets in Kampala wearing the rather inferior training uniform. Why is this so? 

I know there is a branch of the police called VCCU. These are people who go around the country torturing people; actually they violate people’s human rights. I would like to know whether they also have a uniform. This is because I noticed that in your presentation and among the samples that you showed us, there was no uniform specifically for the VCCU, which is the Violent Crime Crack Unit. 

Also, I do not know what the ministry and specifically the police intend to do with clothes people wear, which are similar to police uniforms, especially the camouflaged ones. They go down to Owino Market or other areas where they shop for old clothes, find these camouflaged uniforms and wear them. What controls have you instituted, as a ministry, to ensure that this does not happen?

Additionally, I even see musicians – you know somebody calling himself a general and performing at a music concert while in military or police uniform. They actually love the camouflage uniform. Is this something the police would like to allow? What are you doing as a police force to try and curb this abuse of police uniforms? I thank you.

4.43
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

All professions know that when you put on a national uniform, you are putting on a national asset; it is an honour for you to put on such a uniform. So whatever you do; you are doing it in the name of the country and, therefore, all the actions of police officers who put on national uniforms should reflect professionalism. 

I would like to ask the minister - we are aware of the incident hon. Alaso was talking about that happened some time back; people who were not police officers invaded the courts of judicature and  eventually when they were photographed and revealed to the public the following day, they turned up in police uniforms. The newspapers put their pictures on the front pages when they were putting on the so-called black T-shirts and the following day when they were putting on police uniforms; the same people! That means that your system is such that you avail the police uniforms to non-police officers. That is very dangerous. What we need is a police force, which is professional. Some people who commit all sorts of crimes eventually hide in police uniforms and portray an image that the police are the ones committing those crimes. 

We as taxpayers would like to see professional police. In my professional years as a lawyer, I have dealt with both the police and prisons. I can tell you Mr Minister that the most professional force under you today is prisons. It is the most professional because the rules are clear. A prison officer knows that this is how I deal with an inmate and the inmate also knows, but once you allow other people to use your uniforms, it becomes a problem. I think prisons does not lend its uniform to some of these – whether they are Kiboko Squad or whatever it is - whom you know because they come from your police stations anyway.

Secondly, there is this problem, which the minister has not talked about. It is about police officers in civilian clothes, the CIDs. Can you imagine when you are being arrested today, there is a swarm of people dressed in all sorts of curtain material, kanzus and so on carrying guns? You cannot know whether it is police. We have been moving around circles and when somebody was arrested, the police said, “No, we were not part of that group,” yet eventually, you even avail them cells to keep suspects. When you go to CPS, there are cells and they say, “No, those are not our suspects.” You go to Kiira Road Police Station and they say, “Those people are there, but we only keep custody. They are not ours.” Even Jinja Road!  Why should you allow such things to happen at your police stations? Why should you? For us we want to deal with a professional police. If somebody is suspected of committing a crime, police will come and say, “You are suspected of having committed a crime X, let us go.” 

4.47
MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just have two questions. One, if you look at 3A, the police blue or blue-black fabric for the Mobile Police Patrol Unit, I wonder whether the minister is aware that sometimes, you can get a Mobile Police Patrol Unit;  a pick-up full of police officers putting on different colours? There are those in black; there are those in blue camouflage; you find some in military fatigues and you find some in plain clothes and they are all on a Mobile Police Patrol vehicle. Is it common practise that for any function, any member of a specialised unit can put on anything because it is just a mixture? 

Secondly, my question is in regard to deployment of police trainees. An honourable colleague has just said that along the streets of Kampala, sometimes you find police patrolling streets putting on poor quality khaki material; actually the trainees’ material. I would like to find out whether it is now a practice for police trainees to be deployed in any part of the country while still under training before passing out? This is something that we have now realised. 

In fact on Sunday we buried a police trainee from my constituency who was gunned down while on duty in Karamoja at a place called Lorengechora. I now wonder whether your office has taken a step to deploy trainees for paramilitary operations in conflict areas. 

And finally, just to thank you - in fact you would even qualify maybe to train your other colleagues, the ministers, in how to answer questions. I think he has really performed quite well -(Applause)- for which I would like to commend you. You know the report has been ready for quite sometime; he was only waiting for the opportunity. And the way he has demonstrated it here and promised even to leave samples in the Clerk’s Office, I wondered whether the Clerk’s Office would generate more copies to answer hon. Kavuma’s question whether they should go to their constituencies with copies to demonstrate to their constituents. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for his timely and detailed report that is full with exhibits. I appreciate the justification for the eight different types of uniform. 

Normally laws and regulations are intended to cause order and orderliness in the community and I expected that one of the reasons for the differentiation of the police uniforms is to cause order and orderliness. But the reason that this House is debating this matter today is because it was raised, I think, by hon. Okumu Reagan. We were discussing security matters and the reason we are discussing it today is because we are not commending the order and orderliness that this has caused but we are concerned about the apprehension, fear, disorder, and the general sense of insecurity or lack of understanding of what is going on.

Madam Speaker, ours is not your ordinary police force. Our police force has got a historical background. It is closely associated with the NRM revolution. It is also associated with a party or a government in power. It is associated with indiscriminate killing, torture and kiboko squad plus of course the black T-shirts which the honourable minister - I think his list is not exhaustive. Hon. Minister, your list should include the black T-shirts. We also need to know when plain clothes are used by police to do their duties like the Kiboko squad who were not clothed in police uniforms. 

In this country, we have so many paramilitary organisations: LDUs, SPCs and Kiboko squads. It is for all these and other reasons that it was asked of the honourable minister, “How do we identify the good and the legal and how do we differentiate the bad and the not good?”

Hon. Minister, you told us, and we have noticed, that police have names on their police uniforms but what are they really intended for? Who are they really intended to serve? In this country we have people who cannot even pronounce other people’s names and they have worked together in this House for five years. They cannot pronounce or write their names properly. Now, the policeman out there comes threatening and he has come to arrest you. Do you think that the ordinary person out there will take care to read the policeman’s name, remember it -(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I think you are really asking for too much. First, they had no identification and we complained. Now he has given them names and numbers and you are saying that even that is bad. I do not know what you want.

4.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Police were known for smartness. I come from that family in which my father’s father was in the police force. If you look at me, people have commented that I am smart and I think it is so. I learnt it from the police -(Laughter)- but when you look at some police officers today, they leave a lot to be desired. I think we must revive that smartness. I hear hon. Ben Wacha also making the same comment. You can see how Ben Wacha dresses. (Laughter) So, I think we need that.

I had expected the minister to give us a complete uniform because a complete uniform comes with the boots, trousers, shirt and a cap. Madam Speaker, I heard you the other day in Imperial Royale when you asked the Inspector-General of Police to remove his cap because he had his khaki cap. A full police uniform will either have the black beret cap with a crown but what you find today is these fake caps of this material like this one that the “g-boys” put on. I think we must have that national character as hon. Katuntu was saying. We should have that black cap, the one for the ceremony and the round woollen cap with the coat of arms that shows the nationalism and the country. We cannot just wear any cap. They are using this cap to cover the face but the other one was meant to show the face such that you can easily identify the police officer.

I also want to find out from the minister who has given us the categories of uniforms and who is supposed to wear them. Now, when it comes to the airport uniform, the light blue shirt and the navy blue trousers, are police officers who are not working in the aviation supposed to be putting on this because I have seen some in Parliament putting on that uniform which is supposed to be put on by the aviation police?

Finally, we applaud the role the traffic police has played. It has tried to sort out the traffic jam but I think you need a lot more around Uganda House and Caltex. I think those police officers deployed there should help us in that area. But in all, the traffic police have tried to bring order and we encourage you. Thank you.

4.57
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just four queries. 

One, can the minister tell us the cost of making these uniforms and who supplies them? Because we have reliable information that one of the big shots in the police force has got the tender of supplying the uniforms. So can you tell us the unit cost of these uniforms – forget about the other ones, some are black, yellow – I now mean these ones, which are the majority. Can you tell us the unit cost of each and tell us the company that supplies them? 

Secondly, are you aware that in upcountry police stations, police officers make their own uniforms? I specifically have two in my constituency, they have stayed for over three years without receiving uniforms from Kampala, so they have made their own and they look distinct from the ordinary police force uniforms. Theirs are not made in this hard material, it is in a thread material – polyester, actually not quite polyester because it is partly woollen. They use their own money to make uniforms because the other ones are worn out. So can you tell us the intervals you take to replace the uniform of an ordinary officer at an ordinary police post upcountry?

Thirdly, which sign distinguishes the police uniform? The way I see this one, it just takes me two hours to make one for myself. We had that problem during Operation Iron Fist, when they were delivering UPDF uniforms to Patongo; the rebels set an ambush and collected all the uniforms. And within eight hours, the uniform which was meant for UPDF was in the hands of LRA and they we dressed in it and it had a distinctive sign which you could see even at night, right at the forehead. 

The Government then wanted to make it a monopoly of the UPDF so that if you see that sign at night, you know that it is a UPDF soldier, unfortunately the rebels got hold of them before they could arrive. 

So, what is so distinctive of these uniforms of yours; if your junior officers are even going down town to make uniforms themselves? What is the distinction that would prevent the Odonga Otto’s of this world from going down town to make the same?

Lastly, I thank you so much for the issue of police numbers –(Interruption)

MAJ. BUTIME: Madam Speaker, the official gazetted Khaki colour of the Uganda Police is recorded as beige – that is the colour. All the other colours like the one hon. Otto was holding up there are running away from the official recorded colour which is beige.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Having raised that issue, has the minister gazetted these colours – and interestingly, even in this Parliament, just look up in the visitor’s gallery, there are two officers in police uniforms but they are in different colours. There are two officers up there, they are all in Khaki – (Interjections)– yeah, they are there. I do not know if the rules would allow me to request them to stand up or we lay them on Table. (Laughter) So, which colour is gazetted? 

And lastly, are you aware that at police stations all over the country, people are paying money for police bond?

5.02
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to appreciate what the minister has done. We should also know that the Government has been trying to do its best to make sure that the police force is felt as an important institution. Some people have already expressed appreciation that there is a positive impact, compared to the past.

I just want to have one clarification from the minister about these several uniforms. In down town markets like Owino, where they sell old clothes, there are very many clothes of the same make and fashion, including caps that look exactly as those of the police force. What strategy have you put in place to differentiate this from the others because these second hand clothes continue coming in everyday? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, please respond, but let me also add my voice to the vote of thanks; I think you are one of the most compliant ministers. (Applause) 

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I happen to come from a highly disciplinary home, where I was taught that when your superior tells you to do something, you do it. I believe that is how the world should go. 

Anyhow, colleagues, I wish to thank you for the nice words you have given me, it is quite encouraging and I promise to even improve in performing my responsibilities. 

Many questions have been asked, but some are related and I will try to summarise them. First they asked: are you trying to introduce new colours? The answer is defiantly, no. We are not trying to introduce new colours. In fact if anything I am thinking of sitting with the management of police and see if we could reduce the number of colours. But maybe, we could get bands as a sign of identification for the officers.

A Member asked, for these uniforms which are white, are you sure they will remain white? There was a police canteen which is dead. I would like to inform this House that recently, Government allowed us to open up new canteens for our police officers to receive general common supplies at reduced prices. 

One of the traits that a police officer must have is neatness. If you are not neat – that is why you see we ask them to keep their hair short, they have to wash and trim – so it may be for lack of facilities that you may see a dirty officer. But generally speaking, the police officers are meant to be very clean because they are supposed to be exemplary citizens of the country anyway and they are the ones at the frontline of projecting Government authority. So, we will try our best to see that police officers, especially those putting on white uniforms keep them white and neat. 

On the matter of the black cap – it is true that it is woollen and can be hot during the day; we shall look into that. But as I said, we would like to keep this uniform – keep the shades of uniforms as few as possible.

On the white coats, as you know, the rain coats normally have an insignia of the Uganda Police Force on them and in any case, a rain coat cannot cover the entire uniform. If it is a lady, definitely the skirt will still show that that is white and really if you are driving, you should be able to identify that that is a police officer. So I do not think it is absolutely necessary that we should introduce white rain coats. Why not maintain one colour? I think I have explained this really. These are international practises and these uniforms as I have told you, are functional in most cases and so it is not possible for us to maintain one colour.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I did not have an opportunity to contribute but I would just like the minister to clarify to me - maybe before I do that, I should congratulate you. You are maintaining our standard. We went to Royal University College not the ordinary ones of today and you have kept the standard. I am very proud of you.

I want the minister to clarify now that we have talked about the colours of uniform; it has been a mystery in my heart to find out, who were the people that stormed the court in black uniform and interrupted the court process? Should we now confirm from you, based on the colour of the uniform, that actually those were our police officers? Can we seek clarification because the Army does not use that kind of black colour? Should we now take it from you that they were actually police officers or police personnel? Can you own that problem? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But that matter has already been raised by hon. Alaso. I think allow the minister to answer.

MR KASAIJA: I do not think I need to answer that one but on a lighter note, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we did attend university together and we sat on the same bench and I want to confirm to this House that she was an extremely intelligent girl at the Royal University College of Nairobi.

An officer that was holding on Entebbe road -(Interjections) no, I think I know Ssese very well. (Laughter) For your information, even when Lameck was picking her, I was there and so I saw.

Hon. Kavuma asked if officer holding a stick is part of the uniform; well a police officer may hold what we call a baton. It is a kind of little stick. If he was holding an ordinary stick, then that is really a sign of indiscipline and I wish hon. Kavuma had taken note of that police officer for us to take appropriate disciplinary action against him because he is supposed to wear the uniform and that is all and nothing more.

Abuse of Police uniform and masquerades; of course people can abuse anything and it is the responsibility of each one of us to pick anybody who may abuse the police uniform. As I have showed you, there will be a name tag and a number; if you are suspicious of anybody, then you should give us that information and as police, we will be able to take the necessary action.

Yellow uniform; I have not seen it and that is why I have not displayed it here.

How many sets of uniforms do you give to an officer in each year? Two sets of uniforms for every police officer. Those you may have seen not in so nice uniform could be - you know recently we integrated the Local Police Force, the LAP and because of financial constraints we have not been able to dress every police officer smartly like we would like to do. So, please bear with us. As our budget improves and as the old uniforms disappear, definitely, the new ones will be the very type that I have shown.

Training uniform used as by regular police; that could be either that police officer is training on the job or it may be either he has misplaced his uniform or he has not maintained the uniform that we gave him. It can only be explained by those three but otherwise training uniform is not supposed to be displayed on the road.

Artists using our uniform: yes, they do it with permission. You can come and seek permission from police and say “Can I use your attire to go and demonstrate or perform in a theatre?” With approval of the police officer responsible, we can do that because then we keep track and we definitely call — because if someone is going to act on a stage and he is acting as a police officer, certainly he has to look like a police officer and that one, we give permission with no hesitation at all and in writing by the way.

Un-uniformed CID officers; of course our CID officers will normally not put on uniform for reasons you know. They must camouflage themselves. They must appear within the population so that they can be able to know what the population is saying or is doing without easy identification. That one we do. We do not regard that one as a formal uniform for the police.

The police bonds; can I state it? I have been hearing this rumour that someone pays a police bond. A police bond is supposed to be absolutely free. Any officer that demands money to give a police bond to anybody is behaving irregularly and illegal and should be arrested forthwith.

Power of arrest is given to all of us; all of us can arrest. The Constitution and the Police Act give everybody within Uganda the freedom to arrest anybody who is committing a crime or is about to commit a crime. When you arrest, then you deliver to the police and then leave the rest of the job to the police to investigate and eventually charge if there is a case.

Different personnel on patrol vehicles dressed in different colours. Depending on the challenge; if the challenge calls, for example, military police, do not be surprised to find that on the same vehicle of our regular police, we also have military personnel. We may have the anti-terrorist unit on the same truck simply because the challenge so demands.

Training officers on duty; we do not train these people just in theory. We must bring them to do practicals. I am sorry for the officer that I have heard that was killed while he was on training in Karamoja. We recently passed out a group that has gone to help with the cattle rustling in Karamoja and to keep law and order.

If you remember during CHOGM days, most of the officers that were patrolling the streets actually were trainees from Kabalye. Part of the training is to make sure that they train on the job.

Police associated with NRM, torture and so on. We are not training police for NRM; we are training a police force for Uganda irrespective of which part is in power. Irrespective of who you are, this police is supposed to serve every Ugandan equally.

I do not know whether it was hon. Kamya; illiterates unable to read numbers. That is why we are actually calling for UPE; really I do not know how one can do this because we will not help you to identify a police officer easily. For those who are illiterate, I think they can get help from someone who knows how to read but I think the way should –(Interruption) 

MS KAMYA: Clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No please, please complete your response, we have got other work.

MR KASAIJA: Sorry colleagues, I did not complete the uniform because the question of the cap and shoes was raised. Let me put it to you; there are two types of caps. There is the ordinary cap which is round and there is the one with a hood coming in front here and each one is used depending on the functionality and every police officer should wear black shoes.

Officers putting on uniform outside their functionality; the officer whom you may have seen here putting on aviation uniform, I think he was not on duty. He either came here right from Entebbe or something. But really, the officers that are supposed to be here are supposed to wear khaki, unless he is a special officer that may have been deployed here for a special responsibility.

The unit cost and who supplies; I am afraid I do not have an answer for this, but if this House is interested, I can bring that information as well.

Making their own uniforms; no, the Police officers are not supposed to make uniforms for themselves. Currently, as I speak, we have the capacity to at least provide one uniform for every Police officer. Our force now is tending to about 36,000 officers and we have sufficient resources to dress our Police officers with at least a minimum of one uniform -(Interjections)- I am coming to that.

At what interval do you make supplies of uniforms? Every two years we should replace a uniform. Of course for those who are working under difficult conditions like ASTU, who have to crawl in the mud and so on, we replace annually. Generally speaking, however, it should be two years.

Different shades of the same uniform and the uniform losing colour; again, that depends on how the officer handles it. If you use JIK -

Quality; normally the suppliers have to submit to us a sample. If that sample does not meet the specifications, then definitely we do not supply. Of course, as I said, if an officer is careless not to handle the uniform appropriately and uses wrong materials in cleaning it, then it may lose its true shade of colour.

Lastly, someone has asked a question here - when you transfer officers across departments, what happens to their uniforms? Of course, they go with their uniforms. Every officer is supposed to keep their uniform. If they transfer you from traffic today and we take you to general duties, tomorrow we could bring you back to traffic. So, that officer goes with his uniform and keeps it. Should we wish to transfer him back to that particular unit, then he may not have to ask us for a separate uniform.

The VCCU are supposed to be uniformed. They operate under what we call the Anti-Terrorist Unit, and I showed you the uniform of the Anti-Terrorist Unit. They should be dressed in the same way as the Anti-Terrorist Unit.

I wish to thank you very much for having listened to me this afternoon. Before I sit down, I will answer the question from hon. Kavuma. You know she is a teacher and teachers normally would want to keep memory and record. For those who wish to look at the uniforms, I am leaving these uniforms here with the clerk. For clarity, I will lay on the Table the photographs of the various types of uniforms that I have displayed this afternoon. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to thank you. Can I ask that if there are any outstanding issues, follow them up with the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2003/04

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, these two reports were presented. You can now debate them together.

5.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think there is a little bit of a problem. It is true that these reports were laid on Table many months back; in fact, they were laid on Table last year. However, many of our colleagues, maybe all of them, were not even aware that actually these reports were on the Order Paper today. I do not see any of the Members carrying this report except one or two and myself. 

I seek your guidance whether it will be possible for Members to debate a report which they do not have. Maybe you could give them notice such that when they come, they come with the report and then they can debate from an informed position, but it is all up to the Chair.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But weren’t they presented last week and Members advised that they will be debated? Maybe if you say that you are not equipped today, that is a different matter, but they were presented. If you say that Members are not ready, that is a different matter, but they were presented. So, we can defer this and go to the next item.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, that will not sort out the problem. Even then, you need to give them the notice when it will be on the Order Paper so that they know and carry the report. If you just defer it sine die, they will come maybe Tuesday next week and they will not have the report.

You see, the problem we have is that the Order Paper sometimes comes out the very day, when Members may have left the reports home and so on. So, if the matter is supposed to come on Tuesday, the Chair should be able to guide the House and say “This report will be debated on Tuesday”, so that Members can carry their reports. I thought that is a fair way of proceeding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we defer debate on this matter to Tuesday next week specifically.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will beg your indulgence because my committee’s two other reports on municipalities are also ready.  Can we –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you cannot jump the gun.

MR KATUNTU: We want to offload what we have in the committee to the House, really.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are making the situation worse. You will actually stress the Members if you have four issues you want to talk about.

MR KATUNTU: So, can I keep this business in my committee when it is complete?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you will table them next week; otherwise you are going to stress Members and they really worry about how much you have brought.

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS PROTECTION BILL, 2008

5.25
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Grace Oburu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report is going to be circulated; it came early. 

The Whistleblowers Bill, 2008 was read for the first time in March 2009 by the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. The Bill was then forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House -(Interruptions)- This is a report. The clerk is bringing the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is in those things? Chairperson, where are your reports?

MS OBURU: Madam Speaker, the clerk gave the report to one of the stewards in the Chambers here to bring it for circulation -(Interjections)- No, it was already photocopied.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I think it is very embarrassing that even the Speaker does not have a copy of the report and the House too does not have copies. It is important that Parliament expresses itself on such a serious situation. We cannot just allow this to pass. You must have a message for the committees and those concerned because it is so serious that even the Speaker does not have a copy of the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently the reports have been in that corner. Okay, continue; blow the whistle.

MS OBURU: Thank you very much. I am very sorry about the mishap, Madam Speaker. 

The Whistleblower’s Protection Bill, 2008 was read for the first time by the Minister of Ethics and Integrity in March 2009. The Bill was then forwarded to the Committee on Presidential Affairs for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House pursuant to rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

The committee received and considered the Bill as per Article 90 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 133 and 161 of the Rules of Procedure Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, I am now delighted to present to this august House the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Whistleblower’s Bill, 2008. 

Methodology
The committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings with different stakeholders including the following: 

a) 	The hon. Minister of Ethics and Integrity and the technical staff of the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity.

b) 	The acting Inspector General of Government and his staff.

c) 	The committee interacted with civil society organisations and received position papers from the Anti-Corruption Coalition (Uganda) and the Uganda Joint Christian Council (UJCC).

d) 	The committee considered whistleblowers’ legislations in other countries including Brazil, Canada, United Kingdom, South Africa and the United States of America. 

e) 	A four-member delegation of the committee travelled to Brazil to benchmark and seek the Brazilian experience on formulation, operationalisation and enforcement of their whistleblower’s protection legislation. 

Background to the Bill

In general terms, a whistleblower is a person who reports misconduct in an organisation usually from within the same organisation. This misconduct may be classified in many ways. For example, a violation of law, rules, regulations and/or a direct threat to public interest such as fraud, health, safety violations and corruption. 

Whistleblowers may make their allegations internally within the organisation or externally to law enforcement agencies, the media or to groups concerned with the issues.

Given the nature of their activities, whistleblowers frequently face reprisal either at the hands of the organisation, affected individuals or groups which they have accused, or from related organisations and sometimes under law. 

The concept of whistleblowers’ protection comes in the context of the fear of reprisals. The Whistleblower’s Protection Bill, 2008 is intended to provide protection to those who may suffer reprisals as a result of disclosure of misconduct by an officer both in the public and the private sector. 

The Bill provides for provision of such information either orally or in writing. In either case, the whistleblower has two options, either anonymous disclosure whistle blowing or protected whistle blowing.  

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill seeks to provide for an enabling environment for both citizens and non-citizens to disclose freely information on corruption or improper conduct both in the public and the private sector. It specifically seeks to:

a) 	Provide protection from victimising any person who has made any disclosure related to corruption and/or improper conduct;

b) 	Regulate disclosure of impropriety and improper conduct; 

c) 	Specify persons qualified to make disclosures, persons to whom or institutions to which disclosure may be made;

d) 	Provide for the procedures of making disclosure and making the disclosures in writing;

e) 	Establish mechanisms for investigation of disclosures made and the authorities responsible for such investigations.

Salient features of the Bill

    (a) Scope of the Bill

The Bill applies to wrongdoing within both the public and private sector. When someone discovers wrongdoing, this individual can blow the whistle either internally to the employer or by making an external disclosure to any of the following persons:

i. 	The Inspectorate of Government;
ii. 	The Directorate of Public Prosecutions;
iii. 	The Uganda Human Rights Commission;
iv. 	The Directorate of Ethics and Integrity; or
v. 	The Resident District Commissioner. 

    (b) Anonymous Disclosure Whistle Blowing

The Bill provides for anonymous disclosure of information related to impropriety. Under clause 3(2) of the Whistleblower’s Protection Bill, a person is allowed to make an anonymous disclosure of any impropriety to which he or she has knowledge. 

(c) Protected Disclosure Whistle Blowing
Under the proposed Bill, an employee of the public or private sector or any person may make a disclosure of impropriety and any such person is entitled to protection provided for under the Bill once he or she fulfils the following conditions:

    i. The disclosure is made in good faith.

ii. 	The whistleblower believes that the disclosure and any allegation of impropriety contained in it are substantially true.

iii. 	The disclosure is made to an authorised person under the law.

iv. 	The whistleblower maintains confidentiality of his or her identity and confidentiality of the information contained in the disclosure.

(d) Investigation of a Disclosure.

On receipt of a disclosure, the concerned person is required to investigate or cause an investigation into the matter and take appropriate action. Any such investigation is required to be done expeditiously. Where a person to whom the disclosure is made is of the opinion that he or she does not have the capacity to investigate the matter, the person is required, within seven working days, to refer the disclosure to a competent authority provided for in the law.

(e) Protection from Possible Reprisals

The Bill prohibits taking or directing someone to take any reprisal against a person for blowing the whistle. A whistleblower who believes that reprisals are being taken may approach the relevant authorities for protection.

Under Clause 9(3), a whistleblower who believes that he or she has been victimised as a result of whistle blowing is entitled to make a complaint to either the Inspectorate of Government or the Human Rights Commission for redress.

A whistleblower is protected from civil or criminal proceedings in respect of a disclosure that contravenes any duty of confidentiality or official secrecy law provided he or she acts in good faith. 

In the same vein, a whistleblower may request for and be provided with Police protection.

(f) Whistleblowers Protection Legislations Elsewhere

    a) Canada

In Canada, the Pubic Servants Disclosure Protection Act was created to protect Canadians who blow the whistle on federal government wrongdoing. The Pubic Servants Disclosure Protection Act establishes a regime for allegations of wrongdoing to be investigated and for whistleblowers to seek protection from reprisals. 

The Canadian law establishes an independent commissioner for purposes of implementing the Act, i.e. for investigations, protection and recommendations. However, the Canadian Act does not cover wrongdoing in the private sector. 

By definition of their law, only a public servant can make a protected disclosure and thus has the right to submit a complaint to the commissioner in the event of retaliation under Section 2(1) of the PSDPA. However, under section 33(1) of the PSDPA, the commissioner can conduct an investigation into wrongdoing on the basis of the information provided by someone who is not a public servant provided the allegation is restricted to wrongdoing in the public sector.

    b) United Kingdom

Britain is one of –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I thought you are writing a report on the Bill of this country. I do not know whether it is really necessary to confuse Members with what is done in Canada, which is a bit different from the UK. You are supposed to be reporting on the Bill, which we committed to you. Give us your amendments according to what you evaluated otherwise Members will get confused. Canada is doing something different and the same applies to the UK and Brazil. Focus on the Bill and your recommendations.

MS OBURU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We can turn to page 9 on recommendations, the second last paragraph. 

Uganda needs to put in place sanctions against employers who may exercise their discretion wrongfully to punish employees who have reported illegal activities of their employers.

Uganda needs to put in place a policy framework for protection of witnesses and provision of incentives for collaboration with justice.

Uganda should adopt a system of percentage remuneration for persons who may disclose useful information leading to the arrest, prosecution and recovery of monies that would otherwise have been lost with the corruption vice.

Observations and recommendations

The committee recommended that the minister, upon receipt of a dismissed complaint presented by the whistleblower, should cause fresh investigations into the complaint or reject the complaint on merit and should inform the whistleblower of the action taken and the outcome of such action.

The committee believes that the scope of meaning of “employer” is both unclear and inadequate. It may, for instance, exclude other Government departments and yet Government is a major employer in Uganda.

The committee recommended that the meaning of “employer” be expanded to ensure that every category of employer and all departments of Government are included to ensure inclusiveness and effectiveness in its implementation and enforcement.

The committee considered that the Bill proposes vices such as demotion over which employees are protected from as a result of exposing their employers’ wrongdoing at places of work. More vices should be included.

The committee recommends that demotion and redundancy, commonly known as “katebe”, of an employee should also be regarded as a form of victimisation as they have similar effects on employees’ career and rights.

While the Bill provides for mechanisms for reporting and specifies the authorised persons to whom misconduct can be reported, it fails to provide for any penalty for an officer who fails to act on a disclosure made to him or her. The committee recommends that an offence be created for an officer who arbitrarily or unlawfully takes no action upon receipt of a disclosure made to him or her. This is to ensure that upon receipt of a disclosure, the authorised officer acts on the disclosure as provided for in the law.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in conclusion, the committee recommends that subject to the committee’s proposed amendments, the Whistleblowers Protection Bill, 2008 be passed. 

The committee takes note that once passed into law, the Bill shall go a long way in strengthening the protection mechanism accorded to those who seek to expose corruption, abuse of office and other forms of injustice in Ugandan society.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. This is a very interesting legislation.

5.46
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whistle blowing can be a very risky business. Even if information is provided in complete confidence, there is a big probability that such information will leak. My people say that if you misbehave with your mother-in-law even under deep waters, it will eventually be known. There are entities like drug dealers, big bank robbers, money launderers; such people are very difficult and risky to touch. If they got information that you are reporting on them, it could be a matter of life and death for you. 

In some countries, drastic measures are sometimes taken to protect the whistleblower. They can be given different identities or they can be relocated to other parts of the country all together. In my case, if I were a whistleblower in Arua, I would perhaps be relocated to Kisoro or Karamoja for that matter and be given full-time state protection. I am not sure whether this small economy of ours is ready to foot such bills. We have awards given by courts which more often than not we are unable to pay. While the financial implications of this Bill have been laid on the Table, I am not sure whether this background of huge bills which can accrue to this undertaking we want will be taken care of. I am just afraid that people’s lives can be put at a great risk and the state abandons them to their fate. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.50 
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to thank the committee chairperson and the Minister of Ethics and Integrity for coming up with such a report. 

I have two preliminary observations. One, I have glossed through the Bill and the committee report and I see very many legal issues arising, which are constitutional in nature. I have been left wondering why the Bill was taken to the Committee on Presidential Affairs and not the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

That notwithstanding, I see that the spirit behind the whole piece of legislation is good, but we may not achieve anything with this piece of legislation. It is just going to add up to the many laws we have on our archives like the Enguli Act, just because we need to invest more in the culture of living our country. 

Personally, I have had two experiences with whistle blowing. (Laughter) The first one is when I was assaulted by ASP Emmanuel Muhairwe at a Police station with hon. Lukwago, in the presence of over 70 Police officers. I reported to the Police officers and I was bleeding, but those Police officers were transferred to Karamoja. They carried out a massive reshuffle at CPS and nothing happened to that officer who assaulted me and hon. Lukwago in public. So, I am really wondering what value this Bill will add to the whole process. 

We are defining an authorised officer to mean a Police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector General of Police, but that is the same rank at which the officer that assaulted me while in Police custody was. Up to today, nothing has been done. So, I am really wondering whether the committee bothered to see this law from the parliamentary perspective. This is because most of the influential and potential violators of necessary reports for operation of Government are the Executive. 

I personally believe that this committee should have come out clearly to even recommend that this Parliament institutes a whistleblower’s protection committee. At the end of the day, Ugandans want to find out where they can report someone, and the biggest violator according to the Human Rights Commission report is the government. Stealing of money, it is the Executive; corrupt practices, it is the Executive; short Police uniforms, it is the Executive; illegal deployments, it is the Executive; employing relatives, it is the Executive. Now you are encouraging us to report to a Police officer who is also deployed by that same Executive! You are encouraging us to report to a Resident District Commissioner who is appointed by the Executive! So, I still see it going round and round. 

At an appropriate stage if I do not recommend that this Bill be recalled for further consideration, I would move that we go ahead to create a parliamentary committee on whistle blowing. There are people all over Uganda who have someone to report. They end up in the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government Accounts Committee, and I have enough in the Government Assurances Committee. Most of the vices are coming from the executive arm of Government. So, we may have to consider a shift in policy, from making whistle blowing a policy that will not help us solve any problem. 

The second experience was in Parliament when I raised the issue of CHOGM. You saw what happened to me. I was almost suspended from this House if it was not for the wise ruling of the honourable Speaker. This Parliament spent two hours begging me to apologise so that we can get over it and we continue with our lives normally, and my only offence was saying that some Members took bribes. Even when before the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, one MP asked whether I would pay the cost in case I failed to prove that they took the bribe. So, the issue of cost had even arisen. In fact, I failed to prove, according to the ruling of the committee –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TRADE) (Mr Nelson Gagawala Wambuzi): Madam Speaker, I took time because the honourable member holding the Floor, who happens to be from Aruu County, has continuously hammered that the Executive is the culprit for vices. You have been at district level and you know how rampant the violation of norms in doing Government business is, to the extent that some people have been arrested in the districts for even killing. There are these primary school headmasters going away with people’s salaries, chairpersons of public service committees at districts doing all sorts of things and so on. 

Is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to insinuate to this House that it is the Executive which is the culprit yet the Bill is being presented in this House by the Minister of Ethics and Integrity? Is he really in order to start drumming and intimidating and saying all sorts of things against the Executive on a matter which is so important for him and for all other people in the country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have actually supported his argument because the examples you give of the local governments, the teachers and so on are all part of the Executive. You have actually supported him. So, what he is saying is that, to him the proposals for reporting are not satisfactory. He wants to see another body where the citizens can report.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I am just in agreement with the honourable minister. I am just asking: Who watches the watchman? I still strongly submit that unless we make an urgent amendment, this Bill may have to be recalled. We can then make a provision in Parliament where from all over Uganda in those UPE schools, in Government institutions like the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, the Executive, the military, someone can informally get his way to a parliamentary committee on whistleblowers through writing, so that Parliament can be able to have the information that there is something happening say in a UPE school. I think by involving a parliamentary committee, even the thief out there will not be sure that someone recognised that they removed money and they may end up before Parliament.

I am just praying for an extension of the reporting procedures, like my case with the Police finally ended up in Parliament. It is a parliamentary committee that gave recommendations, which have gone back to the Police and the Executive. The Police on its own failed to clean itself and the Inspector General of Police called me and made apologies.

DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO: To be honest, it seems to me that the honourable member is discussing the provisions of the Bill already. I thought that once the chairperson presents, the normal course of action is taken. What I am finding hon. Otto doing is discussing issues which are in the Bill itself. I wonder whether this is the case or whether we should go back to our normal way of handling a report of this kind. My expectation was that once the chairperson did present her report, then we would proceed with studying the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is a report on the Bill; the discussions must involve the Bill as well as the report. The committee stage will come later when we have closed the debate.

MR FRED BADDA: I see that hon. Otto is debating in the right direction because he is appreciating that the committee listed five options to which a whistleblower can report. In addition, he is saying we should have some other options and add onto the list. Can you suggest other options that can be included?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has already suggested a committee of Parliament.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Hon. Badda, I suggested a committee of Parliament specifically tasked with protection of whistleblowers.

Lastly, I will still strongly move that at an appropriate stage, if we consider recalling the Bill to be so grave, we allow a five to six committee body that can see how to incorporate and bring in the parliamentary aspect into this very good piece of legislation. I want many actors from different arms of Government.

6.00
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga North, Kampala): I also wish to add my thanks to the committee for this report and indeed, I commend her in the spirit of the Bill. In the spirit of zero tolerance to corruption, which we all have consensus on in this country, I think this Bill needs to be strengthened. In that way, I agree with hon. Otto. 

My first comment will be on page 4 where it says that for a person to be offered protection under this Bill, they must fulfil certain conditions, and one of the conditions is that the disclosure is made in good faith. I would like to understand more what good faith is because most confessions have actually come from people that have fallen out and this has been useful. Most of the whistle blowing has not come out of good faith but just falling out. Normally, the people who have good faith are not privy to information. Information is usually shared by people that, for some reason, get close to information. So, in my view, this good faith thing waters down the intent of the Bill. I would like us to pay more attention or perhaps just to accept that whether they fell out because of sharing the loot, the important thing is that they have saved us billions of money.

In other countries, since they are receiving some information I have read about courts or state attorneys negotiating with suspects on lowering the sentences if they will give evidence on somebody else. That is a way of compromising the suspect to give information so that you catch the bigger thief or the bigger culprit on condition that you get a lighter sentence. That way, I think the law is negotiating. I think that can be explored and we need to consider it as well. I am not a professional judicial person and we need guidance on that - I think it can be sorted out. I am talking about accomplices who have been arrested or have just fallen out - I think this also needs to be considered to strengthen the Bill.

I have also noted that on contracts in other countries, I think there is a law that you cannot sign a contract. There is a provision somewhere in those small notes that declares that you did not participate in offering bribes for this contract and you do not know of anybody in this contract who participated in negotiating or offering bribes. If you are telling a lie on this, you are liable to prosecution. This is almost a blanket threat to anybody who gets information about a certain contract or even signs a certain contract. I think we can strengthen this Bill by making provisions for people who even know of contracts and tenders that have been acquired illegally, but there is –(Interruption) 

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: On the issue of “good faith”, hon. Kamya is saying it is not – that if I connived with hon. Otto and in the process of conniving with him, he cheated me and then I say, “Look, I must go and report him.” Is that in good or bad faith? It is still a crime and if both of you have been thieves and you said, “I think I am guilty, let me go and report myself on this matter.” Is that not still good faith despite the fact that you earlier on acted wrongly? You are saying, “I must correct society and I would rather go to jail. Let me report.” 

Are you saying we should not accept that sort of evidence as a whistle blower - because one was also originally a sinner and, therefore, he cannot go and actually report the sin to people who can correct it? Is this your line of argument?

MS KAMYA: I thank you hon. Minister. My problem is “good faith” because if we fell out and I went and blew the whistle, someone may argue that I am pursuing a vendetta and therefore it is not in “good faith”. Good faith may mean that you are just a good citizen who does not like what is going on and out of your patriotic duty, you go and blow the whistle. But if you are pursuing a vendetta, I just think this may be construed to protect or rather undermine the information that we could even get out vendettas, which may be good for this country.

In conclusion, I would like to also suggest that this Bill be highly promoted and that the people of Uganda be sensitised. The issue of sensitisation can be a strong and empowering thing, especially if people are mobilised around their patriotic duty to whistle blow including people at home. If an MP or public person is building a house or he is keeping Shs 900 million under their bed and his wife knows about it -(Laughter)- they should know that they are supposed to go and tell someone about it. I thank you.  

6.08
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): I thank you. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for coming up with this Bill and the report which I believe will, to an extent, help in encouraging our people to report fraudulent activities. 

On page 3, which talks about the scope of the Bill, I am left in a dilemma, especially for that person from upcountry who may want to report such a case and here we have pointed out five offices, yet this person may not be in position to even move up to the RDC’s offices. At the district, I have only seen the RDC and the others are at the regional level. I would like to find out and support hon. Otto on whether we can open and move and try to find more offices where people can easily access those offices where to report. 

For example, as we are speaking now, some people have been reporting to the CID offices upcountry and yet of course, we have not mandated them. Can we open up and venture into more offices which people can easily access and report and then those people can help them in referring those cases to higher offices? 

Secondly, on page 4, it is important to protect the whistle blowers. I want to note here and observe that I suffered with whistle blowers who reported certain cases to certain offices and they were being hunted by the culprits. I actually had nowhere to even house them, but they came and confided in me that, “We reported these cases to such and such offices and we are now being hunted by the culprits.” 

They had nowhere to reside and I had no idea on how to protect them although I finally referred them to the Police. It is in this respect that I want to ask the minister and this Parliament on whether we can even provide protection in form of accommodation and welfare to these whistle blowers and even to their families –(Interjections)- yes, because giving them the Police to protect the family, may not even help them. The other family of another culprit may even follow them to where they are or even follow the children to school. So, we need to look into the details of how these people can be helped and protected because it is a real syndicate of the people who are being reported. These people may have all the connections and yet this is a small person reporting with his or her small family somewhere and giving them two Police officers may not help because the other person may send an armed gang to terrorise them. 

Lastly, about the regulations, let me hope that after passing this Bill, when the minister is making regulations, he will consider payments of the costs that will have been incurred by these whistle blowers after ascertaining and finding that what somebody has reported was factual and justified. This person will have incurred some costs by moving to where he is supposed to report. Leaving these people to continuously spend their little or whatever they have – we may need to look into the details when it comes to regulations – making regulations to try and pay them, cater for either their transport or any other form of payment.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.12
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the minister. I have a few comments. 

Regarding protection of the whistle-blowers, in this country, unless the issue of nationalism is strengthened, this Bill cannot succeed. Unless corruption is rejected in society, this Bill cannot succeed.

I am saying this because when you are a whistle-blower, you will be rejected by society. Even the whole of your family will be rejected. The definition they have given in the Bill is that family includes spouse, father, mother, child, grand-child, brother and sister. 

We come from African families. You could be having 20 brothers on an island of Buvuma. If you are a whistle-blower - I do not believe that this country – unless we put in the regulations – will have the capacity to safeguard the whistle-blowers. 

We also need to know the protection they are talking about. If you are going to relocate me from Buvuma and you take me to Mbarara, it implies that I, and all my dependants, are going to start from zero. I do not think the designers of this Bill considered this in the financial implications they laid on Table.  Otherwise, I do not see any protection of the whistle-blower. They will not be victimised, but the society will reject them because society applauds those who are corrupt - as long as you can put up estates. We must think twice.

When you whistle-blow, some revenue is recovered and a percentage is given to the whistle-blower. What if you disclose that bar X is selling Waragi, which is leading to the death of people? You might fail to attach a price to the lives of people; yet when you disclose a businessman who is evading taxes and they recover a billion, they can attach a percentage on the amount of revenue recovered. So, how do you quantify situations whereby somebody has provided information and you have saved life? 

A very good example is these buses. Are you aware that when you are a passenger and you tell the driver and the conductor that you are over-speeding, they can give you an option to get out of the bus and they proceed? So, if you are a whistle-blower in the bus and you make a call to the next Police station, they will give the Police officer – God forbid – Shs 20,000 and for you, they will tell you to get out of the bus. Can you imagine that sometimes, they will not refund your transport?  

We need to do a lot regarding this law; otherwise the way it is, we are going to cause more unemployment and more suffering for our people. This is because the way the country is, we cannot safeguard the welfare of the whistle-blower and their immediate families. 

Lastly, is the issue of – in the report, when you report to the RDC, Inspector General of Government, Directorate of Public Prosecution, Uganda Human Rights Commission or the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, they are  supposed to take action. You know that all the laws establishing these bodies have a clause that these bodies should not work under the influence of anybody. So, you can report when his desk is full and he will take his time.

6.18
MR STEPHEN KASAIJA KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole):  Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. True, the report is timely because we are experiencing moral decadence at a very high rate. Like my colleague hon. Bintu said, the list to where people can report is limited because our people are poor. The suggestion that we move down further brings in another complication. When you go to the lower strata, people are so poor that when you give information, they are again likely to disclose it. It is a complicated matter.

When you see the protection we are giving, we are saying that if someone gave information and he thinks he is in danger, this person can be given protection. But surely, do we have the capacity to protect all these people?  These people are exposed to danger.

This is a good Bill, but the problem is that the institutions that are supposed to nurture it, bring it up and see it grow, many of them are decaying. It is very difficult. We may make the Bill into a law, but it is a problem. The institutions themselves are lacking.

The other problem is lack of information. People may be willing to give information, but they lack it. For instance, here on the floor of Parliament, a number of times, Members have been telling us and even myself – we are not fully aware about the oil – whatever – you know what has been going on. So, how do you go in to probe and give information? We lack proper guidelines on issues like NAADS. Someone would be willing to give information, but they may lack clarity on some of these issues. 

What is important is to be clear so that people - when people know, they are able to discern good from bad. However, most of our people are ignorant to the extent that even members of parliament at times show ignorance about a number of issues.

Colleagues brought up the issue of nationalism - this is good this is good and we are all willing to see it work. However, people who should promote it - actually, people are very nationalistic in the lower cadres; the teachers who are working for Shs 200,000 continue to work, but when they hear billions being embezzled, they lose the morale. So, nationalism must come from the top to the bottom. But when we want it from bottom to the top it may be very difficult. Otherwise, I support the Bill and maybe we shall add other amendments and see how we can move on.

6.22
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I also want to add my voice to those who have spoken before me in thanking the committee for this work.

When we talk about whistle blowing in Uganda’s context, we are basically talking about something that is long overdue. In one of the reports, especially the one of the EPRM, they talk of almost Shs 500 billion of Uganda’s tax payers’ money being wasted through procurement flaws. This is a lot of money; almost 10 percent of our national budget. And I know of many ministries that possibly share only a tenth of this total money that is being wasted. If we come out now and we do something, it will be timely and we must all support it.

The committee did a good job by giving us scenarios from a number of countries that we cherish as a developing country. As they said, in Brazil the situation is very good and it has yielded results. They said before the enactment they would get some few people but from 2003 to 2007, a span of only four years, I think they tripled the number of cases and I am sure this tripling of the number of cases brought in results.

I want to start from the Shs 500 billion that this country loses that can be documented because I do not even believe that it is only Shs 500 billion. I am a member of the Local Governments Accounts Committee and what this country is going through cannot be overstressed. 

I think this is the time we need to give this Bill the support it deserves and enact a law very soon. But this law should also take into consideration the environment we are operating in. If you talk about the five groups that are given here, like my colleague hon. Otto has said, they are really not enough. The American experience as we have read says that there is a leeway to go to Congress. I do not mind one of the committees that are already in existence in Parliament taking up that role specifically as can be provided for in that Bill. But to leave it to only these five categories may not help us much. 

I also want to request that we give this Bill the effort that it deserves and we put in an additional amount of money. We can talk of the Shs 500 billion, but give 10 percent of this Shs 500 billion to operationalise this Bill at least for one or two years and we see the results.

What am I talking about? Those who are going to be directly in charge of this legislation - we may not take everybody but we may have a small section of Police; a small section of the group under the IGG; and a small group under Parliament, where people can get this information. I think we can reap big out of this and also cause sanity in our environment here.

I want to thank the committee further for providing us this alternative, more so in the areas where they talked about protection. Jobs in this country are a little bit of a – (Interjections)- as we speak now. We are 33 million or around that number of people but we are all aware that we have less than 500,000 jobs that we are talking about. 

We would also prefer that we incorporate the element of other organisations, not necessarily Public Service, because there are also areas in those organisations that directly impact on the economy of this country if not well monitored and that will give us a big way forward -(Member timed out.)

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County,  Soroti):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no reservations supporting the Whistleblowers’ Act. I have been one of those who have been pushing for this Bill to come into force. Those Members who are part of this legislature and who have been attending this International Visitor Programme in the US under the State Department, I think they are about five or so Members from this House: I, hon. Alaso, hon. Byenkya, hon. Lukwago and hon. Katuntu have had the experience of sharing with the American institutions and different states how this operates. This goes a long way to reinforce the earlier laws that hon. Nsaba Buturo has brought to this House regarding corruption. We only need, at an appropriate time, possibly at the committee level, to reinforce it to enable it provide useful meaning.

I was looking roughly at the Bill. I think as partly stated in the report, but also from my experience in the States, there is a timeframe for whistleblowers to give information and this is based on what type of information the whistleblower is giving. It ranges from 10 days to over a year, depending on whether you are recording the violation of human rights, civil rights in an organisation, in a department or in a ministry; whether you are reporting environmental issues or issues of corruption. I do not see it here. So, I think when that moment comes, we need to have that incorporated. That is why I was agreeing with hon. Otto possibly because we know the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is composed mainly of the lawyers. So, we could have had it, but it is never late; we can have some of this incorporated at the committee level. 

I was also looking at page 11 on the protection of the whistleblower. The other legislations like those stated here go ahead to specify what type of protection is given to a whistleblower. Not every whistleblower is given protection. So, what type of protection are we giving because I have heard hon. Arumadri raising the issue? “How will I go there? I do not have a house; I do not have what.” People have raised the issue of the cost. These are some of the things that should be specified here such that people know because the degrees of the risk of the whistle blowing vary from what you are exposing. There are those which are life threatening and there are those which will end up taking your life. So, your family should be able to be taken care of - accommodation, a job, relocation - you have been relocated to a place. You should also include counselling because the torture people undergo - I was just listening to BBC last week and there was one gentleman who has been in hiding because he came out to report to the Wako Commission those people who were involved in the Kenyan election violence. He was talking from his hideout, but he says he is ready to die. So, he is coming out to say, “This is what happened. It was so and so who were involved. This is what was going on. This is how the thing was planned.” So, we should be able, if we are to make protection, to protect those whistleblowers. I am just making, like hon. Otto here did, he whistle blew on the issue of CHOGM; at that time when he raised that issue, people thought he was just being big mouthed as he is always, but now you can see what is happening in the Public Accounts Committee. The members of that committee can bare witness that things really went wrong during that function. 

So, we should be able to give Ugandans the protection that is necessary. If the risk is highly involving, we should tell them the protection that the state is going to offer them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Minister, I want to add on what the Members are saying. In all this, I think it is a bit one sided. If I am a whistle blower, I blow the whistle; if I am in danger, I take myself to the Police and say, “They want to kill me,” who is in charge of me as a whistle blower? I am the one who has to go and report, and then I am supposed to go to the Police to tell them that things are bad – who is the authority in charge of the whistle blower? I do not see it in this Bill, because for every complaint I have, I have to take it myself. If I put my life on the line why should I still be on my own? I am not seeing the final protection which I deserve as a whistle blower, as hon. Okupa was saying.

In Mayuge, we had a whistle blower, who genuinely went to court to inform the country that this person is pretending that he went to school, but he did not. They banded him off from the magistrate’s court and the following morning, he was found in a forest dead. 

In the Kenyan violence, the witnesses are being hunted. So, who is actually protecting the whistle blower? Who is in charge of the whistle blower – where are my safe guards from your side, you who have received the information?

6.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I thought I would come in perhaps at the end to comprehensively deal with issues that I do believe are in the Bill. The problem is, from my point of view, people have not read the report alongside the Bill. Otherwise, I can appreciate why - we last got hold of these Bills months ago – so, presumably Members have forgotten. 

But if one has knowledge of what is contained in the Bill, a number of issues that have been raised, including what you have just raised, Madam Speaker, the person receiving a report of impropriety, that person is under obligation to maintain confidentiality, and the Bill does make it clear that for any violation, you receive five years in prison - it is there. It talks about the obligation the person processing reports has and so clearly that compels you and I who has received these reports to be very careful. It is very clear that such a person would be jailed for five years. 

I would be happy if honourable members would like to make proposals that strengthen, because it is a two way; one is the person who has knowledge, and many Ugandans do have knowledge of what is going on throughout the country. The problem is that they fear. So, we have to deal with that element of fear. There are many others who would like to do so and they come out everyday. I have a number of whistle blowers who come forward not even expecting any allowances. 

Therefore, I think it is about the love of this country. We have Ugandans who are not happy to see things the way they are. And I think we should tap into that instead of emphasising monetary benefits that arise if you report. There are a lot of Ugandans who are willing to do so - what they need is for us to provide an environment that would allow more and more people to report. Otherwise, if things go on the way they are, we are talking about very dangerous situations.

Madam Speaker, let me also say that our country is at cross-roads. We have got to do something radical; and to me, whistle blower legislation is that bold attempt to do something radical and it has worked in other countries, anyway. There are many countries where this law is in place and it has greatly helped to improve the situation. 

Finally, I think what should be done besides this legislation – we are open to other proposals that strengthen this legislation. We need something radical, we need something that really makes it harder for those who are in the habit of hurting the nation. 

We are really dealing with a complex situation. What is going on today is a situation where there is a convergence of habits. A lot of hypocrisy from those who should be doing something and they do not do it. There is a lot of lip-service going on, double stands going on and lots of networking for those with intent to hurt everybody. So, we have got to empower Ugandans.

As of now, there are not yet sufficient laws and we believe this is the tool that will allow us to achieve that. Otherwise, we are open to proposals that strengthen what we are trying to do now. 

6.39
MR TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): I just want to emphasise that an authorised officer in this Bill, is an officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police; a Policeman with only one star. And that Police officer is not an officer, but he is a member of the inspectorate. You can find him at sub-county level; that OC station – most of the OC station officers are at the rank of Inspector or Assistant Inspector of Police with one “Nyota”, one star. If you fail to reach the district headquarters now that the district headquarters are very many, and if you fail to reach the RDC in your district, at least you have an opportunity to report that disclosure to the Assistant Inspector of Police nearest to your village or station.

Secondly, there is a lamentation, “This country is finished, where shall we go?” We cannot move from this country to another country. We cannot all go to Britain or to the US or Brazil. We have to remain here in Uganda, pass these laws for ourselves of course God with us, isn’t it? If this generation of ours cannot manage this law, let another generation do that. For us we shall have passed the law, but really we should not lose faith in ourselves. There are very many Ugandans in this country who are prepared to die for their country, who are prepared to push on so that things get better, and for me this law is very important.

You can disclose using information technology. You get your mobile; you ring because it is here also. If you are scared about being known, at least ring and inform and that information will be recorded. The officer who records your information should not disclose it to any other person who can harm you. As they ring you from your constituency, somebody can also ring and tell you, he can also ring the DPC; he can also ring an authorised officer at that level and give that information. 

Of course, there will be victims. There is no doubt about that, but the law must continue. People will actually possibly die, but you see we cannot now run away to Kenya and say we abandon Uganda because the whistle blowers’ law will not operate.

There are very many Ugandans who are prepared to struggle until corruption and all forms of impropriety are dealt with. That is what I wanted to add.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the debate will continue tomorrow. May I ask that Members go and study the Bill in detail tonight so that tomorrow after the general debate we can go to the committee stage. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m.)




   
      
 

