Tuesday 23rd February, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS 

(The council was called to order).

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. G.K. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, Government wishes to formally announce with deep regret the death of Prof. Mudoola, who passed away yesterday evening following a brutal attack on him and his friends by unknown persons.  Prof. Mudoola was the Vice-Chairman of the Uganda Constitutional Commission and a Professor at Makerere University.  He has served Government with dedication as Commissioner amongst others, on the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  Government is doing ever thing possible to bring to book these criminals, and Government wishes to assure everybody that investigations are going on at the moment and no stone will be left unturned.  Meanwhile, government offers its condolences to the family and friends of the late Professor.  Lastly, Government also wishes to encourage the rest of the Commissioners to proceed with the noble task remaining, without fear or intimidation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us stand up for one minute of silence in memory of the deceased.

PAPERS

The following Report was laid on the Table by the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional affairs: 

THE INTERIM REPORT ON ADOPTION OF THE NEW CONSTITUTION

CHAIRMAN, SELECT COMMITTEE ON THE TRADE UNION LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL, 1992 (Mr. A.A. Ongom): Mr. Chairman, you will recall that on the 21st day of January, 1993, the hon. Minister of Labour and Social Welfare introduced in this House for Second Reading the Trade Union Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, 1992. The general debate on the Bill came to an end on the 28th day of January 1993, when the Minister wound it up.  It will further be recalled that before the House could dissolve itself into a Committee to consider the details of the Bill, a Motion was moved and adopted under Rule 58 of the NRC Interim Rules of Procedure to the effect that the Bill be referred to a Select Committee for further study and refinement.  In accordance with the Rules 58 and 73 of the NRC Rules of Procedure, we proceeded to nominate Members to constitute the Select Committee to further examine the Bill and report back by today, the 23rd February 1993.  Mr. Chairman, the House will recall that you nominated the following Members to handle the assignment:

    i. Hon. A.A. Ongom    		-   Chairman.
    ii. Hon. J. Kawanga    		 - Member
    iii. Hon. S.K.E. Okurut		 - Member
    iv. Hon. Rhoda Kalema 	 - Member
    v. Hon. E. Opot       		- Member
    vi. Hon. C. Karusoke   		- Member
    vii. Hon. J. Mwandha   	 	- Member

In close corroboration with the hon. Minister of Labour and Social Welfare Affairs, his Deputy and their technocrats, the Select Committee has successfully executed its assignment in the timeframe given and this Report is now ready. (Applause)

I now have the honour and pleasure to lay on the Table a copy of the Select Committee Report on the Trade Union Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, 1992, as compiled by the Committee that were entrusted with the assignment. I urge hon. Members to take the trouble to read the Report together with the original text of the Bill, in readiness for further debate when the time for it comes.

	Mr. Chairman, I beg to lay the Report on the Table.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. G.K. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, in accordance with Section 24 of the Interim Rules of Procedure of the NRC of Uganda, I will make two statements to this House now.  The first Statement concerns the commitment of Government to print and distribute to all the NRC Members, copies of the Interim Report of Adoption of the New Constitution by today.  This has been a consignment between Government and the NRC Members. That commitment has been completed by Government.  I am glad to announce, therefore, that the copies are ready for distribution to all the Members, by the Clerk to the National Assembly, starting immediately after today’s Business. (Applause) We mean what we say. (Laughter)

Another Statement regards the issue of embezzlement of both DANIDA funds as well as Government funds which, according to hon. Pinto, were religiously released to meet the financial obligation of the Constitutional Commission.  But as it turned out, most of the funds settled with the Ministry and only a meagre amount trickled to the Commission.  Since hon. Member Pinto is yet to wind up his contribution to this issue possibly today, let me request you to allow me to make a Statement on this matter after he has made his contribution.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members I wish to announce that the number of Members who have registered to contribute to the Constituent Assembly Bill has increased.  Therefore, in order to save time, I wish to advise hon. Members to observe the following: 

	1.  Every Member holding the Floor should be brief and summarise his/her contribution in not more than five 	minutes.  Hon. Members who find it difficult to be brief are advised to make written statements which can fit within the time limit.

	2.  I shall not allow any Member to repeat what another Member has already contributed.  A Member, who repeats what is already said, will be asked to take his/her seat, please.  We want to save time and repetitions.  That is all.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992

(Debate continued).

MR. M.X. PINTO (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to follow the Rt. hon. Prime Minister in condemning the brutal act, the distant act that resulted in the death of Prof. Mudoola and Dr. Kidubuka.  Mr. Chairman, what this means is that thuggery is still amongst us.  

Allow me to present a few points on this important Bill before I come to continue with my last statement, because I may not have time then.  I support this Bill to create a special Assembly to deliberate the Constitution.  The Chairman and Vice Chairman should be elected from among the Members, and presided over by the Chief Justice or Principal Judge.  We should avoid any stage that may be misconstrued. If we allow His Excellency the President to appoint the Chairman, it may be construed that His Excellency has certain preferences.  To give the supremacy to the NRC, I may go further to propose that those names that may be proposed could come here for confirmation.  

Secondly, the existing constituencies which may be having less than the proposed 80,000 people should continue to exist.  (Applause)  Because we want to give full representation.  Only those that have excessive numbers should have additional ones.  I am trying to visualise, constituencies like Mathaniko and Bokora.  There may be fewer numbers, but they are distinctly different.  You may not be able to merge them.  So, we should allow such marked differences to separate constituencies like in Busoga; some tribes are distinctly different by constituencies.  We should not bring in destabilisation just because of arithmetical numbers.  Special representation, for all the political parties and the three religious institutions, the youth, women and army.  We should not go beyond that, otherwise UTODA will want to come in, the Livestock Farmers Association would want to come in, and Buganda n’eddagala lyayo may also want to come in. (Laughter)

I would also like to revert to a subject which I had introduced in this House, and which I can see is gaining prominence and has been highlighted in The New Vision today.  By and large, what is said in The New Vision coincides with my own investigations.  To give this parliamentary matter the proper attention it deserves, I propose to surrender my report to you so that you may, if you allow, hand this, with consultation of Government, to the Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee so that they can investigate and come back to this House with a report.  This is a parliamentary matter in the first place.  (Applause) 

I would also like that if there are any investigations, we avoid these kinds of commissions which give a saga.  You have an investigation going on in the Post Office.  The Managers are fighting the Board; but they are still in place.  We are not going to get anywhere.  This is going in circles.  I believe that if we are going to have a proper investigation, the people who are being investigated should step aside or be suspended temporarily during the course of inquiries.  But this business of just having to stage a Commission, we are getting tired of it.  Maybe putting in mind the problem we have had of the bomb attack, I would like to remind people like hon. Sekiziyivu that serious matters considered in this House require mature and serious minds.  We now await the opportunity to debate corruption, because Members have overwhelming evidence of what may be going on.

I have now, with your permission, to proceed and hand over my report to you so that, with your permission, it may be handed to the Public Accounts Committee so that the matter may be handled by the Parliament.

HON. MEMBERS: Summarise.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, I am required by my hon. Members to summarise.  I have information that substantial amounts of money were released by the Government of Uganda on a monthly basis and I think those people who have read the paper today know that well beyond 60 million shillings was given to the Constitutional Affairs every month so that it can be passed on to the Constitutional Commission.  Very little of that ever reached the Constitutional Commission.  Indeed, out of almost 200 million, only 26 million has gone to the Constitutional Commission.  Mr. Chairman, the Commissioners have not been paid their sitting allowances.  People who have been working, the support staff have not been paid their salaries. It took Government, in addition to the regular support, to make a special release of 26 million to pay staff.  Even then, I believe only 22 million has gone to the Commission.  There have been fictitious purchases - you will see in the report when they come up.  There have also been donations that came through DANIDA in terms of computers, and in terms of stationery.  But our friends who were entrusted with the responsibility of accounting for these funds took it upon themselves to draw cash.  How do you explain an accounting officer who goes to draw one million and a half to go and buy stationery? Are there no procurement procedures? Why have we been put into a saga, and made a laughing stock? These are the issues that really hurt us. We should get to a stage where we are going to discuss corruption, because the days of blanketing are over.  When I speak now I know that hon. Members have got files and files that look into other areas.  We must get to clean our House before we look at others.  DANIDA provided 475,000 dollars of which 300,000 dollars were used in kind; some of it was used for fictitious purchases. Money to the tune of 30 to 40 million shillings has been stolen outright.  SIDA of Sweden provided 32,000 dollars that has been embargoed together with the balance when DANIDA found that there was no proper accountability.  These and a few others, since there will be investigations, I would like to place in the hands of PAC of this hon. House so that -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: I have been made to understand that even some Pajeros have been sold by the Constitutional Commission. 

MR. PINTO: Mr. Chairman, I am winding up and I am very grateful to you for giving me time.  I would like to submit by way of winding up, calling for the seriousness of this House that we have a lot of other issues that are going to derail us. With this report, I hope we have paved the way so that even other areas of corruption will be handled in the open and with transparency.

In conclusion, some Members have talked about the dissolution of the NRC.  I think that would be the most erroneous act.  I can only say that what you see as thuggery and instability in this country still exists.  So, if we play with the little stability we have in this country, we may cause untold sufferings.  I pray to the hon. Member that reason prevails and let serious minds pervade all considerations so that we build a Uganda we want to be proud of.  I want to bring the report to you, with your permission.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr. C.K. Adyebo): Mr. Chairman, since last Thursday or even earlier, Members of this House and the people have been hearing and continue to hear disbursing statements by some Members of this House as well as the Press about alleged embezzlement of DANIDA funds as well as money from the Treasury meant for the work and other requirements of the Constitutional Commission.  The Constitution funds were reported missing by staff in the Ministry, and it is one of the many cases members of the Press have been reporting over the years.  Funds go missing because of financial indiscipline, and as a result of general indiscipline in society and Government.  It is true; there is gross indiscipline especially with regard to finances.  Government uses this with the complete contempt it deserves.  It is high time these anti-social acts are redressed.  I am talking about indiscipline in society and in Government departments.  For example, you can easily come across bureaucrats in Government departments who may not even heed to Government obligation, be it a Cabinet decision or otherwise.  You find it may be undermined by some junior officers in our society.  There have been cases.  For example, you find there has been a political decision on some issue.  Now, instead of implementing the issue, some Ugandans take it upon themselves to do it the way they want, irrespective of whether a Minister has been committed, or whether the Government has been committed.  This is the kind of indiscipline I am talking about.  As far as this matter is concerned, Government has already taken some preliminary and professional steps involving all the necessary Government organs, including CID among others.   But that is not enough. It is true, there have been compromises by some Government Departments when handling cases, especially of a financial nature like this one.   In this respect, Government recommended that the Public Accounts Committee be allowed to prove this matter -(Applause)-  and recommend to Government prompt and appropriate action to be taken to the satisfaction of both the public and those concerned.  I did say that the necessary Government organ, I.G. for example, has been involved. So, I am also of the view that the Public Accounts Committee, being a Committee of this House, should come in, because of the fear of compromising the Government departments so that they come up with a recommendation as to what further steps Government must take promptly and satisfactorily to satisfy both the public and those concerned,  including Government. Thank you.

DR. G. KANYEIHAMBA (Rubanda County, Kabale): I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like very much to thank the Government for the tribute they have paid to Prof. Mudoola and his colleagues who were so untimely removed from us.  

I stand here to make a few comments on the Bill before us.  The Minister who introduced this Bill said that the principle of this Bill is to create and establish a Constituent Assembly.  This is the same principle that was enshrined in Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, as amended in Section 14(b).  In that respect, I agree with the Minister and, therefore, I will be supporting the establishment of the Constituent Assembly.  The only issue where there is doubt and different views is, who should constitute this Constituent Assembly.  That is why I could not see why Clause 33 was necessary at all because it repeats what the Minister has already conceded. There has been a lot of talk about the sovereignty of this House to make laws and to do other things.  In any given society, there are four sovereignties dealing with different matters.  There is the political sovereignty which belongs to the people.  This is exercised through voting and through referendum.  Then there is the legal and legislative sovereignty which in our country is exercised at the moment by the NRC and the Bills passed are assented to by the President.  Then there is Executive sovereignty.  That is exercised by the President as sometimes advised by Cabinet, and lastly, there is the Judicial sovereignty.  That is exercised by our courts of jurisdiction. 

All these are derived from the Constitution.  The Constitution is not sovereign.  It is the supreme law of the land and all those sovereignties derive their authority from the Constitution.  However, if they obey the Constitution, then what they do which is within the arena of their province is fine.  It is for that reason that if this House, acting in accordance with the Constitution, makes any laws, those laws bind everyone, including the Executive and the Judiciary.  Therefore, the power to make and unmake any laws resides in the Legislature.  (Applause) 

Some people have argued that our system is different from that in the U.K. or in America.  I respectfully disagree.  As I have said, in every state those sovereignties must find their place.  However, in the United Kingdom Parliament is composed of two parts.  One part is elected and the other part is not elected.  It is composed of hereditary peers and people nominated by the Prime Minister.  But that House must agree.  I allude to the suggestion that this House, because it was indirectly elected, has no such sovereignty. In the United Kingdom the House of Lords, which even does not have the courtesy of being directly elected like us, has the legislative power.  Secondly, in the United States of America the founders of the Constitution were wise to say that after the people have elected the President, it shall not be left at that.  In case they have made a mistake, we shall entrust the college of delegates from each state to be the ones to finally pronounce whether the President has been elected.  That is similar to our RC system.  But of course what is good for America and Britain is not necessarily good for Uganda, according to some persons, unless they misunderstand how those systems operate.

I want to move to the question of why it is unrealistic to say that we should abandon the NRC and move to an entirely new body? The reason is that as a Member who was elected in Rubanda, I find it very difficult that I can go back and remain a Member of the NRC, and at the same time go back and say, ‘I want to stand as a member of the Constituent Assembly’. Many people will think that I want to have two cakes while others have none.  So, politically, it is untenable.  Secondly, imagine if I was to go to Rubanda, by the way, if this Bill passes, I will go there to show that I am not a coward; because some people have said, I am a coward, I do not want to go back, and I will not go back! But assume that I went there, and I was defeated, which is likely -(Laughter)- how do I come back and to sit here as a Member of the NRC. Some of us have got some pride.  So, for me, if this Bill passes, in order to prove that I am not a coward, I will go to Rubanda.  Hopefully, I will be elected.  But if I lose, I have to consider very seriously whether I want to come back and rejoin the NRC; because people will just laugh, and say, ‘My friend, people have withdrawn their confidence in you, and here you are’.  

But let us talk about that withdrawal of confidence.  It has been talked about a great deal in newspapers and in other media. I will call these people ‘arm-chair’ politicians.  They have never been to my Constituency.  I was only there two weeks ago, just before we started debating this Bill.  I went to every sub-county and all of them, and had I called wananchi and the RCs. Having explained what was at stake, they all agreed with me that the present NRC must be part and parcel of the Constituent Assembly which is going to make this Constitution. The Minister mentioned that the RC V all over the country sent in memoranda saying that they want a new election.  I want you to check with Kabale.  I went and visited the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of Kabale RC V, and other Councillors,  and I explained what was at stake.  They all changed their minds and said they agreed with me on this issue.  Now, as far as my Constituency and Kabale are concerned, I do not want any more statistics.  I have my own statistics which I collected there and, therefore, I intend to vote for saying, let us expand the present NRC and as proposed by hon. Butagira.  Incidentally, I mentioned that hon. Butagira had already tabled an Amendment which met with their views and they said I should support that.  I want to make it absolutely clear, categorically state that the Butagira Amendment, which we have, and which every Member should have read, had a very good compromise between what is proposed by the Minister and what most of us feel ought to happen.  There is a great deal of saying, that people who have got experience or who have known the procedure, should participate in the debate on the most important Constitution of our land.  Why not? Most of us, when we want a doctor to treat us, we go to the most experienced doctor in the country.  When you want a builder or to build a house, you ask, “who is the man who builds very well?” Why is it shameful to put that question when we are building the most important building of our land, the Constitution?  

As a result of this Bill and our discussion on it, politics has entered the arena for our people.  People are now agitated and are agitating.  I believe that in order to calm them down let us have the referendum on multi-parties now.  Let us have it now, so that the question is finalised and put to rest; and I can tell you, thereafter, people will come here, and happily make our Constitution without any problems.  I am told that in fact, one of the problems that Government has no quarrel with is electing new Members to represent every constituency to join the NRC here.  But the problem is that we have friends, we have friends abroad who do not like the system that we have here; and that they are not concerned about the wishes of the people.  I am reliably informed that they think the Constitutional Commission has made two fatal errors. One of the errors is to suggest that democracy as they understand it, should be postponed for another five years.  In other words, that as far as they are concerned, we must have multi-partyism from 1994, and any postponement is contrary to their interests.

Secondly, that the Constitutional Commission made a mistake in proposing that there should be a referendum by the people of Uganda to determine whether they freely want multi-partyism or not, and when.  And they have come to the conclusion that the only people who can reverse what people have suggested, are freshly elected Members to a Constituent Assembly who have not been exposed to other ideas or other constitutions and, therefore, can be manipulated, either during elections or when they come here.  I am talking about a point of which I know and if you want evidence, I will give it you. And so, I am suggesting that we must be weary when we begin to be praised by foreigners who think that they know better what is good for Uganda than Ugandans themselves and for that reason, we would not accept that we go along with them.  I am told they would be happy if we amended the Bill in such a way that the directly elected members exceed those who are nominated and who were indirectly elected. I have no objection to that whatsoever.  If we can - because some of the constituencies are very big, for example in Buganda, in the East, some of the constituencies are extremely big and have 160,000 to 200,000 people.  We can decide to divide them into two or three constituencies. After election certainly, the new members will outnumber the indirectly elected and the nominated ones and, I have no objection to that whatsoever.  But let us not separate the NRM Movement from this body because as you, when we were enacting the extension law in 1989, one of the main reasons we gave was that the NRA/NRC and the NRM are co-existent.  They stand or fall together.  We are like siamese twins joined at the heart and in the brain.  You destroy one side and the other is equally destroyed.  Because we must be very carefully; we were not directly elected and we have, therefore, become a question of ridicule. How many of our Ministers are part of the NRM and how many of our leaders were directly elected? None.  Be very careful, those who live in glass houses should not throw stones lest you break yourself in the bargain.  

One very important issue is that many people have compared us and said, if we do not go for direct elections now or for the Constituent Assembly, we shall be likened to Obote in 1967, and I always look very carefully and with respect at my opponent’s arguments.  Let us look at that argument.  Obote in 1967, did not go to the people.  When the NRM came here, it said we are going to make a Constitution on the advice of the people.  We elected or appointed a Constitutional Commission, that Constitutional Commission went to all parts of this country gathering evidence at every Muluka, sub-county, county and district. It gathered information of how we want to be governed.  For example, our people said, we want a directly elected President, and so be it; we want you to have only two terms of office, so be it; and they decided on many other things.  

So, they brought this report that we now have got as an interim report. And so, the people of Uganda have already spoken as to how they want to be governed. The question now is, who in the Constituent Assembly is most likely to implement what the people of Uganda have chosen to be their Constitution? Is it the present; must we keep the present body in, or must we go to an entirely new body? That is why the Butagira Amendment is very good, because it marries the two.  It says, do not discard experience; at the same time do not ignore the new people who represent interests as the Commission has said and everybody.  So, he has said, the Constituent Assembly shall be composed as follows, the present NRC Members, the new elected delegates from every constituency in the country, and as I have said, we can even expand them by sub-dividing those which are too large to accommodate only 80,000 people; and he has gone further to say that let the religious - the three major religions; Catholicism, Protestantism and Islam be represented.  I go further and propose that let the Police and the civil servants have representation.  The parties, I have no objection to that. I must maintain that the women have contributed very tremendously to this House and, therefore, I do not want to subtract any woman from the present number we have.  We have 38 and they should remain; and if we vote for the Butagira Amendment, we shall have achieved that.  I hope the women are listening to that particular point.  (Applause) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, try to wind up, please. 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr. Chairman, I want to -(Interruption)

MR. ADAM IMAGA: Point of clarification.  I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor that according to hon. Butagira’s Amendment, he is emphasising on experience.   However, it appears that the hon. Member on the Floor, has in mind who will be elected to the Constituent Assembly, if not, this Parliament started long time ago, and Governments have been coming and going.  I am sure some of the previous Members of Parliament will be contesting in this Constituent Assembly. Will that not mean experience? 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank the hon. Member for his valuable piece of information, but let me say that yes, you are right, there are many experienced people and even more qualified than ourselves in other fields in this area, but I think that we have been exposed to this Bill, to the report, and to what has been going on as representatives of our constituencies more than anybody else.  And my argument in the paper that was published, which people have misunderstood, was not that the present NRC should be alone.  If you remember, I concluded by saying, we must be expanded; and the Butagira Amendment caters for that.  

I have already mentioned the untenable position that we would have if we said the NRC Members present should go.  I would accept if we said, the present NRC Members are disqualified from standing as candidates for the Constituent Assembly. Let them do the business here and we get somebody else. But it makes it too rigid, and it would be a very dangerous proposal to our people.  The other alternative we have is to dissolve this NRC. I know some people say, it is very dangerous.  It is not dangerous.  Let me tell you the answer.  In 1989, many of us who represented the constituencies, but were not Historical Members, went back to the constituencies and were elected; there was no problem.  All we have to do now, is leave the Historical Members intact with our Chairman here to continue carrying on as NRC, then we go back to the people and they elect us, and we rejoin them.  I thank you, Sir.

REV. ATWAI (Lira Municipality): Mr. Chairman, I also beg to support the Bill, basing it on the views of the people whom I represent, and that is Lira Municipality, in Lira District as a whole.  I would like also to join others, especially in mourning the death of the Academicians.  I would like also to inform you, and the House that it seems now to be becoming the order of the day, because a week ago, in Lira town, a man was gunned down at around 4.00 a.m. when he was going to board a bus to come to Kampala. Yet up to now, no meaningful steps have been taken. 

I would like now to turn to the Bill, and say that as you have already been covered, I beg to start from where I should end; from Schedule 3, Section 2, Sub-section (iii), where we are talking of municipalities. Earlier on, the Commissioner was mandated to honour counties as gazetted electoral area and my people see no reason why the same Commissioner cannot go ahead and take note of municipalities as gazetted areas.  They are, therefore, saying, without any amount of jealousy, that Kalangala which is a district with 16,000 people and with two gazetted counties, bringing the number to about 8,000 per people comparing it with Lira Municipality which has a population of 27,000 people; a population which also fed the same Commission with their memorandum, is now being denied the opportunity to send a representative to go and debate and promulgate the Draft Constitution into the new Constitution. They are, therefore, strongly appealing and hoping that the hon. Minister who is the mover of this Motion, will take note of this Amendment and also bring in all the existing municipalities to be declared as electoral areas.  The same people are telling me that since the youth are being catered for separately and we did some weeks ago have some legislation on the Youth Bill, which as we go along, becomes the Youth Act. They are saying that because the age limit of a youth goes up to 35 years, then whoever stands as a candidate should ensure that the youth do not cheat other people; and that candidates should be at the age of 35 and above because the youth have got their share of 21. 

They are also saying that it is playing on the intelligence of the Members of the Constituent Assembly as they are there in the clauses.  Some matters which otherwise should have been handled either through the referendum or by the Constituent Assembly are left as a matter of consultation and negotiation between the region and government. That is playing on the intelligence and integrity of the Constituent Assembly to be established.  They feel that all these matters should be handled there.  They are also telling me to tell this House that it is very unfortunate that even at this time when you can almost go the full length of the country without any interpreter, that some people still think we should bring in people who need interpreters.  They are, therefore, saying that the official and only language which should be applicable in this particular forum is English, so that if we had, or if we choose to elect a Chairman among the delegates who may be there, and the Chairman chooses not to speak in English, then it will mean that the Chairman has to have an interpreter.  And that what would otherwise have taken a very short time ends up taking about eight months.  They have already seen some of these sorts of things.

Finally, I would like, as I told you that I was going to start and end from the reverse.  I feel very sad that the manner in which we were brought in, in 1989, is the one being abandoned now.  All this time, people have been very happy and proud of our unique democratic system.  But all of a sudden, even if I was elected with due respect, to the hon. Mover who is a Nominated Member, he comes here and -(Laughter)- he says, people are saying you do not have their mandate, then I begin to say, who am I representing, what sort of law am I manufacturing here, if I know that at the end of it all, all that we have made and legislated upon, will eventually be taken as something which was done by people who did not have the backing and the mandate of the people.  I consider this as a very unfortunate statement, which I think when the time comes, he is going to withdraw so that we know that we are here for a cause.  So, I beg to support.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I continue with my deliberation, I would like to thank the Islamic Community who have started their month of Ramadan, and may peace shine upon all those who believe in him and Prophet Mohammed swala Allah wa salam. (Laughter) I wish also to thank the hon. Rt. Prime Minister for his statesmanship and his political acumen when he quelled the unfortunate situation that was about to develop here; and came to bail Government by accepting to provide an interim report to the Members of this House.  In war, we call that one a tactical manoeuvre.  Since you have warned us, that we do not dwell on matters that have already been said by other Members, I will only add my contribution to that of the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister.  He actually articulated my mind, except for a few items that I will have to add as an observation.  Having listened attentively to the Members who have now contributed, and I am here to support the Bill.  We should not also allow to let our hard-fought democracy, to be wasted or be thrown into the doldrums of the political detractors.  It is not very easy to appease everyone, in as far as democracy is concerned.  If we have got to go by the bitter truth of democracy, there is always somebody who is offended as far as democracy is concerned.  For instance, if we go to our votes, somebody will be defeated democratically, and the person who is defeated, will not become a Vice-Chairman.  The minorities are always sidelined and sometimes, in our so-called democratic process of election, when we go into elections, it is always the majority who are the victors and who constitute of course authority.  But when it comes to the minority, they are never listened to.  I do not know what type of democracy that is.  And, therefore, my own submission is that while we are talking about transparency and about our political system, where we talk against sectarianism, and where we introduce new systems or new ideas, I see no reason why we should not continue with our present style of politics.  In the first style we were lining up before our own candidate. This type of lining up is not of course popular.  It is assumed to be unpopular.  But why did we bring in that system? It was because we wanted transparency.  Today, we are coming with the idea of a secret ballot.  This secret ballot is correct.  It is of course satisfying the wishes of the advanced class.  Ours is experimental.  We want our own democracy, which is Ugandan; where a Ugandan is satisfied and is not grumbling.  When we talk about grumbling, it is when we have endless problems.  The problems which have bedeviled this country and which have always emanated from the Constitution.  You talk about the ’66 problem, you talk about the 67 Constitution’ - now you are talking of 1993. All those were rotating on Constitutions.  When it comes to representation, we are talking of group representation.  Of course, it is correct that we must have a popular democracy where everybody has a right to participate and we are talking about participatory democracy. I find it a bit funny in our situation, if we say that today we want a secret ballot, and no lining up. When it comes to our RC system, we might say, now line up.  I believe this is a bit fictitious; we do not know when we are supposed to do what.  If we have opted to use these ballot boxes - secret ballot boxes, we should continue with that through and through.  However, if we have decided to adopt multiparty, we go with multiparty, and we call it a day.  As one of the speakers said, if we are now talking about future politics, let us solve some few problems.  For instance, the contentious issues of which the Commission was talking about are of course unknown to our situation. Maybe one of the contentious issues is where people are talking more about multiparty. Some people always give their own documents by saying, for us we are not interested in multi-party.  Multiparty should be dismissed for about five years; others talk of ten years, while others propose 15 years.  But this situation is not known.  Are we going in for that? Why do we not ask the people, for instance, to say before we even go for this Constitution, let us go for a referendum?  People could decide whether they are in for multi-party and once that one is solved, then we proceed. (Applause) 

I wish also to warn those who are aspiring for leadership roles to remember that democracy is sometimes very expensive; very expensive in a sense that at times when people are struggling for their democratic rights, there are people, for instance, our peace now, did not come for free.  We struggled for it, people lost their lives. But people have now seen peace, peace is coming and it is in place.  

So, we must guard that type of peace until we have completed our own mission.  Our mission here is really to discuss the Constitution, and to hand over our Government peacefully and then go to the people.  But we have not finished that mission, they are saying, go back for election, and after election, get the mandate of the people.  This mandate is correct, and is necessary; we cannot stay in power without consulting the people.  But our contract, which of course, I think was not an entirely fair contract - our contract is not complete.  Our contract was to educate and lead our people to a prosperous and peaceful Uganda.  We should hand over the interim Government, then people will choose their own leaders afterwards.  All that is not done, but we are wavering.  

 I wish also to caution some of the political leaders.  We are all political leaders, including myself. If we cannot accept the politics of ‘give and take’. For instance, if you are a politician, and you cannot accept advice, you become irritated, and you start saying, if we discuss this or oppose this, we shall be childish.  If we do this, we are not better than the Pope.  If you question the right or the fairness of the Chairman of the Commission, that person should be looked at in the most serious possible way. All this, in my view, is just intimidation. If we are talking about the so-called democracy, people should be allowed to express their minds, give their views, and look at the issue as it is presented.  For instance, if one said, we want full representation, all of you should participate, I do not see why we do not even involve others, such as the lame. But what are they going, for instance, to add to this discussion? That is why, I have my own reservations in as far as group representation - group interests are concerned.  I have my own reservations for the following reasons.  Each proposal by the Commission had its own merit. When you talk about women, it has its own merit.  When you talk about the disabled, it has its own merit. When you talk about the Church leaders, it has its own merit.  But again, it has got its own counter-productive result.  I am a Protestant, and I believe in Makumbi, for instance, and then when we say, Protestant representation will be by two and then as a follower of Makumbi, who has got Bishop Makumbi -(Interjections) - Archbishop Makumbi, I beg your pardon.  The follower of Archbishop Makumbi will be left out unrepresented and yet I am a protestant. Supposing I was having another follower who was a Moslem, and you choose about two or three representatives, and one of them is of Kakooza group, Kakooza is not represented, naturally, he will be disgruntled.  When it comes to ‘dini ya musambwa,’ he will also not be represented and , therefore, some of these issues, are the ones I call contentious.  If we are talking about a representative, this representative should represent the interests of all. If I have been elected by many, and I am representing the Constituency, I do not see why we should have these special groups coming in, because they have their own contentious reserved argument. When it comes to the Army, for instance, you could say that it played a leading role in establishing democracy, and peace.  I happen to be one of them.  (Interjection) Yes. It is like when a child is about to be grabbed by a hyena, and you save this child.  When the child starts growing old, he will want to go out to ease himself, but you will stop him from going out because you will tell him that the hyena will grab him. And if he wants to go and prepare tea for himself, you stop him and say the hyena will grab you.  Because you helped him from the other hyena which was about to grab him.  Therefore, this child -(Laughter)- will get disgusted with your protection and in a similar manner, as the NRA did, because the Army Council was so big, so they said, we want to listen to the wishes of the people, if the people say we want this, we shall go by that and besides that we should also participate with our 10 representatives.  So, democracy in our view prevailed; because when they have 10 representatives, we are not going to bring the whole Army to sit in this House to discuss as the Commission.  The Commission is proposing that every citizen who has got any political following should be represented.  You should have one or two people representing various interest groups. But if we talk about the whole army coming to sit in here to discuss the Constitution, I do not think we are going to go too far because we are going to be contradicting ourselves; a lot of interests will prevail and the discussion will not be smooth.  

On the economy, Hon. Pinto has already presented a report. I do not know whether it is good at all! It might be bad but it is of course, dwelling on corruption; and if it catches some few people who are involved, that means there is some money which has been spent; and even in the production of this simple document, which has disappeared.  There is a reason why it has not been able to - why the Ministry has not been able to produce few copies to circulate to the Members. There must be a reason.  

So, I propose that let us have an effective Assembly of 167 representatives, who are elected Members, including 10 NRA and 39 youth - I will have to substantiate on 39 youth, that is, one from each district.  Then we should have 39 women, 2 Trade Unionists, and 3 other women, one from Mothers Union, one from Young Women Christian Association (YWCA) and one from Uganda Moslem Women.  I am going to qualify that one too.  

Why did I refuse interests group? The Interest groups are different from Uganda Young Women Christian Association, for instance.  The Uganda Christian Association has its own leadership.  The whole association will elect one person, irrespective of whether she is Catholic or Protestant, or whether one is from Archbishop Makumbi’s following.  And of course, Members have been talking about the effectiveness of women.  Women have a certain percentage which we all know here and no doubt, as husbands, we all know that women play a big role in our day to day lives; and you know, yes, as mothers of course they play a big role and where there is a successful home, there is of course, a good woman behind it.  Besides that, we also want to encourage these women.  We have not seen any woman who is aspiring to becoming a Prime Minister, for instance, or even to becoming a President.  So, they should be helped.  The 5 should be encouraged without prejudice; the points that are given to ladies entering University, for instance.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Mr. Chairman, in winding up, I also want to talk about the 100,000/= deposit; which I think is quite all right, and in my view, I think it is even not enough.  It should have gone to around 150,000/=.  If you want to become an aspiring leader, any person with reputable position, if you want to become a very important person in society, you must not be insolvent.  If you accept these cheap, poor, representatives, naturally, one time they will come, and say my friend, you are even missing fuel - please go and say the following.  These people can easily be manipulated. For instance, with due respect, here you can see hon. Members have been going about their business without any allowance - some deliberations, sometimes going without payment, but they are able to look after themselves, and so, business is going ahead.  So, I think if we have very effective and substantive Members who are able to pay even 150,000/=, it is a welcome idea.

The Presidential nomination I think is another contentious issue.  We have been talking about opinions of people.  Many of the documents which are for the Commission and some memoranda which have been read or heard in papers and on radio; many RC V officials were criticising the idea of allowing our dear President to be involved in selecting some of these people. Why? You know, humanity is a very difficult thing; you have seen in our own mist here, people have been appointed to some offices, as the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is lamenting now. He is saying some people are not even fulfilling or following decisions that are passed because of their own interests.  Now, supposing this President, clean as he is, is allowed to get involved in selection of these people and this person does not live to his expectation, shall we say this is the President’s nominee? Why do we not save this dear President of ours from the confusion of appointing these people so that the people are appointed here by ourselves, and if something goes wrong, we are to blame.

THE CHAIRMAN: Time up, please, 

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Mr. Chairman, we should not shy away from the bitter truth.  We must seek the mandate of the people to discuss this important document.  I support the Bill, and ‘Allutta Continua!’

MR. ASIKU (Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute to this most important Bill that has ever been tabled in this House. I ask for your permission to allow me to repeat some points which are very necessary to draw up the feelings of the majority of Ugandans to the points which matter.  It is not right, according to my thinking, to say that do not repeat what somebody has said, when the need for repeating that particular thing is to emphasise its importance.  I would like to advance my argument right from the start.  I came to this House, directly elected by the people of the Constituent Assembly from my Constituency.  I was elected and not been nominated, but using delegation systems, I do agree with what everybody in the House says, that the American President is elected democratically.  We also had our electoral colleges in our various constituencies, through which I came to be their representative. That is honourable. If it is honoured by the Western Powers like America, we should accept that type of election.  Election of the Pope is through a College and every Catholic honours that election. It is very democratic, and you cannot question it. (Applause and Laughter)  

Now, let us analyse the Constitution of this Parliament. Right from the start, unfortunately, very high ranking officers of Government here say, people are complaining.  Who is complaining and who is going to stop complaining? (Laughter) Who was not given a chance to be a Member of this Parliament? Which part of our population have we missed in this House?  If we carefully analyse this situation, this is the best House, most qualified and very competent to discuss the Bill of this Country.  Talking of political parties.  I am sorry, but I will be forced to say, UPC is in full front, including Cabinet Ministers, DP is in full front, including the Cabinet Ministers, and CP is in full front. (Laughter)  The only party which is out we may say, is UPM.  But I think, most of them are on the Chair.  (Laughter) Therefore, we have not left any political party out of this Parliament. And do you know what the advantage is? Right now, when a Motion is tabled for Uganda’s advancement in this House, we look for nothing, we are not quarrelling, we shall ask, who is the best man? or, who is the best woman to discuss this Bill? You should be able to give us the answer.  I do not mind, and nobody minds, whether the best man with a head belongs to UPC, provided he gives us the best solution, we shall accept.  We also do not mind whether what we adopt comes from CP; it is the same. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

MR. ASIKU: Now, the question is, in our particular politics, which is one of the best experiments in Africa, is to represent the women; and I think in the NRM Government, either because of the figures, which indicate that 54 per cent of our population is women, we must adopt them in full swing in this Parliament - we have done very well! Every district has elected women representatives. I was wondering in this House, if people say we lose confidence, I am sorry to say, but our honourable ladies would be the first in whom they would lose confidence.  They were the first people who struggled to elect themselves out in this House, I refused the debate; the Women’s Motion which was here.  It was not necessary really, because what has happened, instead of creating 39 representatives in this House, which was aptly requested by the House and provided for, it created eight; which means, these women vigorously lectured to vote themselves out in this Parliament.  They are now moving around saying, let us amend it.  How do we amend what you supported yesterday?  I support you all, you represent the districts; the best way of representing our views, is as you are, 39.  

Now, the issue is the NRA. I think our Army is okay.  We are very comfortable, they lost a lot of lives, and they are simple, because they accept what people say.  I do agree with them and I do agree with Ugandans that all the confusion, maybe earlier - the manipulation started earlier, using nobody else, but the Army. All the overthrows, and the change of Government, the Army was behind it.  Whether the Army kicks the President or the President manipulates through, really - they change another President. You know that history.  It is the Army that is at the front line. That is why we fear, we say, ah, the Police are not necessary, we say Prisons are not necessary, because I have not seen the Prisons. The Police are actually chasing Members of Parliament out of this House. For that, we think that it is the Army that matters. Honestly, they were brought to play that role, directly or indirectly; but they really have a backward role. But this one of ours now, must be inside to discuss the law with us and we want to know, who among them, is now going to take a gun and destroy the law when he was part of the law.  For that reason, I support.  The 10 representatives must be accepted by all of us.  I do not disagree.  Let us go ahead and extend the House.  We can extend the House to have contribution from religious parties.  Somebody was telling me, and he is very unfortunate -(Interjections)- yes, religious parties.  If you do not want to call them parties, call them Associations.  But the fact is, we have to honour the three religions.  It is very unfortunate, I do not know how many they are now, somebody is saying about 90; but these are sects.  But we all believe in our Constitution and the three are honoured - that is, Catholic, Protestant and Moslem.  Somebody is saying another one, and they are going to be many, but I think these are the three we have been honouring throughout our system.  Let us have the representation here.  

The question of the youth and the unions is not debatable, because it was provided for.  The only unfortunate thing was that the Government was unable to fulfill its promise to bring in these people. We cannot debate that issue.  The unions and the youth should have been here.  Already, we have one who has stolen our seat - the mature man’s seat; he is behind me, and he is a youth.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that actually, all those religions are represented here.  He represents one of them and in fact, I was just talking to hon. Omara Atubo here, he says, he represents the Catholic Church.  (Laughter) So, Mr. Chairman, I just want to make it very clear to him, that all religions are represented here, in fact, those who move at night with Malakashi, are also represented here.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. ASIKU: I thank the hon. Member for the information, but I tell, you some of the people will recall.  For example, one may be a Catholic or a protestant, but he may not be an active one. We want to see whether the churches will come here and say, please, ‘one wife, one man’ which they may advocate for; where else, is a Catholic, a Protestant or a Moslem, who hopes to represent the religious sector, is advocated for by many.  Now, in which case, we want the right people to represent us in the right theory. (Laughter)  I am, therefore, responding to the wishes of many.  The problem of this country is one; poverty.  What is killing us is poverty. The Cabinet Ministers are here, and they know.  They are not happy, with the Bill as it is tabled.  Why I say this is because I think they disagreed quietly there.  They have now been given the liberty not to be collectively responsible for this particular Bill.  Do you know why? There must have been disagreement and rightly so! 

MR. SAM NJUBA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that a Government is one on this Bill.  Perhaps, the only thing the hon. Member is confusing, is the Constitution Debate where we said, the Constitution Draft will be taken to the Constituent Assembly and there, the doctrine of collective responsibility should not apply.  But Government is solely behind this Bill.

MR. ASIKU: Thank you very much for the information.  I did agree right from the start.  All of us are behind this particular Bill. We are talking about its contents as it is, but otherwise, the whole of Uganda wants a new Constitution which must be written with truth. So, on that one, we are together.  We are different from the composition.  To compromise, to make things simple, I am advising the House, I, personally went to my Constituency as many did.  Many of our Constituencies are wondering about what we are saying? We elected you to make laws for Uganda, and the laws you have been making for Uganda were valid.  Somebody is saying at this particular time when you are making a bigger law that you are not very qualified, and we are loosing confidence in you.  We have not.  Do not bother us with very many elections. We are waiting for the election that comes after your term of office ends; this is 1994.  But because in some places, maybe rightly so, some of us have lost confidence in our Constituencies. Let me give these people the freedom and I want to support them. Let there be direct election for those who think they had not participated for the first election.  This is an additional number to this House to satisfy those who for any other reasons, failed to come to the House and they feel their contribution is necessary. (Applause) We have confidence in them.  (Laughter)  We shall have to act.  I think the Police are very important.  I have no quarrel with having a representative from the Civil Service because the Civil Service can confuse the government, and apparently we are saying they have stolen all the money, and have refused to work. Let them come and legislate against their good conditions also.  We are saying, keep quiet, do what we tell you, but this is too much.  Let us have their views for the good of this country.  

I will, therefore, conclude by saying that the best solution is to support the Amendment which compromises all in one party; after all our hon. MP said, he had enough money to cater for all Ugandans, and how much have we lost in wars? To end more losses, we want peace and we must have the peace frame made. Let us invest a lot of money in making a permanent law for this country.  Thank you very much. 
 
MRS. KALEMA R. (Kiboga County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to ask you first of all to allow me to associate myself with the hon. Prime Minister’s report on the death of our top academicians and scholars, who were brutally murdered.  The reason I want to say this is because we were promised that no stones would be left unturned in 1979 when not less than nine doctors were killed in that kind of mysterious circumstance, but all the stones were left where they were. The stones were not turned.  So, it is my hope and prayer that this will be done, and that there will be an end to any other murderous acts.  In my short submission, I feel the main issue of this debate and Constituent Assembly Bill is actually in the Preamble, which it seems to me a number of hon. Members who have been contributing have been jumping it and leaving it out, and I would like you to allow me to read just the first and the third which states that, and I will ask Members to look at the Preamble, ‘Whereas under the Ten-point Programme, the National Resistance Movement envisioned a fundamental need for the development of a new National Consensus, upon Uganda’s Constitutional arrangements, as a pre-requisite for the democratic process and the rule of law.  Then 3, which I also consider very important, ‘and whereas it is deemed expedient and in concert with the policy of involving the will of the people in the entire process of the National Constitution making that a truly representative Constituent Assembly be established’, and the rest of it.  

We are here to debate a Bill that involves the will of the people, and I am also compelled to start where I should have perhaps ended. I will start with the disturbing report I read in the paper yesterday where hon. Tiberondwa was addressing Members at Makerere University, the students, and he asked that, ‘Who told NRM that Uganda needs a new Constitution?’ (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the reason why I raised this question is because the people of Uganda have not been asked whether they want to reverse the 1962 Constitution or whether they like the 1967 Constitution or the 1993 Constitution.  Because of that I felt that before we get into the postmortem of the present Constitution, we should be able to ascertain whether the people of Uganda actually want this one in the first place. Of course, I would not like to - he is wasting my time which is very limited because definitely he should be aware that the people when they were asked to commend, or to give their views about the new Constitution, they were aware that they had a choice.  Now, if I wanted the 1967Constitution, they would have never given me new ideas. (Applause) I accompanied one of the Commissioners when he was collecting these ideas from the people of my area; from the village level to RC II and RC III, and Haji Kasujja was the Commissioner. I accompanied him, and as I read through these ideas, it was really interesting to see that people took trouble to say what they wanted and most of the people did not want the 1967 Constitution, which hon. Tiberondwa wants. 

So, I feel the hon. Member should actually apologise to this House for confusing our young men and women at Makerere University. (Applause) In the same vein, I would like to emphasise the point that since we are debating the will of the people and the people have already given their views and these views have been incorporated in the new Constitution Draft, it is important that we concentrate on that; concentrate on the people’s will and we also need to realise that because every Member from his village, even Members here, were given that opportunity, it is important that where there has been under representation, like in many NRC counties which we represent here, many of them have been under represented, and because there is no time to tell you how others have been over represented and others have been under represented; so, although a lot of Members are now talking about the Butagira formula of incorporating the new Assembly and the NRC, still a lot of our people will not be truly represented as it had been hoped, because a lot of our people are under represented, even in this NRC.  It is unfortunate, that when the NRC was expanded in 1989, there was no review to see that the counties that were too big should have become three counties.  I will give the examples of Bukoto County in Masaka District, which has 350,000 or so people, and which, according to the new proposal, they can have approximately 5 representatives. But today, Bukoto has got six Members, including a municipality and woman - perhaps seven or six.  

So, I would like us to watch against under representation and over representation, where the Assembly has to be truly representative, because all our people gave in their views.  And if they gave in their views, they must as much as possible be properly represented or else the Preamble will have to be amended; if it is not amended then this is the time for us to see which one we choose. Do we choose a truly representative Assembly or go according to the existing counties, of which some are very under represented and others are over represented.  

I would also like to go to the delegates of the President. Personally, I would like the President to have not more than 15 delegates.  A lot of Members here jumped to the conclusion that the President should have 15.  The wording in the Bill states, ‘not more than 15.’  A lot of people did not watch that. So, there has been some kind of excitement.  Instead of at least proposing that let him have 12 or 13. I think there is a tendency for Ugandans to be very mean.  I know here people are very mean sometimes because I have been thinking about the present President, Museveni. In 1981 he just picked 27 young men and went to the bush.  Of course, some of us here are not interested in that war.  They do not feel he is doing a good job because he was frustrating them. But as far as we know, since 1986, Uganda has been a better and different country. The change is felt by everybody in this country and by everybody outside Uganda; that Uganda is a better country. (Applause)  

So, I would like to say that since the President took on that responsibility of saving this country from turmoil, is really 15 people too many for him.  They could have suggested to him 27, one for each according to the young men he went with in the bush. But it is only 15, and without wasting more time on that I would like the President to have 15; and there is another matter where I was very angry with Uganda Law Society President.  He was reported on Friday and on the 19th - Remmy Kasule.  The President and the Cabinet should be detached because it is the Executive Arm of the Government; and they should be totally detached from the Constitution making process.  Hon. Members, are the learned people really correct in what they are saying?  Can you let the government, the leader of the government and his Cabinet, be responsible for everything, from immunisation to seed processing, schools and to every single thing, even feeder roads.  They should be involved in that, but they should not be involved in the Constitution making.  I disagree with the Law society, and I would like ‘New Vision’ to report this so that Remmy Kasule -(Laughter)-  should read it tomorrow.  

Regarding the first Schedule, without adding more to the numbers, I tick the 10 members of the NRA, and I tick the 10 members of the NRC. When we come to NOTU, we are still in the process of amending the Trade Union Amendment Bill, and in that it was government who incidentally, from the interview we had with the teachers and civil servants; they were not very keen to unionise, but government wants them to be members of the unions and also to come to this Assembly. So, they have accepted that since we are going to have more basic groups, because they can never share the same sentiment as the traditional Trade Unions, but the basic groups of these people, the teachers and civil servants, two is not enough, and I would like to suggest as many as at least one or two more - three or four, so that at least, if there is one that is to come here, he will be a teacher representing the teachers, and one should be representing the civil servants and perhaps one or two representing the original NOTU. 

Concerning women, it has been unfortunate. I was going to leave it because a lot of people have talked about women.  I would like women - the 18 Members to be elected by women and I want to assure this House that the way this government has supported and promoted women in the top leadership of this country it has been very much commended by everybody outside the country, including Pope Paul II, who said he had very high esteem for the women of this country.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. NTIMBA J. Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much.  The people of Mbarara Municipality and myself would like to add their voice to that of the Chair in sharing the grief and joining in prayers for the repose of the soul of our dear beloved citizen who was murderously killed yesterday. I also wish to condemn in the strongest possible terms those who are responsible for this dastardly act and express the hope that government will leave no stone unturned in bringing the culprits to book.  

I rise to support the Motion, subject to certain Amendments which my constituents have asked me to move.  I will also be supporting some Amendments which my conscience requires me to support.  I am happy to say that, because of the easy communication within my constituency, and I was able to make some thorough consultations. The main thrust was at RC III level, where I was able to interact with RCs, opinion leaders, civil servants, religious leaders and students of my baby university, Mbarara University.  After discussing the Bill with them, I left them to go back and digest it and submit to me memoranda.  I received three memoranda from the three different divisions, which I subjected to a discussion by the full Council - Mbarara Municipal Council, with a view to comparing the various RC III councils, and ironing out differences wherever they existed.  

Having done that,, it is my intention not to say so much about what they have agreed upon, but they have raised a few question marks. I am going to refer to Clause No.15, 17,18,19 and 31.  I will also talk about the Election Rules No.2 and No.17.  Since my time is limited, I will start with the most contentious issues of special interest to my Constituency. This is concerned with designation of electoral areas.  As you may notice from the proposals, the municipalities in Uganda which have a population of less than 50,000 people will not qualify to return a delegate.  If you look at the statistics of the Census of January, 1991, you will find that Masaka Municipality for example, which is only short of 50,000 by a mere 415 people, is likely to be denied the opportunity of returning a delegate, whereas at the same time we have Bujumba County, Kyamuswa County in Kalangala District and Upe County in Moroto District, with much smaller populations of 9,000, 7,000, and 11,000 respectively, being allowed to return a delegate.  My constituents do not see any fairness in this, and if I may speak as a demographer, it maybe, recalled that this Census was taken on the Saturday morning of January 12th, 1991.  People were enumerated at places where they slept the previous night.  Now, you all know what happens to the populations of urban towns over the weekend or at night.  If this Census had been taken on a Wednesday afternoon in the middle of the day, the results would have been different.  This raises the question -(Interruption)

MR. ELYAU: Point of information. Thank you Mr. Chairman, the point the hon. Member on the Floor is raising is very important. Like in Teso, by the time they were doing the Census most of the people were in the bush and -(Laughter)- I want to assure you that it has been disappointing.  I say so because it is very painful, now that everybody has returned at home, you find that the population is really great and to make matters worse, in Uganda, formerly, Teso was second to Buganda in population. But I was surprised to see that we were No.5. How? Who killed the rest? (Laughter)

MR. H. KYEMBA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. Since I also represent the Municipality of Jinja, I would like to give some additional information to the hon. Member. During the time of the Population Census which he has referred to, it was deliberately put on the radio and in the other media, that people were being advised to go back to the villages where they come from, for the Census and many people working in urban centres took the opportunity of that weekend of the Census, to go home, and that one affected quite a number of urban centres.

MR. NTIMBA: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I thank the hon. Members for the additional information given.  If you look at the reason why censuses are taken, one of the important reasons is for development.  You take the census of a town in order to determine how many cubic meters of water should be pumped into it, in order to serve the people, and Saturday morning certainly, was not the right time to count the people of a particular area. Besides, my people in Mbarara are of the opinion that municipalities and towns have unique problems of development, which should not be overlooked -(Applause)- and I think in 1989, when some of these of municipalities were designated as Parliamentary Constituencies, this must have been take into consideration.  Even as we talk about decentralisation, the towns and urban authorities are going to be given special treatment because of their very unique nature.  If I come back to my own Constituency, and if the argument is that, if Mbarara cannot raise more than 50,000 people it has to be merged with the neighbouring counties or gombololas. Mbarara happens to be in a very unique position, where do you annex it? Do you annex it to Rwampara, do you annex it to Kashari or do you annex it to Isingiro?  The town was curved out of these three counties and if this were done, the people of my constituency are of the view that this is likely to create more problems than to solve them.  So, I bring the message from the people of Mbarara Municipality that all municipalities which were designated -(Interruption)

MR. BARIGYE: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. Allow me to inform the speaker on the Floor that if Mbarara Municipality was treated in a manner proposed in this Bill, whereby not having the population required to have its own representation, it has to be included as is stated in the Bill in the county it is in.  Now, as he has stated, there is some ambiguity as to what this would mean to Mbarara, because before Mbarara became a Municipality, half of Mbarara was in Kashari County, a quarter was in Isingiro County and a quarter in Rwampara.  Now, if you were to include the half of Mbarara in Kashari County, this would create new problems for, not only Mbarara Municipality, but also for Kashari County because as the population stands, Kashari qualifies to have one representative in the Constituent Assembly.  If you bring the half of Mbarara then it will over-shoot the 160,000 population figure, and Kashari County would have to be divided into two.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. NTIMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Without wasting too much time on that, most, if not all hon. Members who come from municipalities which I have had the opportunity to consult, agree that municipalities should be designated as electoral areas, and I hope when the Commissioner comes out to curve the electoral areas, he will be directed by wisdom.  Concerning Clause No.4, initially, members of my Constituency were of the view that the present NRC should become a Constituent Assembly. But as the discussions continued, somehow, people decided that there should be transparency, and that the NRC Members should be statesmen and put their interests before all other considerations. They thought, that way, those who agree to be statesmen and put National interests above their own, will be scoring a point because the idea was that there is need for acceptability and credibility.  They want a Constitution passed by a body in such a way that when it comes out, it will be acceptable. However, I noticed that there have been some new developments namely, the Butagira proposed Amendment, and I hope many Members having heard of this Amendment proposal, and will be able to go back and consult their constituents, and I hope at the end of the day, we shall come out with something that is acceptable to all.  

Concerning Clause No.15 on the quorum, as you will see, the Bill stipulates that the quorum shall consist of the Chairman and 140 delegates, that is 141. My people’s contention is that this is a very important and serious exercise and we should not just pin ourselves to numbers which may not lead us to the right decision.  They are of the view that a quorum should consist of two thirds of the total number of delegates; that is two thirds of 238, and of course if the Butagira Amendment is acceptable, it should still be two thirds of whatever number we shall arrive at.  With regard to Clause No.17, which talks about decisions of the Assembly being arrived at by consensus, yes, my people are of the view that decisions should, as far as possible, be arrived at by consensus.  But that in the event of this not being possible, they propose that two thirds of the delegates voting should pass a decision

I also want you to consider a situation where, if we accept the fact that the quorum will be 140 people minus the Chairman, who has no vote, if that minimum quorum comes to debate an issue and you require two thirds of that 140, you will have a situation where 93 people, that is two thirds of 141 will a particular issue, and this represents only 39 per cent of the total number of people present and voting. 

So, the question to be asked for the purpose of voting is, Is 39 percent good enough to pass any resolution?  The contention here is that if there is any Bill to be passed, it should be by two thirds of the total number of membership of the Constituent Assembly.  With regard to Clause No.18, my people are of the view that if there are any contentious matters of a local character, this should be resolved initially by a local referendum within that area first, before they think of negotiating with the Government. If for example my friend from Rubabo wants to restore the Kingdom of Makobole, they should first go to a referendum and if the matter is contentious, sort this out before they negotiate with the government.  

With regard to Clause No.19, my people are of the view that the Constitution should be enacted by the Assembly, and should be signed by the Head of State within 30 days after it has been promulgated.  The idea of this is not that they do not trust the President about his being prompt in signing the thing within a reasonable time, but the argument is that there is a lot of work to be done and a lot of things to be put into effect.  If there is any inordinate delay in signing the Bill, we could run out of time and we could find ourselves behind the programme.  So, it is contented that the sooner this is signed, the better, and they believe that within 30 days of the promulgation of the Constitution, the President should be able to sign and put the matter in place. 

On the question of the polling procedures, in the interest of the economy, and also considering the fact that many of our people are illiterate and also considering the need for transparency, it has been strongly argued and emphasised that the voting should not be by ballot box but by lining up behind the candidate, his photograph or his agents.  

Finally, I would like to raise a question which has been brought to my attention regarding the election of the Chairman of the Assembly. It has been felt that if one of the elected members of the Assembly is elected or appointed chairman, somehow he will cease to represent the interests of his or her constituency.  So, because of this and for other reasons, my constituents and others whom I have had the opportunity to consult, feel that it is right and proper that the Chairman should be appointed by the President on the advise of the Cabinet, and as stipulated in the Bill. 

Once again, let me take this opportunity to thank the NRM Government for bringing us what we have been waiting and longing for, that is, putting in place a new Constitution which hopefully, will ensure peace, security, stability and prosperity for Uganda.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Motion, subject to a few Amendments that we shall have the occasion to discuss during the Committee Stage.  Thank you.

MRS. NJUBA G. (Historical Member): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Bill.  If any group has been dis-favoured by this Bill, it is the Historical Members; because the Historical Members of this House actually conceived the idea of making a new Constitution and sold this to Ugandans, and of course naturally, to anyone could have wanted to be party to whatever body was to debate and promulgate the Constitution. I personally feel proud to know that my grand-daughter will know that her grandmother was a party to the making of this Constitution. But at the same time, the NRM from the beginning was committed to the idea of following the wishes of the masses, unless of course if what the masses are demanding would lead to disaster; in which case, the leadership will have to explain. But in this particular case, apart from me personally feeling sorry for myself, I do not see any disaster to the nation that will come by a new Assembly, or a new group of people being asked or being elected to debate and promulgate a Constitution for Uganda. I do not see any disaster that could come.  Therefore, because of that, I support the Bill, since the people of Uganda have asked for it, and this one I am taking from the evidence given to us by the Constitutional Commission.  If we are accepting other things that they have recommended, I do not see why we should not accept this particular point because it is part of the recommendations which a lot of Members here appear to be supporting.  

The other reason is, from the day that the popular Resistance Army and the Uganda Freedom Fighters agreed to form the National Resistance Movement, they also, by the same agreement, agreed to make the NRC the supreme political organ of the Movement.  The Movement came with its own line of politics. It brought its own type of elections, and it has its own methods of work in politics, and one of the contentious issues in the Constitution, one of the very important things that we are asking the Assembly to decide on, is the type of politics.  Therefore, if this is one, in fact, I think it is the most contentious -  if this is one of the most important things that we want to decided on in the Constitution, I do not see how we should expect people of different political thinking in Uganda to accept a decision taken by the political organ of one of the contestants.  I do not see how they can accept.  Certainly, if I were Dr. Obote, I would later on refuse to accept a Constitution that was debated and promulgated by people whose political thinking is completely opposed to mine.  Therefore, we should really go back and elect a new body where everybody - if Dr. Obote wanted to come back to stand or to elect- he will have a chance, because now, he does not have a chance.  As you heard from the hon. Member there, at the time this House was elected, and I am talking about the elected Members, quite a number of Ugandans were still in the bush.  Now, they are back and they want to have a chance to be able to have an input in this  -(Interruption)

REV. ATWAI: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Lady holding the Floor that some of these people who are aspiring to have an input did not give that input. So, they are coming to reap where they did not sow. (Laughter)

MRS. NJUBA: At least at the eleventh hour, to make an input in the Constitution, because they are Ugandans and we are asking them everyday to come back and participate and contribute to the development of the country.  Now, if you are asking them to come back, you should surely give them a share in this very important document. What is happening today is actually not new in the Movement. Whenever this Movement attains a certain level of growth, this sort of thing happens.  In 1982 and 1983, when the Movement decided that instead of the Secret ballot, people go to elect committees, and there was a lot of agitation among the members of the select committees.  They felt it was unfair; that they had done the job in the most difficult times, but now they are going to put the votes to everybody, including those people who were not supporting.  They were very annoyed at one time and I although this one is on a larger scale; it is the same thing really. A qualitative change has come in the Movement, and the Movement has grown to such a level that we must now give a vote to people, even those who oppose us and those who were fighting in the bush; and we have been around here for seven years, preaching the gospel of NRM. Surely, we must give people a chance to decide whether they like this type of politics or whatever type of politics. If after seven years, this august House, which is the supreme organ of the Movement, is not confident enough to put itself to test, then I fear, maybe we have not been doing a good job. But if we think we have been doing a good job, I am sure members of the public will return a House competent and good enough to do a good job.  

I support the Bill but I would also like to see a few amendments if it will please the hon. Minister, or if it does not. In Clause 17 (f), I would like the definition of ‘contentious issues’ to include, ‘issues which are now obviously contentious;’ because there are those issues which do not necessarily need to wait for the Assembly to declare as contentious. The issue that we have partisan politics or Movement politics, is obviously contentious right now.  Therefore, I do not see why we should wait for the Assembly to tell us whether it is contentious or not; because experience has shown that what is contentious at the grassroots is not necessarily contentious in a group of a few selected people who will most likely be of the same class.  It is most likely that the people who will be elected to form the Assembly will be of roughly the same class, with roughly the same thing.  Therefore, this issue which is obviously contentious should be as hon. Kanyeihamba suggested before, decided upon before we continue with anything else. (Applause) 

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Thank you for giving me a way.  I would like to inform hon. Mrs. Njuba on the Floor that while her idea of putting a contentious matter to the referendum or to the people, is acceptable to me, it is one of the ideas that will be discussed by the Constituent Assembly, which will be set up to discuss and promulgate the Constitution.  Also, on the issue of this multi-partyism that again, will be decided when the Constituent Assembly sits to discuss, you are pre-empting it, and you are pre-empting the work of the Constituent Assembly.  You are rendering the whole exercise of forming a Constituent Assembly, irrelevant.

MRS. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for his information.  If there was a way that every citizen of Uganda could debate and promulgate our Constitution, I would suggest that we do it, but since it is not possible, that is why we go for the second best - the idea of representation; but on an issue which is obviously so contentious that some people cannot sleep, because of the fear that this government - the NRM, is supporting parties to come back; and because of the fear that the NRM is preventing parties from coming back.  The issue is obviously contentious and we should take every step to see that anyone who can contribute to the decision contributes.  After all, there are other issues in the Draft Constitution to discuss, which we shall leave to the Assembly, but on this one, on which politics we shall have, let everybody who is over 18 years have a chance to decide; and if the hon. Minister does not accept our proposal, and hon. Kanyeihamba does not move the Amendment, I will. (Applause) 

The other area where I want a slight change is on the issue of women representatives.  I want to concur with hon. Members who have suggested that every district should be represented by one woman.  I wish to support the idea of secret ballot to protect a few people.  One type of people that I would personally like to protect are those people who will make use of the abundant money which is being thrown around; because those people have the right to use the money when they get it, and I would like them to be free to vote as they genuinely think, but also to take the money.  (Laughter)

 I, therefore, support the secret ballot to protect those people.  I also wish to protect married people - men and women who may have spouses, and who want to stand, or spouses who want support a particular candidate and are not very free to decide. I would like those people to retain their marriages and at the same time vote peacefully as they want.  I would also like to protect those workers whose bosses may either wish to stand or may wish to support a particular candidate and who may demand that their workers support a particular candidate. I would like them to retain their jobs peacefully and also vote freely.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.

MRS. NSUBUGA KAGGWA T. (Women Representative, Mpigi): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I have a few points to comment on this very important Bill.  First of all, I do support the Bill.  I support the Bill because this Bill prepares us Ugandans for the making of a very important document; the Constitution, which will help Uganda to settle, maybe forever.  As we all know, the Constitution exists to strike a balance between the powers of the government and the rights of the individual, and the people at large.  Because of that, people ought to send or to elect people of their choice so that they present ideas about the Constitution which will be in line with what the people want.  

So, the people need to elect people and form an Assembly to discuss this Constitution. Having said that, I would like to comment on some Clauses in the Bill.  First of all, I would like to support the Clause which states that the President should choose the Chairman of the Assembly. I want to substantiate my support on that.  The present President we have now is a man who knows quite a lot of people. He is a man who is quite impartial and who is likely to choose somebody who will lead discussions with a high degree of impartiality.  So, if we allow him to choose the Chairman, I am very sure we shall get a person who will be able to lead proper discussions. As you can see after the election, many people will not know each other. There will be quite a lot of learning who is who first of all, and then electing a Chairman. Later on, people will say, I wish I knew, but with the President will definitely choose somebody who will be able to lead proper discussions. I will even go ahead to say that the President should nominate even the vice-chairman.  My reasons for that are, if he chooses the chairman and does not choose the vice-chairman, then one of them will be giving allegiance to the people who elected him and the other one will have allegiance to the President.  

So, we need to have both of them selected by the President.  This is why I support the President to choose -(Interruption)

MR. KARUSOKE:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that first of all, every human being is a political animal and because of that, no man can afford to be impartial in matters of politics, unless that person is either abnormal or insane.   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. KAGGWA NSUBUGA: I thank the person who has informed me, but I think, if we look at our President now, we realise that this is the man who is devoted to making this country peaceful, and if we want to have a peaceful country, we need to have somebody who is devoted to a peaceful atmosphere rather than having partial or biased ideas when choosing whom. So, I think the President should choose the vice-chairman and the chairman.  On a point of demarcation of constituencies I suggest that - the Bill says that this should be based on a population of between 80,000 and 160,000.  I think that it is a very, big number.  I suggest that a county should be the unit for a constituency.  This will avoid amalgamating cultures which may not be - yes there are certain areas where you have counties with very many different cultures and different ethnic groups. So, if we have a county as a unit of a constituency, then we shall avoid quite a lot of problems; and at the same time, if a county has got more people because representation - we represent people we do not represent areas. When we come here we represent people but not areas; so, when we have a county with quite a lot of people; say, 200,000 people - then that county will be divided into more constituencies. But the county should be the unit for the constituency.  That is my suggestion, because many people are basing the demarcation of constituencies on population.  First of all, let us look at the county and the unit, and then look at the population within that county.  If the population is big, then we divide that county into more than one constituency and the population that should make one constituency, to me, is 60,000 people.  But if a county does not make 60,000 people, it can remain a constituency of its own as long as it is a county.

On the point of women representation, I do agree with quite a lot of people who have said that more women should come in and should be one per district.  The reasons being that the world over, there is a deliberate effort to correct the imbalances as regards quality or opportunities between men and women. If we bring only eight women - I am not saying women cannot stand on their own card, but we can stand on our own card and a number of us will come on our own card.  But then we know the attitude of the people; they have not changed very much.  We wish to have more women coming in as women so that they can cater for issues pertaining to women in the Constitution.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand up to support the Bill.  I want to thank the NRM Government for being consistent with its promises.   This is yet another achievement; of giving the people the promise the Government made some years back, and for that matter, the people are very happy and anxious to see that a new Constitution is made and is seen to be put into practice.  The years 1993 and 1994 are very important years because we are at a crossroad, and it is a big challenge to all Ugandans to make the right decisions in order to determine our destiny.  Therefore, the arrangement to discuss the new Constitution must not be seen to be high jacked by incidental differences within our society.  People should think very seriously and allow the will of the people to take precedence.  

As I have a very short time, I want to make some observations about this Bill.  Observation No.1 is on Section 4 - the Composition of the Assembly - where it is stated by the Minister concerned that there will be only 180 delegates.  My question is, what is the criterion of determining these 180 electoral areas? Why I am asking this is because today, the way we represent our people in this Parliament must be respected. Therefore, the question of population, though important, should be secondary to the present set up so that the present constituencies remain as they are, but they could be enlarged, if necessary, because of big populations in certain areas like Bukoto.  On the question of representation in the town, we suggest, in my Constituency, that the present municipalities which have got Members, should be allowed to keep their positions, because the town people are a special class.  When you start splitting them, you cause problems with other counties around them.  As a matter of fact, what you create is that one county will be over-represented in the calibre and standards of people.  You get a town like Masaka where you have the elite, and you join it to Kalungu for that matter, Kalungu will have so many people from Masaka to stand and these people are not up-country people; they are town people.  Therefore, in the long run, although that county will have somebody from Masaka town, they will not be properly represented. So, let us leave the municipalities as they are and I think everybody will be happy about it. (Applause)

I want to touch on the First Schedule of the elected specified bodies, and  I begin with women.  Women should get representation in each district. (Applause)  I say so, and whether we believe it or not, in our society when you throw these ladies at the county level, the challenge is impossible.  Men are selfish; they are likely to put in men rather than women. Even the women will vote in men and this has been the practice anyway.

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the women of Uganda are going to contest every seat there is, be it at the county or district levels. (Laughter)

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I wish them well.  But the practice is that for a long time, ladies have been pushed aside in Uganda’s politics, and as you know, the ladies have got a lot to discuss in the Constitution - the problem of heritage, the problem of property when the husband dies, the way they decide to separate the children in the family and on land issues.  I think the ladies should have proper representation so that their interests can be catered for in the discussion of the new Constitution.  The NRA definitely deserves the ten positions and by virtue of the way it is constituted, by law the army cannot go to be elected with the civilians.  So, I think we should allow them to elect among themselves ten delegates to represent them on this Constituent Assembly, and ten NRC Members.  But I stand to oppose this.  NRC Members are all free to go back to stand during these elections and many of them will come back anyway.  Now what will be the point of having somebody to struggle to come back and yet another one is just nominated on a free ticket? I think it is not proper.  Let everybody go home, those who will come back will represent NRC. (Applause) 

Concerning the unions I would propose four Members: one from NOTU, one from Industrial Sector, one from Civil Service and another one from the academicians, so that these four can represent the different interests.  I think two are enough for each political party and for the sake of transparency, we do not want to be accused tomorrow that NRM Government never involved parties when they were discussing this Constitution, which is a very important document.  Therefore, the parties should be represented and I think eight people from the four parties are enough.  

The youth are the society of tomorrow and, therefore, like the women, there should be one Member in the Constituent Assembly so that they follow up problems of this society of Uganda.  The President, I think, qualifies to appoint some Members.  I am suggesting ten.  Why do I say he should appoint some Members, and I am suggesting ten? Why do I suggest so? It is not because it is the President who is standing to choose these ten Members, but he is a man with the Government of NRM, who has proposed this Constitution.  For this new Constitution to have no impact or to have no contribution from the Government, I think it is a bit unfair.  The Cabinet after all, is part of our society.  We should assist the President to choose ten people to represent the Government on this Constituent Assembly Bill or in discussing the new Constitution.  I am also qualifying that the Chairman and the Commissioner be chosen by Cabinet with the President.  This, I would call, a managerial position.  We need somebody with experience; somebody who can have control over the discussions.  Therefore, when you say Members should choose their own Chairman, Members have got the right to do that.  But I still insist that the President, with the advice of the Cabinet, has got resources to find the best out of our society; somebody who can be the right Chairman with no biases, and who can lead the discussion of the Constitution in the proper direction.  Therefore, I request Members that we request the new body to allow the President to choose for them a Chairman and then they can choose other Members who will be part of the discussion of the Constitution. 

On the language issue, if we have to interpret for about 50 people, I think the four or seven months will not be enough for discussing of the Constitution.  Therefore, we recommend that for those who understand English and can express themselves in English, should be elected as Members of this body.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up, please.

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Chairman, I am winding up with some observations of concern.  This is on the registration of voters and on the Returning Officers.   From our historical background, most of the gymnastics of rigging are being done on these levels.  The way the registers are made by registering minors to be the electorate at the time of election, then sometimes you get biased Returning Officers who can be road blocks of some Members who are supposed to be candidates.  So, we are requesting Government, when choosing the Returning Officers and to make the registers for voters to be very tough, so that justice is seen to be done. Otherwise, we shall go back to the former forms of rigging.  The more youth coming in, the more the votes a member will get.  And if you put in somebody who is unscrupulous as a Returning Officer, he will even under-count a certain character whom he does not want.  These are some of the things that we must guard against so that this exercise is not spoilt.    

I will end with a question from my constituents.  They are asking that if in 1992, we had elections, and in 1993 and 1994, we are going to have elections, in case there is a consensus problem, shall we have a referendum.  With the meagre funds the Government has, definitely we cannot afford all these elections year after year. Another thing is, the people will even get fed up of the system of voting every other year.  So, with those issues in mind, we should be careful not only to disappoint people, but also to make sure that there are enough funds to hold these elections properly, and in a manner that is fitting to our country.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. P. AKURE (Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have six things to say.  First, I would like to make this clear to the House.  About the representation of the army, the reason why the army has to be here is just because of one thing, they must know what is being deliberated here and if they make a mistake, they should be blamed.  Because, in most cases, leaders have used the army to overthrow governments.  They have made the army personal, and of course, the Head of the State who manipulates the whole system, and all the children follow him.  It is just a matter of saying I do not want this, but I want this, and a child follows.  If you tell your child not to use warm water, and you wanted cold water, and at the same time you are saying, when I am telling you do not do it and yet you do the opposite. Similarly, our army has been used in that way, and that is why we have been having problems from time to time.  Therefore, to have the army in this House is right.  We want them to exercise democracy which is being practiced here, and of course, they must not abuse the democracy which all Ugandans are doing.  We have been talking about candidates and somebody mentioned programmes for them.  I think we shall never be democratic at all if you are telling me you only talk for five minutes and I close the chapter.  In such a system, you will find there are a lot of loopholes; and you will find that some of them are criminals.  But now we are trying to cut out the people from telling them the truth.  Because, if you are sick, you must be told in public that you are sick.  Why do you say you should not go beyond this.  It is not democratic if you are doing so.  I think the hon. Minister who is bringing this Bill must change this because he is just trying to bring us people who have been in hiding and when time comes, they show up and say this is our time.  We must tell them the truth.  The people must tell you that you have done a lot of bad things; you have killed.  Then I get advantage because I come through this attire since my mistakes are not revealed.  I do not think it will be good democracy.  If it is democracy, we must exercise it so that every Ugandan has a right to exercise democracy.  So, this question of giving five minutes and somebody programmes for you; why should somebody programme for me?  Am I a mad man that I do not know what to do, and that I must not be programmed for?  I have the right to my own programme.  This is the point that I would like Members to understand, because you could be playing around politics, if we still have this system of democracy like the other time when we were elected.  They said you give that one two minutes.  But I did not see the democracy; we were not democratic at all.  In other words, we abused the democracy of the people in this country.

Members have expressed the issue of appointment of a Chairman; that let the Chairman be appointed by the President.  It is true, there is that trust in the President, of course; not ruling out that somebody who appoints Kawanga must be having interest in Kawanga.  You cannot tell me so and so is neutral and is, therefore, going to appoint somebody he knows.  There is some interest.  If somebody is appointed, there must be interest in why they should appoint them.  There must be somebody who can always serve me on the other end.  So, the question of saying so and so will do very little, I am sorry, people of this country must not be deceived.  We know our problem; and we have undergone many political problems.  Therefore, let the House, decide from the experienced men they have.  Because, if they say they want a person of the rank of a Judge or whatever case may be, we have our Judges here.  It is a matter of getting their CVs and knowing how much they have been doing.  Of course, the records are there.  Then the House can select the Chairman on those criteria.  

On corruption, I am very sorry when papers talk about the little money we get from the donors.  It is an abuse of office and an abuse to the people of this country.  If the money given by the donors is being misused and the workers are not paid, it is a very unfortunate situation. I have always been made to understand - even when you look at the Pajeros of the Commission, the rims are changed; they are not from the original cars.  You find a rim of another car is put on another car.  It means, therefore, that the other one has been sold and another rim has been put on.  I really do not see the truth.  What is the point of using all these resources and yet we are going in for a new Constitution which I believe the people of this country will appreciate as efforts taken by NRM.  It is the first time the people of this country have been called upon to make a Constitution of their own.  I pray that whatever resources are there, let the Ministry responsible or the Minister responsible make absolutely sure that this business of stealing money left and right stops.  Because we shall be wasting time, and we shall be borrowing money every time.  Where do we borrow money if the little money we get is wasted?  Why do we bother these donors, what for? We should not close a chapter and say let things be forgotten? It is very unfortunate, because we are abusing the rights of our people.  We have talked about corruption several times, but I think Government is never serious; Government is not taking action.  We have identified people, but the Government still keeps them in big positions.  They are continuing tom steal.  I do not know how we can get rid of them.  (Laughter)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information. Corruption persists in us as a nation, first of all because Act 8 of 1970, against prevention, Government has failed totally to implement it.  Secondly, we enacted the Leadership Code ourselves. That has been put into the pigeonhole.  But the country is being told openly that there is no money to implement.  We told the Government in this House that it should be the IGG (Inspector General of Government) who should enforce that Leadership Code, and they refused.  Now, they come and tell the country that there is no money.

MR. BUTELE: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, it is really something very absurd when we hear such a thing has happened. But we see the victims are there enjoying even at this material time when we are having crises of all these things. You hear so much is lost.  So, I do not know whether this is a Government of thieves or what.   But each time, we say that it is the Civil Service and yet there are big people somewhere.  Why do we blame the civil servants alone when we have thieves in parastatals?  I think the Public Accounts Committee should come in.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the Member holding the Floor that the Public Accounts Committee has tabled here two reports for which we do not have time to discuss.  So, I think it is useless to bother the Committee, even after tabling the report; there is no time for this House to debate these reports.  It is useless to bother us.

MR. AKURE: Mr. Chairman, I know that is the Chairman of the Public Accounts  Committee. As a leader of this country, whatever happens, it is on their shoulders.  Because whether he has laid the report on the Table and it is not discussed, it is not our mistake.  Perhaps we may be having other programmes which may not warrant us to discuss the report.  But that document which hon. Pinto brought, I think these are some of the things which we shall speed up.  If we do that, we may be cutting down corruption.  At least, et somebody be brought to book and the whole nation sees what action the Government has taken. 

I also agree with the Amendment moved by hon. Butagira, because this one can marry the two and make everybody compromise, instead of knocking their heads.  Because once you have two bulls in the same kraal, of course you know what happens.  The other one says, I have got very long horns and I can hook you properly and the other one says a different thing. So, it is better we marry the two so that they come together.  That could be the only way in which these people can compromise. (Applause) Otherwise, we are going to continue to have problems that will never be forgotten.  

I would like to appeal to the House that this Bill has no problem, and it should not worry us. We came here on ticket. If we want to go back, we can still come back.  Because personally, I have no problem of saying we do this or that.  Let us pass this Bill, knowing that the additional Members will join us.  Because that is the only way we can unite these bulls together.

Lastly, we have been talking about development.  I have been very furious on this book - the Ten Point Programme of the National Resistance Movement.  Mr. Chairman, on sad note, this is the eighth year of NRM in power.  I must say this very precisely and wisely that some of us have not achieved what was promised here. Taking Point No.8 (b) that talks of liberating the long-suffering Karimojong who are moving long distances in search of water.  It is talking about water here.  I want somebody to challenge me frankly here that they have given the people of Karamoja so much. I want any Cabinet Minister to challenge me, because we are not here to backbite anybody. (Laughter)

MR. BUTELE: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that there has been some progress as far as the development of Karamoja is concerned.  The six million has been used half way.  Now, the EEC has appointed an independent valuer, and that report is already out.  In the report, where the KDA has not done well, is the issue of the water instead of the dams, because we did not have the machinery.  We have got the water ponds which they call ataparis. That thing is being reviewed so that half of the balance left is going to be used and so that we can promote those atapasis into fully-fledged dams and that will be done by some machinery. We shall be starting the work very soon, and that issue is being addressed by Government as we speak right now; and our Colleague who is a NEC Member from that district will see the results very soon.  The NRM Government is a Government that just rushes things.  The report is true.  The water cannot carry the animals all the way through.  It dries up. But with the farm machinery, we are going to promote those ataparis into fully-fledged dams and the struggle continues.  That is why, if this Bill we are debating now is passed, more people will be brought in, and we shall continue consolidating the efforts we have already achieved in Karamoja, especially the roads, security and all that.  So, the struggle continues and that is why, if the NRM system continues, you will see a dramatic change in that region.  Thank you very much.

MR. AKURE: I do understand what my Minister is saying and I do not oppose the six million dollars that was given by the EEC. A phase of this money - the agency handling the money is aware that money was given, and was being misappropriated.  That is why, Mr. Chairman, in some places roads are not graded. 

MRS. NJUBA: Mr. Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to labour on a point that is completely irrelevant to the Constituent Assembly Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Out of order, please.

MR. AKURE: So, Mr. Chairman, that is the truth as far as that side is concerned.  Because we must really see what has been done.  These ataparis that are there, but we do not want them.  They were made by our elders a long time ago.  That is why we have had the Karimojong losing cows to the nearest districts.

THE STATE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. H. Kyemba): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to say something on the Constituent Assembly Bill before the House.  But before I do so, I would like to ask you to allow me to associate myself with the condemnation which was expressed by the hon. Prime Minister, for those cowardly acts that led to the tragic death of the Vice-Chairman of the Uganda Constitutional Commission and his colleague at the University, Dr. Kidubuka, who is being buried today, along with many others who were injured while they were going innocently around their peaceful business.  It is really a tragedy that we are discussing this very important Bill when some people are thinking in terms of doing actions like those.

The debate on this Bill started on a very worrying note last Wednesday, and indeed, it reminded me of the periods of crisis in this very House where we are sitting today, and incidents which resulted into great agony and misery for many of our people in this country.  

The NRC has made a commendable contribution by bringing back respectability into the leadership of this country.  Let us not wreck it at this 11th hour.  (Applause) The Constituent Assembly, that we are proposing to set up to scrutinise the Draft Constitution, is not intended by any stretch of imagination to set up a Constitution  for UPC, DP, CP, UPM or indeed any other sectarian group of this country.  The Constitution is indeed everybody’s Constitution in Uganda, irrespective of any political affiliation. It would be a great disaster for us to have any party claiming that by having some numerical strength in the Constituent Assembly, then that is a mandate for that particular group to turn its political manifesto into the Constitution of this country.  It is in the light of this, that views have been expressed to the effect that the Constituent Assembly should not be confused with the role of the NRC in the performing of its legislative functions. I, personally, have got the greatest respect for Members of the NRC who have guided the affairs of this nation since the elections in 1989. Equally, I have the greatest respect for hon. Historical Members of this Council, who in very difficult circumstances were bold enough to identify the political malaise that have dominated the politics of this country for a long time, and have seen fit to continuously advocate for the widening of consultations in the management of the affairs of this country.  If we cannot accept that we need to continue to widen the parameters of our consultations, then we might be missing the point.  We have heard remarks in the past, where winners have said that the drum is not beaten by two people.  This, would be the most retrogressive step we would be taking if we were to imply that we have now got all the brains in this very House and we cannot afford to accept the fact that there might be other people more qualified to discuss certain things which some of us may not even be interested in.  

We condemn in no uncertain terms those elements and publications that have attempted to undermine the integrity of the hon. Members of this House.  These Members have done a very important job and continue to do so.  (Applause) Hon. Members of this House can correctly claim to have discharged their responsibility with honour and will continue to do so.

To be associated with the views being expressed regarding the composition of the Constituent Assembly, they should not be made on the basis that they (CMS) have behaved dishonourably.  Indeed, what is interesting is that even the papers and elements that are criticising the performance of Members of this House, generally admit that many of the Members who may wish to stand for the Constituent Assembly, if this Bill is passed, would indeed be returned to this very House.  It is in the light of this, that I would request my hon. Colleagues in the House to agree to clearly demarcate the very different roles that are supposed to be performed by the Constituent Assembly and by this honourable House.  The very important role expected of the Constituent Assembly is to pass the Constitution; to debate and scrutinise the Constitution of this country. The National Resistance Council - this Parliament - will continue until it is dissolved by the President, and will continue to perform its very important role of passing the laws of this country.  

I would like to believe myself that it is quite possible, and it is true, that there are very important contributors outside this House who would like to come and participate in the constitution-making process, to spend about three or four months and go back to their proper duties, and would not like to have anything to do with the legislative performance duties of this House.  We should be prepared to accept that those people are there at the various institutions of learning, in the public life and among the youth of this country, who may want to come to the Constituent Assembly for three or four months, give their contributions, scrutinise this document and then go home and let the people of Uganda elect those people for the Legislative Assembly, who would like to continue with the legislative duties of this country in 1994.  But because some confusion has been stated to the effect that going to the Constituent Assembly is a stepping-stone to going to the Legislative Assembly of 1994, I believe that is why we have got quite a bit of commotion and unnecessary debates.  There is absolutely, not in my view, any connection between the question of using the Constituent Assembly and NRC to come back to the House if one wishes. I am sure there are many Members in this honourable House, who may not even wish to participate in the Constituent Assembly.  They should be given a chance to choose if they so wish.  But to overcome the problem, I would like to suggest that we do recognise the important role of this House and certainly, like the NRA is, let it be represented in the Constituent Assembly by the proposal to have ten Members there.  If the Members feel that the number of ten is too small for this honourable House, then it is my view that we should be able to articulate the need for a bigger number, to cater for those that may want to go there, and also to emphasise the fact that this honourable House has every right to be in the Constituent Assembly.

I have had the opportunity to consult my constituents like others have done, and they have commented and made a few proposals which may be worth considering by this honourable House.  In saying this, I wish to admit that I do share the collective responsibility of Government in backing the proposals in this House.  But at the same time, people I represent are entitled on their views, to be stated here.  The first and most important recommendation, is that the members of my Constituency say that it would be perfectly in order for a freshly elected Constituent Assembly rather than the present NRC, as presently constituted, to debate the new Constitution of Uganda.  In saying this, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  I would like to inform the hon. Minister on the Floor that even the present law as it is - Amendment to Legal Notice No.1 which was passed in 1989, stipulates that the NRC and members of the Army Council shall participate in the discussion and progression of the Constitution.  It does not say that the NRC alone will do so.  It is not exclusionary; it is a misconception which members of the public are also having, that this present NRC wants to constitute itself alone to discuss the Constitution.  This is not so. (Applause)

MR. KYEMBA: Mr. Chairman, a lot of things have been changing since the NRM took over power in 1986, and I have already paid my own tribute to the manner in which they have been mature enough to be able to modify the course of action at any one particular moment.  I have no doubt in my mind, that what the hon. Butagira is referring to, is correct.  That is what the law says. But the maturity that we are calling for in dealing with it, is to be able to stand and be counted and not to take advantage merely because the paper which was written seven years ago says that we should be there and we cannot improve on it.  I would like to confess that we have got every right to be there, but the political climate would not really be on our side, if we say that we should cling to this provision, just because it is there.  

If I can go on, concerning consultations, I have clearly resolved also that in view of the fact that there has been so much confusion on the understanding of the composition of the Constituent Assembly, if we can put some sanity in some people to ensure that they know the difference between the two bodies, then those who are aspiring to go to the Constituent Assembly in order to come back next year for election to the National Resistance Council or Parliament should be barred from that particular election.  (Interjection) I am explaining this because there is confusion between the two roles.  But I know, as a matter of common sense, that it is certainly right and proper that there are some legislators who may want to participate in the Constituent Assembly, and there is no reason why they should not, but the fact that we could have such a proposal, is indicative of the fact that there are people who are clearly using and manipulating the very provisions of this Bill for other party politics.  

It was also strongly recommended in my Constituency that the Constituent Assembly delegates, should allow the President to elect or appoint a Chairman from among the elected Members.  You will remember when we elected NEC Members in this House, many Members have been complaining that Ministers were advantaged to stand for NEC membership and were elected to that body.  Now, the same Members are now saying that apparently those Members of the Constituent Assembly who may know each other even better now, will not be influenced by that knowledge, and they would like to repeat what they did for NEC.  

So, I would myself, like to suggest that much as we think that this is bringing the President too much in the Constituent Assembly, and I agree with them.  In fact, if I were him, I would be against getting involved in this body just in case he is associated with the confusion that is now starting there.  But I would like to say that for the fairness of the situation, so that the man from Karamoja is seen to be standing on an equal basis with a man from Kampala and Mbarara, then for goodness’ sake, let us give the President a chance to recommend somebody, subject, maybe, to approval by the House, when the Constituent Assembly meets.  

It was also overwhelmingly suggested that on issues of a controversial nature such as political parties, a referendum, should be held on those issues as early as possible, so that they do not drag on unnecessarily.

Another issue which the Members deliberated on, has already been touched very effectively by hon. John Ntimba from Mbarara Municipality and others, and this is to do with the population centres in the urban areas.  It was clearly pointed out that there is a tremendous swelling of the population in urban centres by market vendors, students workers and patients, everyday of the week.  Surely, if one is planning for the urban authorities, one must take cognisance of that population that is always coming into the towns for various duties.  The other point on population, which was commented on, was the issue of disproportionate rural constituencies, which ought to be looked into.  It is certainly rather unfair for Hoima with a population of 197,800 to have only two Members in this hon. House, while Moroto with 171,500 has five Members.  I think that one could really be looked into.  If you look at Mbarara with a population of 922,000, it has got eight Representatives in this House and yet Bushenyi with 734,00 has seven Representatives.  When you go to Mpigi with the same population as Mbarara - 915,000 - it has only five Members.  I think it is only fair, that we should look at these issues as it has been articulated, so that we are not seen to be weighting certain areas against the others.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much indeed for giving me this opportunity. 

MISS R.C. ALIU (Women Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand here to support this Bill.  There is no doubt that this Constituent Assembly Bill we are debating now is a very crucial and important landmark in the democratisation process set in by the NRM Government.  I would like to take Members back historically to see how this process has been moving, and I am taking them back precisely to show them what it means to share power or to bow pressure.  In 1986, when the NRM took the reigns of power, the historical Members and the NRM, decided that the membership of legislature should be expended.  I consider that as the first test of power sharing in the era of the NRM Administration.  All of us who were elected in this House owe our presence here to the magnanimity of the NRA and historical Members of NRM.  Secondly, we owe it to the people of Uganda, who put their trust and confidence in us at the time we were elected to come and expand this House.  

The issue in this Bill, is not whether there should be a Constituency Assembly, but rather, who should be in it.  When we were sent here, we knew there would be a constitution making process in this country, and when we were elected, some of us were aspiring to take part in that process.  However, this process of introducing the people and letting people decide for themselves what they want, has now come onto the scene and is being practiced by the people of this country.  NRC Members rightly said that they are supposed to have enacted this Constitution. Legally, yes. But now, in between, the people came up, and if we were to trust the statistics of the Constitutional Commission, people said no. At the beginning, we did not understand what it meant, but now we should elect new people.  I think this is a test for this House to see whether it is willing to share power and to relinquish it when the people say no. 

When we are in this House, we are exercising power, and we are in the seat of power, and this power is derived from the people. Therefore, we are being tested on whether we are willing to let go or whether we are willing to allow others to come in and share with us in this process.  It is very important, because as we go through the process of democratisation, there must be at every stage a semblance of the people having a say in what they want. Otherwise, it will be disastrous at this stage now, if the NRC says no; because we were elected originally we should cling on to this. It will be very dangerous and I do not know which direction we shall take thereafter  -(Interruption) 

PROF. KANYAIHAMBA: Point of information. I thank the hon. Lady for articulating the principle of expansion by the NRM, which is very commendable.   But the principal of expansion does not say you come in and we go out. I think that should be very, very important.

MISS ALIU: I want to thank the hon. Member for that point and in fact, I was going to say that in this process, when we are now in the process of deciding who should be in the Assembly, we as the NRC should say, let others come and join us, I was not going to say  -(Interjection)- there is a principle behind this and I think the Members reacted the way they did, partly because of the way the defence of this Bill was put to this House.  The reasons advanced were not reasons that convinced some of us, that we should not be taking part in -(Interruption)

MR. OTENG:  Mr. Chairman, we are living in the world of science, where statistics is playing a very important role in decision-making.  We find that in this book given.

THE CHAIRMAN:  On what page, please?

MR. OTENG: The back page, Table 2 - views on whether NRC or the new Constituent Assembly should debate a new Constitution by category submission, and there is on the same table, the NRC and the new Constitution, the total for the NRC is 804, and the total for new the Constituent Assembly is 1,901, and the grand total is 2,705. When we analyse that one statistically, you find that the one for the NRC is 30 percent while that one for the new Constituent Assembly is 50 percent.  It does not qualify with at least the 95 confidence limit that is required to generate confidence, and that this is a true assessment.  So, Mr. Chairman, when we are reviewing this, we are not within the new 95 percent confidence limit, excluding the NRC. (Interruption)

MR. MARWAS: Point of information.  Thank you Mr. Chairman. After analysing what the Member has just said, if you go to page 18 Article 35, as to why those figures are there, it states that, “there is limited discussion of the NRC options in most memorandum, it was not an option mentioned in the guiding question whereas the Constituency Assembly was.”

MISS ALIU: Mr. Chairman, I think that information was for the consumption of the whole House and I have not had a chance to read through, but, I have also seen that particular aspect, and I think it is a very big flaw in the process of arriving at useful information on such an important process as the making of the Constitution of this country. I liked the election of Members to this House as the second test of the NRM Administration, and this Constituent Assembly is rightly generating a lot of heat and a lot of noise, and I think Members should expect that whenever we go in for new things or a new process, a lot of tension is generated within an individual. So, as Members of this House, we also have a right to put forward our heat when debating this Bill because with the Constituent Assembly Bill, there have been a few utterances which reduced Members of this House almost as if their role was already over, and I think that is partly responsible for the way we have looked at it.  Members feel they have been ignored and have not been given their due respect, because if you hear that this Bill, instead of saying subject to the debate and passing it, we are told the Bill is coming, and we felt our role was finished in this House. That is why Members were saying that if that is the case, let us go back home and hold fresh elections.  It is really a reaction to a provocation.  Many people have said a lot of things on the whole Bill, but I want to comment on a few of them.  First, on the campaigns during the election. When the Minister was moving his defence, he said it will create a lot of tension and character assassination; character assassination is there everyday, and hon. Members if you remember the Front Bench, I think there are about 4 or 5 people involved with cases in the High Court, bordering on character assassination and there was no election issue involved. We must accept that this is a thing that happens in our daily life.  Character assassination is always being smeared, and not necessarily during an election only.  Therefore, I do not buy that as a reason for not allowing people to campaign.  

The same with tension; that is why we have election fever as a concept during this process. It comes once, maybe in 5 years, but if we do not allow some of this transparent and democratic process to be practiced now, it will be forever for us, and we shall never see it, if you claim it generates this, because it is part of the process of election. Therefore, I would want candidates’ meetings to be struck off from this Bill, because to me it looks an orchestrated move and very artificial to the process of democracy.  

The county as a unit, I do agree.  I also do support that those which are above 160,000 thousand should send in more than one delegate.  However, at this particular juncture, I want to register the disappointment of the people of Soroti, in the way the 1991 Population Census was conducted.  People in Soroti do complain and have continued to complain that very many areas were not reached by the enumerators, and in some areas, army personnel were sent in to conduct the Census. When people in the village see army personnel coming to conduct the population census, I think the most likely thing is to take cover rather than to present yourself for enumeration.  

Lastly, I would like to comment on the Members who are going to the Constituent Assembly. I would like as my personal opinion to say that Members who have been involved in the past in the making of the previous Constitution should not be allowed in this one. (Laughter)  I am sorry, but I really feel that people who have been involved from 1962, do have some vested interests and biases, and, therefore, we should not allow them to come with these biases and interesst and confuse this Constituent Assembly, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like, in the best of my knowledge and national human love for Uganda, that in making the Constituent Assembly law, we ought to be honest and sincere to our country. But if we have in this hon. House, Members with little spirit such as the hon. Lady uttering that those who made the Constitution in 1961, 1972, 1966, 1967 or before should not do so, how?  It is unconstitutional, not to allow me to use my capacity to enjoy my political right as a national of Uganda; and for me I will fight tooth and nail. 


DR. TIBERONDWA:  point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that if people who participated in previous Constitutions are not good enough for this one, damage has already been done, because hon. Obwangor has been a member of the Constitutional Commission. 

MISS ALIU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the Constitutional Commissioner that, I think the failure of past constitutions is a test for the work they did.  Anyway, this is a very simple matter and personally I felt that when we are trying to find a way in Uganda, or trying to create a new political organ, it is only fair that we give a chance to others who have not had a chance to participate in the process, to do so.  It is a matter of personal opinion.

Finally, the period given to Constituent Assembly to promulgate the Constitution is not enough.  Four to six months to me is a very short period, and we will seem to be rushing through this Constitution. I do not know why! If we take our own case in this House as an example, by the time we elected NEC Members, it was after six months and yet Members continued complaining that by then, they did not know each other.  I think we should give these people enough time to arrive at a well-debated document which will stand the test of time, and we would not like people to come around and say, we were given little time; it is a very lame excuse, but people can use it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BARIGYE (Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The people of my Constituency asked to inform this august Body, that in their view, the NRC as presently constituted should be part of the Constituent Assembly.  Their views were that in the first place we have had too many elections and we are going to have more elections in a very short space of time, which are very costly at a time when we are trying to contain inflation, to raise budget revenue and to economise.  Secondly, my Constituency was of the view that the present NRC has the mandate to be part of the Constituent Assembly, and that they were elected with the full knowledge that they would be part of the Constituent Assembly, and that if they are good enough to pass the laws of Uganda, then they are also good enough to be part of the Constituent Assembly, and so you must not question the validity of all the laws they have been passing -(Interruption)

REV. ATWAI: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member is stressing a very important point.  When the then Attorney General and Minister of Justice were labouring to convince us with a programme which goes up to 1995, he told us here that, I quote his words, ‘the NRM and NRC could exist and were, therefore, co-extended’. That would mean, when he was talking about the constitution making process, we were the body also to promulgate it. Thank you.

MR. BARIGYE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My Constituency was not arguing that the present NRC Members should be the only ones to constitute the Constituent Assembly.  They were of the view that if there is any part of Uganda or any Constituency which is de-satisfied with its present Member of the NRC, or which wishes to replace him, then a law should be passed to enable that area or that Constituency to replace its existing member.  And they were of the view that it would be a waste of public funds at time when the country has very scarce funds, to subject the whole country to an election, when we know very well that next year they will yet be another election, and there was another election the year before.  I have not been impressed by the arguments that the majority of the people who presented their views, to be included in the Constitutional Assembly, because of the point which was brought to light a few minutes ago, that this option was omitted by the Commissioner in no response to it. 

It has been argued here that in any case, on principle, the present NRC in total should not be part of the Constituent Assembly.  I have failed to know what that principle is, because the minute you say that in principle, this present membership of NRC should not be in the Constituent Assembly, then in principle, this present membership had no right to be passing these laws.  Because then you questioned the mandate, and the Constitution after all, is a law, notwithstanding the fact that it is the most important law, and the basic law, but it is nevertheless, a law.  

Now, forbid it that I should be castigated as being against the will of the people of Uganda if the people of Uganda want elections, nor do I want to be mistaken for fearing elections.  I am ready to go for elections this year to the Constituent Assembly, and my Constituency is also willing to have those elections, if that is what the people of Uganda want or what the majority of Members here want. But I would like to state, as I have already stated, that in our view, the best scenario would have been for the present Members of the NRC to be in the Constituent Assembly, and to add on the interest groups, but also to allow Constituencies which want to change their Members, to go ahead and change those Members.  That, to us, could have been the best scenario.  

Regarding the question of the mechanism outline in this Bill, in the first place, we are of the view that much as we have total confidence in our President, and much as, under normal circumstances, he should have been the right person to propose a Chairman, we feel that for the same reasons which have been advanced by Members who want elections, namely to remove all doubts as regarding the acceptability of the new Constitution, for that reason we feel that the Members of the Constituent Assembly should choose their own Chairman, because  if we state that the President should choose the Chairman, then you will leave a lingering reason for the malcontents with the Constitution, to say that the Constitution was imposed on them.  So, we want to remove that doubt and that is why we advocate that the Constituent Assembly itself should choose its own Chairman.  

Regarding the question of Constituencies, we are of the view, and we support very strongly the arguments advanced earlier by hon. Ntimba that municipalities, those municipalities which are already categorised as municipalities, should be allowed to continue having their own separate representation, and they should be allowed to have a Member in the Constituent Assembly.  We are totally opposed to the idea of incorporating municipalities with neighbouring counties, and that is confusing issues in those counties.  

I would like to say also that, regarding the Commissioners, we are of the view that that the Commissioner should be someone who has held public office for not less than 10  years, and not someone who is qualified for appointment to the office of Permanent Secretary.  We fail to understand why the question of appointment of Permanent Secretaries is used as the yardstick for choosing a Commissioner.

Lastly, we feel very strongly that no special delegates should be chosen  by the NRC to be Members of the Constituent Assembly.  If the whole NRC Membership is not good enough for the Constituent Assembly, then we fail to understand where you will find the real species of NRC Members who will qualify, and who will have special qualification to be chosen to go to the NRC without being subjected to the election.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KABUGO (Nakaseke County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  A lot has been said about the necessity to go back and elect a new Constituent Assembly to debate upon the proposed new Constitution.  The people of Nakaseke have no quarrel about this arrangement, but they still have fears because it is not long ago in1980 when they went in for election using ballot boxes and ballot papers, which landed them into problems that they have not come out of.  A lot of lives were destroyed, and they lost their property, and bones of those who were killed are still rotting in the Sub-county Headquarters, and they are all tied in polythene bags. They also feel that the Ministry or the Government may think that the Constituent Bill or the election of the new Members who are going to constitute the Constituent Assembly is going to be conducted and led on the known party system. But they still feel that there is no way that the present Government will find which of the candidates are sponsored by their respective parties, and the other thing that also scares them is that, there is no way that the present Government is going to assist the candidates or aspiring candidates to hold these public rallies.  The public rallies are going to be conducted and paid for by these aspiring candidates, and for an ordinary NRM supporter or an ordinary citizen of Nakaseke, who is still looking even for school fees for his own children, and who is still sleeping on a mat and has no blanket to cover them, then it will be too difficult.  I understand one of the Deputy Ministers, hon. Members, is claiming that she gave them blankets, I do not think she covered the entire county, because to leave Kampala or Luwero to go to Ngoma, you can take about five hours travelling by a land-rover.  The roads are very impassable, and they are very poor. Since the elections in 1980, which sent the Historical Members to go and establish the NRM and NRA in Nakaseke, they have all never been attended to up to now. I have been to most parts of the county and I know what I am talking about. If the elections, proposed elections are going to be conducted by way of ballot boxes and ballot papers, supervised  by returning offices in the parishes, definitely some of these parishes will not be able to exercise their human right of voting rightly, because going, for instance, to Kalagala via Kiwoko is about 15 miles on bicycle. I do not how know the ballot boxes and ballot papers will be carried and supervised to reach the Parish Headquarters and to make sure that they are not tampered with by putting in additional papers on the very election day. 

The major concern of the Nakaseke people is political parties.  The people of Nakaseke hate politics and if you talk about politics now in Nakaseke, the party politics, they will not entertain this idea, though the Government and the Minister is clear on the issue; by saying that no political party activities will be allowed in the Constituent Assembly elections. Definitely, there will not be anyway that these people will be detected to find out so and so, who is now contesting, has not been sponsored by a political party.  Especially now that the campaigns and political rallies for the Constituency Assembly Elections  are going to be born by the aspiring candidates. The people, especially, those who are living in Ngoma and Wakyato, are still very worried about the way, whether  -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that last year, when Mrs. Cecilia Ogwal was arrested by the Police, supporters of the Uganda People’s Congress from Nakaseke were arrested with Mrs. Cecilia Ogwal.

MR. KABUGO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do not know whether the hon. Member who is informing me, can tell me whether these people came from Ngoma or from Kalagala, the furthest sub-parishes in Wakyato.  One may claim to be coming from Nakaseke, whereas he is coming from Nakaseke County Headquarters or from Semuto where the roads are good and he may claim to be from Nakaseke because he is working here and he has a Kibanja in one of those places that he or she does not maintain.  I have been to almost every part of Nakaseke and I know what I am talking about.  If this can be taken care of and the people of Nakaseke are assured of the fact that the elections which are pending for Constituent Assembly are going to be conducted fairly and that the  people who will participate are going to be given bicycles to carry ballot boxes and ballot papers, definitely quite a number of parishes will be left out without exercising their voting rights. What I am talking about is very clear and I know what I am talking about.

Turning to the Bill itself, I am trying to say that the provisions of 180 constituencies in the whole Country is acceptable, but each Constituency should be charged upon accessibility, because some of these areas may be very difficult to reach. These people may not be able to exercise their voting right.  The number between 80 and 140 may be too cumbersome to determine, though there was some counting recently, but some of these areas were not reached and some of the areas which have now been occupied were still unoccupied before them. All the same, let us agree that the citizens exercise their voting rights and we go back to face the same tune and be returned here when we are sure that what we are discussing about has no question mark about the representations. 

I feel that I have some comments to make concerning the representatives. If we agree that 180 are the ordinary Constituencies which are going to be earmarked throughout the whole country, let us agree that the NRA should send its representatives of 10, and then the Youth should be increased in number to represent the five districts or areas, that is Kampala, then the north, and the five regions.  So, with ladies, I would feel that each district should be allowed to send, at least, a delegate to discuss the Constitution, and five religious leaders should as well be considered to attend these deliberations.  

Experience has proved that we have gone through a number of problems, political upheavals and we have seen how best these religious leaders have fought for the liberty of the nationals. In this case, I could say, there was an attack on Namugongo area some time back, when the army was trying to look for the operations of NRA in Namugongo, and instead of going to the bush the soldiers started killing innocent citizens of Namugongo irrespective of whether they were children or women or soldiers who were enemies. But it was the Church leaders who coldly went to Namugongo and started to rescue those who survived and tried to exhume the bodies of those people who were buried in various place of Namugongo.  So, in this case, the churches have played a leading role during those times, and they have a very respectable population, in this case, they should be -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Is it in order for the House to continue debating when it is time for Futali?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, it is quite in order.

MR. KABUGO: Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member’s attention, but I am not the one to direct that ruling.  So, in this case, I still maintain that I am still in order to continue with my contributions.  

I still have a proposal that Buganda should be given special delegates to attend this very discussion.  Buganda has got the biggest population and it has got a special Clause in the 1962 Constitution. So, definitely they need to be represented or else, if this is not acceptable then let the delegates who have been chosen from Buganda boundaries attend as Buganda representatives.  In this case, Mr. Chairman, I suggest that each district should be represented by a one-woman delegation  -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for this House which passed a law against sectarianism to debate a matter which could be considered perhaps a local, but even which does not qualify to be a local matter in respect of the Constitution.  Is it in order for the Member to continue debating for a sectarian line in national matters?

THE CHAIRMAN: The Member us entitled to his views, proceed please. 

MR. KABUGO:  I would like to explain here to the hon. Member that I am expressing my personal views as a representative from Buganda and from Nakaseke, and from both Buganda and Nakaseke, I have no fear and quarrel if the other Members feel that this is testing or smells like a rat to their ears, but this is what I think and it is true.  Mr. Chairman, the women should be represented - at least picked one from each district, and NRA should as well be represented as it was proposed in the statutory law.  But, my concern is that the President should not be allowed to pick 15 delegates to attend this discussion, because first of all, the number is too big and we want to keep the President out of the current politics, and at the same time, make sure that whatever the case, he decides the latter. 

Looking at the proposed Act, there is no place where the National Political Commissar is allowed to attend this meeting in his own right. So, I suggest that he should be nominated to attend in his own official capacity, and at least as an additional Historical Member of this House, he should as well be selected to attend because this is what we are discussing, the Bill of their own making and their own baby; we do not want to see that the baby that they have nursed up to today, is left in different hands, which might make this baby to die.  So, with those comments, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session, and we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24th February 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)














