Tuesday, 26 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.34 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Ali Kirunda Kivejinja

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I take this opportunity to welcome our new Member, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, as an ex-officio Member of this Parliament. (Applause). I was happy to note that as he entered the Chamber, he was accompanied by both Members on the Government side and the Opposition side. Only I did not know what happened; hon. Kamya abandoned –(Laughter)– before the taking of the oath; but I appreciate hon. Odonga Otto for having accompanied him and hon. Kamya for accompanying him half the way. 

I want to assure you, hon. Deputy Prime Minister, that you will get maximum support from both sides of Parliament because you are a deputy Prime Minister, a minister in Government to serve both sides. Please, keep that spirit. You are welcome!

2.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I rise on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament to first of all, warmly welcome the Third Deputy Prime Minister, Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja, who has just taken his seat as an ex-officio Member of Parliament. We also want to congratulate him on retaining his position as the Third Deputy Prime Minister -(Applause)- because there were possibilities that after the elections, the appointing authority could have changed his mind. So, we have no reason to dispute the confidence the appointing authority has had in you, and like the Speaker said, you are the Third Deputy Prime Minister for Uganda and we will treat you and work with you in that capacity. You are welcome! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, another point that I want to raise here is that since last night, I have been hearing things concerning committees of Parliament, in particular the report on Nakasero Market by a committee of Parliament and a number of allegations made. I do not know what is happening. Apparently, it appears that some committees or Members of committees have not internalised the rules concerning the workings of the committees. 

In the first place, all committees are committees of Parliament and must work in accordance with the rules, which we approved when this Parliament started. These include how you treat witnesses; you must be courteous to the witnesses. It also deals with how you make decisions and recommendations. These recommendations must be submitted to Parliament before they become effective, because your recommendations can only become an official document after having been adopted here. You are not supposed to tell the public what is in the report or give copies of the committee’s report to the public. 

I have seen instances where committees make decisions even when the witnesses they have called are still giving evidence or are just present. The question will be, when have you consulted over the evidence to be able to make decisions? I think decisions of committees or recommendations should be made in the absence of the witnesses. You do not have a witness there and say, “No, we do not agree with you; this is …” That is not proper. 

I appeal to the committees to internalise the rules so that proper procedures are followed and that after you have finished your work, it must be submitted to Parliament to either accept it or adjust as the case may be.

I do not know exactly what happened with the report on Nakasero Market. It is true that it has been on our Order Paper but one day we shall deal with it. But we have not dealt with it and therefore, it is not an official document; it is not a decision of Parliament. Committees make recommendations and since we have not taken any decisions, you cannot therefore say that Parliament has done this or that, and you should never give the documents of committees to outsiders. Documents of the committees must be submitted to Parliament. I think that is the procedure. 

2.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and we thank you for raising this matter. Members may have noticed that when you entered the Chamber, most of us on the Opposition side were not here. We were in fact at a meeting where this matter that came in the media was a subject of our grave concern and we discussed it. We have not completed it but we do recognise the fundamental fact that matters that are discussed in the committees are only public matters when Parliament has pronounced itself on them, and this we entirely agree with you. We are discussing the matter and we will come out with an appropriate recommendation. 

It is very unfortunate that this matter came up and there have been lots of allegations of what is going on -allegations of bribery, etcetera - and we think that it will jeopardise the workings of Parliament if draft reports of committees that have not been presented in Parliament are discussed in the public. So, we take your concern very seriously and we will complete our meeting this evening and we will submit to you a formal report on what was discussed and decided. But we think that all sides should exercise restraint so that the dignity of Parliament is upheld. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

2.49
MRS JUSTINE KASULE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that this has happened but it brings questions on the integrity of the person who has leaked the report, and also taints the image of this institution. It is not a simple matter! Rule 193 of our Rules of Procedure reads: “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House, together with the report of the committee, by the chairperson or deputy chairperson or any Member of the committee nominated by the committee, when reporting to the House.” This was not done and an individual leaked the report out and it is even causing problems to the business community in Kampala. 

We have had instances where individuals come up and make allegations on individuals either in this House or outside this House and they have gone free without even explaining and giving evidence. Members have continuously abused the immunity that we have as Members of Parliament. Mr Speaker, I want to move that this matter be referred to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. Members of Parliament have to be disciplined because that is when they will know that they are responsible for their actions. 

I know that we are in a multiparty dispensation, but this institution has to be protected because when you read in the press, they are even threatening certain individuals; but the chairperson of the committee was chairing on behalf if this institution of Parliament. Now they have singled out the chairperson of the committee with threats. I want to move that this matter be referred to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to investigate and that the individual should be disciplined. That is one way to make Members of Parliament responsible for their words and actions. I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have taken note of what you are suggesting but let me give some more time to Members to make contributions. You have heard from the Leader of the Opposition that they are meeting on this issue and tomorrow I think they will present a position. So, we shall conclude your motion after we have heard from them, but since you are not part of the Opposition, then you are free to make contributions to this issue. 

2.52
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I seek clarification preferably from the Leader of the Opposition because of the issue that you raised, Mr Speaker, about the conduct of Members of Parliament while handling work on behalf of Parliament. I do not understand under what circumstances the Opposition is meeting. I do not know whether it is because the Local Government Accounts Committee which is concerned is chaired by the Opposition, or whether because the person believed to have leaked the information comes from the Opposition. Under what circumstances is the Opposition meeting as we wait for them to report tomorrow? 

Two, if we are going to refer this matter to the disciplinary committee, I would rather that if we have specific evidence about individuals, we raise it so that the integrity of this House is restored. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition stood up after they made the comment on what was heard in the press and on radio.  I think he was telling me or you that they are equally concerned and as the Opposition, they are meeting to deliberate on this issue. I think we should allow them to deliberate but it is open for you also to comment on. Tomorrow, after having heard their side, a decision will be made. I think it will be fair that way.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

Mr Oyet: Point of order!

THE SPEAKER: There is no point of order.

MR OYET: Phones are not allowed in this House but hon. Dombo is speaking on a phone. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: If that is true, he is out of order. Nobody should talk on phone, please.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have seen a number of Members smiling at what we have called a proactive meeting. We did not want the matter to escalate when every individual concerned is a member of the Opposition, be it the chairman of the committee, hon. Sempala, who is the area Member of Parliament or hon. Lukwago. So, we said that rather than wait, we shall handle this matter. I can assure the House that if we find that the matter must be referred for discipline, you will get that report and recommendation from us. 

We commit ourselves to giving this to the Speaker. If we now stand up and start saying, “Let us institute a committee for this”, the complaints that would be raised would be just allegations. What we are doing is taking a step that will help Parliament move on. If we find an apology and withdrawal, we will let the Speaker know. So -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the Member for giving way. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for a caucus of a party to investigate the matter and forward it to the Speaker on behalf of the whole House. I think it should be the House to constitute a committee to investigate a certain Member of Parliament and then the report brought here. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. I think the Opposition is entitled to do internal auditing within it on the subject. I am the one who raised this matter and they are reserving their reply on what I said. You are free to make your comments and tomorrow we shall hear any reply they have and then a decision will be made. However, you are free to make a contribution. (Mr Okupa rose_). I think you have reserved your right. The Leader of the Opposition said that tomorrow he will make a statement. I think you are part and parcel of the Opposition and so that is internal. Later, after having done internal auditing, you will come here and make an official position that will go on our record.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I wanted to seek for a period of grace. This matter is not actually related to your Communication from the Chair. However, last week, you asked the Attorney General to make a statement on the 9000 square miles (mailo akenda) in Buganda. The matter requires extensive research and consultation and the Office of the Attorney General seeks a period of grace within which to present this statement. We are requesting that this statement be presented next week on Thursday with advice from the Leader of Government Business. That will be 4th March.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are still dealing with a matter, which I raised. This was an interruption. 

3.00
MR ANTHONY YIGA (NRM, Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This parliament has the mandate and duty to form committees and it is through these committees that Parliament transacts most of its work. As Members of the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament, we had a meeting yesterday over the particular issue, which is on the Floor. We are deeply dismayed by the unethical conduct of one of the Members of our committee. 

We mandated our Chairman, hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, to come, meet you and make a statement on behalf of the committee not the Opposition, much as the committee is chaired by the Opposition because we are concerned about the allegations. We were informed by hon. Ekanya that on Friday last week, one of our colleagues went to his office and got a report. He then went to the market, duplicated it and disseminated the information in that report.  

The committee noted that our honourable colleague was doing this for the second time. We were disgusted with the honourable member and are praying that Parliament handles this matter and sends it to the disciplinary committee so that this honourable colleague of ours is disciplined. The integrity of this House is at stake and we cannot allow things continue like that. Committees are losing meaning if colleagues can get reports before they are even discussed in Parliament and disseminate them outside Parliament.  

Mr Speaker, protect Parliament and committees by having this matter handled rightly. Thank you. (Applause)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I seem to be behind the news so I need to be helped here. I wish the Member could name the person because I am not aware. Can hon. Yiga help us and name the person because we must deal with these people who are undisciplined.  

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, we were informed by our chairperson, hon. Ekanya, that hon. Lukwago went to his office, got a copy of the report, went to Nakasero Market and disseminated it there. 

Hon. Members: Shame!

3.03
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for raising this very pertinent issue. I think this is an issue that should be handled by Parliament because it has attacked Members of Parliament and the institution of Parliament. Therefore, when the issue comes on the Floor and particularly as an honourable member of Parliament representing Kampala District, I am implicated by the verbal utterances of a Member representing a constituency with me and it is very serious. I think that this is a matter of integrity, one that is beyond our caucuses. This is a matter that is on record and I believe that our Member is not denying any of those allegations. 

I want to beg that we seek protection from this House in the constituencies that we serve and in the integrity for which we stand and which we swore to uphold. Some of these allegations are very serious especially those of bribery so we want these allegations to come and be handled by this Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I noted the seriousness of the matter but the Leader of the Opposition was asking for more time tomorrow to give your position, and I have said that tomorrow we shall come to the conclusion –(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: I want to seek clarification from the Leader of the Opposition as to whether the Member will be restrained between tonight and tomorrow from going to the media and making further utterances about this issue.

3.06
MR TOM KAZIBWE (NRM, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear and there is no where they state that Parliament will give way to the Opposition to sit in camera before Parliament makes a decision. This is a very serious matter. The integrity of Parliament has been assaulted; it is at stake and it can be assaulted further. I think that to minimise the damage, we should forward the matter to the disciplinary committee immediately. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, let me explain. I am the one who raised this matter and you have heard from hon. Yiga to the effect that he had asked the Chairperson of the Committee on Local Government, hon. Ekanya, to raise this matter on the Floor of the House. Unfortunately, because I was late, this was not raised. However, I have now raised it as a serious matter and the Leader of Opposition agreed with me that it is very serious. The Opposition itself has taken it seriously and that they are meeting to discuss this and the other. They will come on the Floor of the House and make their position known. After they have done this, a decision will be made. 

I think I have to be fair to all of you and a fair hearing is a human right. Therefore, if they need time to prepare their case or the individual concerned - they have mentioned hon. Lukwago and the press has mentioned hon. Sempala and hon. Ekanya. They will be given an opportunity to raise this matter and after that, the matter will definitely be investigated by the appropriate committee of this House. 

Today I sent the claim by hon. Odonga Otto on the corruption allegation of Ugshs 150 million given by Foreign Affairs to the appropriate committee to handle. In the same way, this matter will be handled that way so that thorough investigations are carried out and a conclusion reached. However, I allowed those who were prepared to comment to do so without prejudice on what is going to happen tomorrow.

3.09
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In light of the gravity of the matter, we think that the demand by the Opposition leader is not only reasonable but necessary in order for all of us and not only the Opposition to prepare to debate and discuss this very grave matter so that we can take a clear position in the interest of integrity of this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members have realised that some Members are using the privilege of the House; the umbrella that is given to Members in that what you say here cannot be a cause for a civil liability. Therefore, I have a duty not to allow you to misuse this privilege. That is why last week when there was a demand that this matter be brought and the names be revealed, I saw a danger of somebody reading out names and the following day making an apology. That is why I did not allow this because the damage would have been done. I want this matter to be investigated by the committee and after thorough investigation, the matter will come here. 

At the same time, I want to advise Members that this privilege that you have here does not protect you at the City Square or Clock Tower. If you make a reckless statement outside this House, the lawyers will earn their fees. (Laughter)

3.11
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you very much. It was not that I defied the directive of my committee, which directed me to come to your Office. I was at your Office and we agreed but I also met the Leader of the Opposition who told me that I should sit and that we will handle the matter. I have to be disciplined, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

3.12
MR IBRAHIM KADUNABBI (NRM, Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have said that last week you advised that names not be mentioned here. Unfortunately, I am a victim of the reckless talk or disregarding of your ruling and my name was mentioned up to now I am still suffering. It is clear that people who are reckless use the immunity of Parliament to disregard your ruling. What should we, people who have suffered quite a lot at their expense, do?

THE SPEAKER: Oh, there is also a procedure for handling that but what I can assure you is that, I have already written to the committee forwarding your case, hon. Odonga Otto having written to me making that claim and mentioning only you. However, I know that the others will be mentioned later. But this will be -(Laughter)- in the Committee of the Rules, Privileges and Discipline. I think we have dealt with this; we shall revisit it tomorrow. So, let us end here as far as this business concerns.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I wish to lay on Table a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorize government to borrow Units of Accounts 56,650,000 from the African Development Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the upgrading of Fort Portal-Ntandi-Bundibugyo-Lamiya road in Western Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the Committee on National Economy take up the document and subsequently make a report. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE GOVERNMENT REQUEST TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL $12 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP, TO FINANCE PHASE II OF THE AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING

THE SPEAKER: They are saying you are handling a no-problem bag. (Laughter)

3.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kadunabbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is to send a message that there is no problem whatsoever. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is a loan request for government to borrow an additional amount of $12 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group, to finance Phase II of the Agricultural Research and Training Project (ARTP). 

The request was forwarded to the Committee on National Economy in accordance with Rule 152(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure and Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

In this request, the minister is seeking approval of Parliament to allow government borrow $12 million from IDA of the World Bank for financing an extension of Phase II of the agricultural research –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. There is some important matter I should have mentioned earlier. Sorry to interrupt you, but this is to formerly inform the House that the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker is back in the country. (Applause) Thank you for the prayers! 

MR KADDUNABBI: As I was saying, Mr Speaker, ARPT is being implemented by the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). The committee has accordingly considered the request and now wishes to report its findings and recommendations. 

The method used by the committee, Mr Speaker and honourable members, was by way of interacting with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and officials of NARO.

The committee also analysed the following documents:

1.	The brief from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

2.	NARO accounts for the year ended 30th June 2005;

3.	Project papers on the additional financing credit and

4.	Report of the achievements of NARO since its inception. 

NARO, Mr Speaker, was established in 1992 as an umbrella body mandated to undertake, promote and coordinate research in crops, livestock, fisheries and forestry in Uganda. All institutions involved in agricultural research were incorporated into it. The World Bank, through IDA and in partnership with the Government of Uganda and other development partners, provided funding for agricultural research through two-five year phases of Agricultural Research and Training Project Phase I, from 1995 to 1998 and Phase II, from December 1999 to 2006. 

The agricultural research and training project is a long term project meant to assist agricultural research in Uganda and is sponsored by IDA, which has supported technology development and dissemination.

Two, ARTP II was approved by the World Bank Board on 6 May 1999 and declared effective on 2 December 1999 for a total amount of Special Drawing Rights of Shs 19.1 million, equivalent to $26 million. During ARTP II, government undertook the re-organisation of agricultural research to make it more consistent with the government policies articulated in its PEAP and PMA. 

The project closing date has been extended twice. The first extension was from December 31 2005 to June 30 2007. The second one was from July to November 2007. These lags were due to time required for consultations to decide on the required national agricultural research systems reforms and delicate slowdown of project implementation to ensure that the outcome of the then proposed reconfiguration of NARO was consistent with the national agricultural research policy and PMA. 

NARO has made remarkable achievements during the seven years of the ARTP II implementation. The achievements have been in the areas of institutional development, technology generation and dissemination, and outreach and partnership initiatives. The project was due to close on June 30 2007 but as earlier stated, was extended to November 2007 to allow government to process the request for additional funding.

The government is seeking an extension from 2007 to 2009 and hence an additional credit amounting to $12 million. This incremental support is urgently needed for a number of reasons, key among which, is to ensure that enough reforms are strengthened and sustained as well as the continued implementation of priority research programmes so as not to jeopardise the achievements of the projects. Also, to scale up the allocation of new technologies as it plans for the next phase of joint support to agriculture research and extension by the World Bank in 2009. Such support will ensure the continuity of a stream of research outputs and their eventual dissemination that will be of crucial importance to enhanced food security, increased outcomes and thus improved livelihoods for large numbers of Uganda small holders farmers.

The project objectives

•	Generation of new knowledge, strategies and technologies in support of PMA.

•	Design and implementation of improved procedures and capacities for scaling up the application of new technologies and

•	Capacity building of reformed NARO for continued support for the implementation of government’s long-term agricultural research for development programmes through participation in a new designed project which is expected to finance both agricultural advisory service extension on the basis of sector-wide approach. 

The project components

During the proposed extension period, project implementation will continue under the same components currently supported under ARTP II: building partnerships especially with NAADS and other entities involved with technology dissemination and up scaling will be emphasised to ensure effective outreach, extension and the technology dissemination component. 

Under the institutional development component, quality assurance has been introduced as an important new sub-component and monitoring and evaluation sharpened to ensure that research processes result into the expected standards. The additional funding will support the following areas under the three components:

•	Technology development and adaptation. We shall have adaptive and applied research including completing ongoing activities and strategic and adaptive research to respond to newly emerging problems like the coffee wilt disease, banana bacterial wilt, rift valley fever, avian and human influenza, including threats to terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity.

•	The second component will be outreach, extension and technology dissemination and priority will be given to establishing partnerships to ensure stakeholder participation in priority setting, design and implementation of research. Demonstration of technologies in farmers’ fields and promoting their adoption dissemination and adoption of developed technologies and management practices through partnerships with advisory services providers and other stakeholders.  

•	The third component will be transforming public agricultural research institutions and non-public agricultural research institutions into research institutions that promote the transfer and adoption of improved technologies in line with NAADS principles. 

It will also include updating the NAADS strategy and plan for 2007-2015 and also provide insights into research needs for the proposed follow on projects. 

It will strengthen NAADS capacity for ensuring quality and value for money outputs including, through economic and impact analysis of research results. 
Negotiating of NAADS information systems, involving combined releases of funding provided by the Government of Uganda and the development partners.
 
It will also include strengthening of NAADS information systems for improved sharing, dissemination and retention of the institutional data and providing technical assistance to determine how an agricultural research trust fund to support the competitive grant scheme can be established. 

The terms and conditions of the additional funding

The amount to be borrowed from IDA, Special Drawing Rights 8million, which is equivalent to $12 million.

Accrual date: 60 days after signing of the agreement.

Closing date: 30 June 2009 or on such a date as IDA and government will agree
Service charges: 0.75 percent

Observations

The committee observed that establishing an effective NAADS will provide the much needed agricultural research development programmes. 

The bridging funds will help the effective implementation of the national agricultural research policy and the plan for modernisation of agriculture. 

The achievements made by NARO in the generation of improved technologies and the importance of sustaining the tempo of technology generation, dissemination and utilisation will be increased by stronger linkages to NAADS.

There is need to secure additional funding to maintain the progress of the research being undertaken by NARO.

Whereas the loan request document provides for the construction of headquarters for the Nabwiny Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute, the apex which specifies respective procurements is silent. 

The committee recommends that the adequate resources be provided for that effect. 

The committee further recommends that research findings be utilised more in the development of agriculture, which is a backbone of our economy. 

The committee further recommends that Parliament do resolve to grant this loan request.  

In conclusion, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Committee on National Economy is convinced that this loan is aimed at research, which should be highly supported. I beg to lay on Table the following documents:

1.	A project paper for the proposed additional financing credit of US$ 12 million dated 7 June 2007;
2.	 NARO achievements 1992 to-date;  
3.	The National Agriculture Research Organisation IDA credit No.3204-Ug accounts for the year ended 30 June 2005;  
4.	The minutes for the Committee on National Economy on NARO request.  I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson and Members of the committee for the report.

MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for this report. I would like to raise fundamental issues and commitment of development partners to work hard to promote development.  

As you are aware, the World Bank, the IMF, ADB are some of the financial institutions that extend support to the Third World countries and Uganda in particular.  If you look at this document, you realise that - and I want to ask the minister to help this Parliament and this Government - there are several international commitments, protocols and understanding that the Third World governments, which include Uganda, have arrived at in meetings with the World Bank in order to make debt sustainable in Third World and in order to promote economic growth.  But I see the loan request that we continue to be tabling in this House still containing those clauses that should have been removed. 

Mr Speaker, there is Rome Declaration, there is the Debt Sustainability Framework and there is a Paris Declaration.  In 2005, the governments of the South and the North had meetings and agreed that the framework of lending money to the Third World countries and especially Uganda is wrong and there is need to create reforms; and among the reforms was debt cancellation.  

Therefore, if debts are cancelled in order to avoid accumulation of more debt, there should be a new framework of partnership and the ministers of the Third World, which included ours, signed what we call the Paris Declaration.  We are going to have a high-level forum meeting scheduled for 2008 in Ghana and countries like Uganda should have had very wide consultation from the grassroots to the civil society and the private sector to implement the Paris Declaration. 

Alongside that, there is a framework of the World Bank, which was agreed after the debt cancellation, which Uganda received after HIPC 1, HIPC 11 and the recent multilateral debt relief in order to make debt sustainable.  If you look at this document - and I want to call upon hon. Members - these documents are available on the Internet.  One of them talks about the concept of ownership; Ownership is very important. The country should own the design; the country should own the project implementation; the country should own in terms of recruitment, consultants.  

Mr Speaker, I raise this from the point and information which is available right now. The World Bank is threatening to suspend funding of NAADS because the government is coming up with reforms that would make NAADS more productive and have value on the ground.  If the World Bank continues to behave in a manner that contradicts international agreements, protocols and treaties that have been signed, it loses the purpose for which we should continue kneeling and getting money. 

I think the government of Uganda should stick to those protocols and agreements because to me I believe the reform that the government is bringing about in NAADS is good; because we have had NAADS for many years, but I have received information that there is threat if Government does not stop interfering with implementation of NAADS in its current status.  If that is allowed, then the concept of ownership and the concept of debt sustainability loses meaning.

Secondly, if you look at this loan request, the terms and conditions, the service charges of three-fourths of one per cent which has been agreed between the Developed World and the Third World should cease because, Mr Speaker, you know the Government of Uganda- and this is available in the Auditor-General’s report- we have forfeited substantial amount of loan to the World Bank. 

There is substantial amount of loan that has not been disbursed because of conditionalities imposed by the World Bank and the development partners. Some of these conditionalities are seeking no objection and it creates a lot of bureaucracy and undermines the concept of ownership, the local capacity and implementation of programmes in this country; and in turn you find that costs of projects that are supposed to have been implemented at a given value should serve because of inflation resulting from delay and therefore the people of this country are unable to realise the value for money. And if you compute this - there is a study by Action Aid, out of every one-dollar we get from the West and the World Bank, four dollars leave the Third World and this is a factual information which is available.

Therefore, I want to urge the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning and the Government of Uganda that some of these conditionalities are wrong and the –(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am a member of the committee and so, I am not really debating this paper but I would like to give information that during our discussion of this paper, the matter was actually raised that the document we were discussing was labelled “Document of the World Bank” and the matter was raised by Members and we were informed by the minister and the technocrats that we do not have a choice because those are the terms of the dollars.  And it was a matter of great concern because all the people who signed that document, the task leader, the other people were actually non-Ugandans; they were a task force of the World Bank.  

So, I would like inform this House and to add to what my colleague is saying that it was a matter of concern that NARO is clearly not in charge of this project. This is a World Bank project, on a World Bank headed paper signed by World Bank technocrats and NARO was merely a passenger in this whole thing. It was raised as a matter of concern.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the argument normally when we attend these World Bank meetings and we challenge them, they say that your officials who go to discuss this issue do not put these conditions forward to us and do not defend it adequately. 

And therefore I want to challenge the minister that Uganda has the capacity – I have seen a study by DFID, or IDA measuring whether Uganda has the capacity in terms of local capacity to negotiate; local capacity to implement projects; the study confirms that the capacity is available, but the report indicates that the Ugandan capacity is not fully utilised. Sometimes during negotiation there is intimidation and harassment of our technical staff to present their views technically.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I want to argue that this loan is good but we should own it; the money should be released. These conditionalities of the World Bank of seeking no objection before the fund is dispersed we should really have it amended. 

Two, the concept of us paying surcharge for undispersed money should cease if it has not ceased. All the money - that once the government has signed money- it is normal practice, you go to a bank, borrow money, sign the agreement – all the funds are transferred to your account. But the concept of releasing money in piecemeal, the money continues staying at the World Bank accounts and then if you want money to build a structure, they release it and then you present accountability. This should stop, because this money continues to attract interest and that interest remains with the World Bank, it does not add value to us here, and yet we pay at the end of the day the interest in for all the money that we have borrowed.

Thank you very much. I beg to support.

3.42
MR LATIF SEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I believe that when it comes to supporting the agriculture sector, all of us are more than willing to do so; basically because a very big percentage of our electorates earn their living through agriculture. But in as much as we support Government borrowing money in order to enhance the agriculture sector, it goes without saying that the accountability, or the way we use this money matters a lot. It is my humble appeal to the hon. Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries- because last year or in the Seventh Parliament, a lot of money was borrowed and some of it went towards the agriculture sector.

This Eighth Parliament, more money is going to be borrowed towards the agriculture sector. But if I can pose a question to my colleagues especially those representing rural areas, do you feel this money or is there any impact in your constituencies, leave alone us representing urban areas; we all know that even in urban areas we have urban farming. But my greatest concern is about our colleagues who can really educate us that indeed the money we have injected in the agricultural sector since the Seventh Parliament, up to now, definitely there is an impact. But as we move around, as we go to the countryside, we do not see this impact on the ground. Mr Speaker, - 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much honourable colleague for giving way. In fact to answer your question, there are more four wheel vehicles in Kampala than the rural areas. So, the NARO money we are borrowing is in Kampala, not in rural areas. Thank you.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for that very vital information. Because, Mr Speaker, as a Member representing a city constituency, I may not have enough information as to whether outside there, our farmers, our peasants are getting the impact as a result of this money we are borrowing. So, it is the responsibility of our colleagues representing rural areas to come and assure us that indeed there is a very great impact in their constituencies, because when we go up-country, or in various rural areas, what we see in these areas leaves a lot to be desired. Yet these programmes have been running for the last 20 years.

MR ODIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to be fair and categorically clear that the existence of agricultural sector lies in research. And now, take a small market research even in Owino; you will get all the technology generated by this NARO. All the seeds we get for beans; all the seeds we get for maize; all the other food crops; without this institution, I think the country would be starving. 

And more so, if you go to coffee which is the lifeline for this economy, we have been attacked by a series of coffee wilt disease and NARO has fought tooth and nail to make sure that this crop survives.  And so, if our farmers live out there, and what you see in terms of crops coming up are basically crops grown by peasants, then the seeds have been contributed to them by NARO.

I think this is the information we should be able to appreciate, the contribution of NARO to this economy and maintaining the seed industry in this country and we do that even in our farming community. I thank you. (Applause)

MS NAJJEMBA: I do appreciate the role of research in this country and I also see a number of research institutions like those in Kawanda and Namulonge. But the hon. Member talked about the impact, especially for us who represent rural areas; I do not see much impact. I see very good banana trees around Kawanda research institute; I see very nice clonal coffee trees; I never see them in my constituency. So, I think there is a problem of translating those research findings into tangible things in our constituencies. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much for accepting to take more information. I really appreciate what my hon. colleague raised that we are seeing a lot of impact around the research centres and not in our rural places. Possibly, we have assumed that the fruits in Nakasero Market are also coming from our rural places, we do not know. 

Mr Speaker, in our rural places we are seeing a negative impact where they are delivering research that is totally killing the power of the seed, where they are bringing seeds that cannot reproduce themselves. You get the seed and you plant it for two seasons, on the third season you have to go back to the market to buy the same seed.   Really, if this is the type of research we have to foster; in the face that we are soon seeing the effects of global warming on the ground, where are we going? We would encourage that NARO - in my constituency where I have 97 percent of the people depending entirely on agriculture –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are forfeiting your chance for making a contribution; you might as well wind up -(Laughter)  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: We would request that this information that they are presuming to be researching, should go down to the ground. Thank you very much.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Was there information from the Professor?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, the importance of science and technology and innovation, in socio-economic transformation, cannot be doubted and part of that transformation is the contribution of research and development. Therefore, I want to inform my colleague on the opposite side that NARO as a research institution -(Interjection)- It is true, I can inform this House without any doubt, that NARO has made a useful contribution in improving the variety of seeds available in the country, and if you want to prove it, you can go to the coffee sector and see the variety of coffee. 

You can also see it in the banana sector, how research has enabled the control of some of the diseases in bananas and it has also introduced varieties; and these varieties are in the rural areas. Mr Speaker, there is no doubt about it -(Interjection)- yes, the bananas are not planted in towns only; they are in rural areas and coffee is planted in rural areas.

My conclusion, Mr Speaker, as part of information I have worked on both sides of the counter. I have worked for the donors; I have worked for government and I can inform this House that Uganda as a country is a shareholder in the World Bank –(Interjection)- yes, it is true and the Minister of Finance sits on the Board of Governors of the Bank. As an institution where we are shareholders, there are standard conditions that govern the loans and those standard –(Interruption)- I am just making a correction because this is true; there are standard provisions, which are not debated because they have already been agreed upon by the shareholders, including Uganda. So, those we do not debate but specific provisions concerning each project are negotiated. They are relevant to the project being financed and these provisions also govern this loan being debated on the Floor of the House. Therefore, it is not true that we have signed without examining the conditions governing this loan.

Furthermore, Mr Speaker -(Interjection)- as further information for the member so that this matter is rested. The loan being given is the most concessionary you can get on any commercial financial scene in the world. Therefore, we support this provision; we support the loan being tabled in the House. Thank you very much.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, I thank my colleagues for the information they have given. But I want to make it categorically clear that I do not doubt the contribution of NARO in as far as research is concerned. But I am questioning its impact in our various constituencies especially in rural areas. 

Mr Speaker, we all know that if NARO is about improved technologies and the reason as to why we need improved technology is to enhance farming in our areas. So, this is my question: If we fund NARO so that we can have improved technology, where are we going to apply that technology down there in our constituencies? 

This is the reason as to why I am questioning it. Mr Speaker, the committee chairperson has laid down the achievements of NARO since 1992 up to date. I think it will be important- Iam requesting my colleagues maybe when we go to the library and get access to those documents we can know that indeed the money we have brought - because we had Phase I and now they have come for Phase 11. 

We would like to know what NARO did with Phase I and where are we in Phase II? Because we have various projects that are going on right now and the hon. Minister of agriculture will clarify. I have seen various vehicles: Rabbit Multiplier Project - very expensive vehicles. Those ones too are under agriculture.  But I am questioning, if that is a project, Rabbit Multiplying, I wonder whether my colleagues in rural areas have multiplied their rabbits to the extent of exporting as many as we can because a lot of money has been injected.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I wish NARO officers will continue having workshops and seminars not in expensive hotels in Kampala but down there in rural areas where these farmers are. Because we have seen very many big projects -(Interjection)- I am winding up, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: He has declined your information.

MR SEBAGGALA: It is my humble request to the minister that these workshops are held in our constituencies and not in expensive hotels in Kampala and to avoid driving Shs 100 million cars. The moment this money is used by the big officials to purchase four-wheel drive and other expensive vehicle, then little will be left to be used to enhance research in agriculture. Thank you, Sir.

3.59
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy for the report, where I had an input after consultations. It is a stated fact that the backbone of Uganda’s economy is agriculture. And when you look at reports coming out from UNDP and UN, they say that in order to foster development in developing countries, you cannot circumvent agriculture; it is a key focus.

Mr Speaker, as hon. Odit indicated, while the backbone of our economy is agriculture, the backbone of agriculture is research. Without research, there cannot be agriculture. 

I have had the privilege of chairing the committee of agriculture in the last session and this one. Only last week, the committee of agriculture went out to monitor research activities in various research stations, and specifically to look at how the research work is going on and the implementation of the new NARS Act. 

Mr Speaker, we shall be bringing a formal report after the completion of our mission. But we have been able to move to research stations like Namulonge which is for crop, Kifu, which is for forestry, Jinja fisheries, which is for fisheries, Tororo, which is for livestock, to Serere which is semi-arid and –(Interruption)

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable member, research is not an end in itself; research is a means to an end. We appreciate the research, but the outcome of that research is more important.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: I was coming to that. I was to state that there is some good work being done outside there – there is good research being done –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Member for giving me way. I would like to give information to my sister here, the Member for Gomba. The report that the Chair of the committee has just mentioned clearly states that this loan will partly be for transfer and dissemination of technology. Unfortunately, we do not have copies of this report, but by just listening in, this loan has identified a need; there is a loop-hole, in that good technology has been developed by NARO; there is very good technology out there as the chairman of the committee has said, but dissemination of this technology has been lacking and I think this is partly what this loan seeks to satisfy. Thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I will lose track if I allow a lot of information. Now, the Government is promoting commercialisation and modernisation of agriculture. But that cannot be achieved without appropriate research, and that is being generated. And, I want to point out, Mr Speaker, that research is continuous, it has no end, so this loan is going to fill this gap. 

As I indicated, in these research stations, we have the manpower, but they lack equipment; they have a problem of funds to disseminate this information. 

In terms of impact, lot of technology has been generated - we have had a problem of Coffee Wilt Disease – right now, there are some varieties of coffee, which are resistant to Coffee Wilt. But the problem is the funding to multiply them in the shortest time possible. The technologies are there; for example to multiply and get million of seedlings using tissue culture, but this requires money. 

In fact, I want to submit, Mr Speaker that as a Gregorian country, Members of Parliament should push for more funding for this sector particularly for the research sector so that we can improve on the livelihood of our people. For example, we are now pushing for fish farming. Everybody knows that tilapia which thrives in Central Uganda may not be the best for Mbale; you need a species which is suitable for that area, and that cannot be achieved without research. So, everything must go hand in hand with research. 

As for the impact, that is an issue that we should handle as Members of Parliament; this transfer of technology - that abundant available technology on research stations; how can we help to transfer it to the farming community? That is our responsibility as Members of Parliament and the Executive. We should work collectively to make sure that this is achieved. 

Otherwise, this loan should have been approved yesterday; wherever you move, you see a need for this loan. Thank you Mr Speaker and the committee.

4.06
MR SERUNJOGI KATENDE (NRM, Kiboga County East): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand up to support the granting of this loan, having known for long the achievements which NARO has contributed towards the backbone of the national economy which is agriculture. 

NARO, as we are aware from the report of the committee, for which I thank the chairperson of the committee, has contributed much in areas of crops, livestock, forestry and agricultural engineering, which few people might have realised is part and parcel of agricultural research. 

With all those achievements, the Seventh Parliament went ahead and came out with the NAPE policy of 2003, which was not being implemented by the NARS Act of 2005, and that is where in that Act we decentralised the agricultural research putting it, first of all, in the National Agricultural Research Institutes and then the Zonal Agricultural Research Institutes whereby the Nation Research Institutes will look at the strategic requirements of the nation as such.  

But the Zonal Research Agricultural Research Institute (ZARI), which is to cater for the specific needs of a particular ecological zone. Fellow Members here are saying they are not seeing the fruits of NARO yet they are at their doorsteps.  We have got 7 ZARIs, for example, Mukono ZARI here takes the whole of Central Region, including Gomba. The whole of Buganda is catered for and here we are talking of not seeing the fruits.  What I am saying is that we need to go to these centres ourselves in order to get what our people need from there.  

There are other ZARIs, which I will not mention but we are trying to establish one in Nabuin, which is in Karamoja. It is to cater for the semi-arid regions of Teso, Karamoja, Mbale, Busoga et cetera. We are requesting for money that will establish this ZARI of Nabuin with this fund here so that we can also have outreach for those semi-arid regions. 

Also, Mr Speaker, I am noting that some Members are talking about some shortcomings of technologies that are, for example, seeds which do not germinate, which is actually not true information. 

As far as I know in agricultural natural research throughout the world, the terminator gene - that was a gene, which was being tried by some international research companies like Monsanto, which was put on the shelf towards 1996 after the outcry of developing countries. It was being used by such international companies to protect their innovations so that one had to pay for it and then if you planted that seed, it would germinate and give you the crop. So, in order to protect their innovation, they had put in that terminator gene but there was an international outcry and it was shelved. Not a single terminator gene has been used in Uganda or anywhere in Africa. So, some of this information, Mr Speaker is not true.

As I support this loan, I would also like to say that already there is a lot, which is now not there in towns, for example, when you talk about the banana wilt, there are already those in the private sector that have taken up NARO technologies and you can now get a tissue cultured banana, which is clean planting material. So, if you are crying about banana wilt, you cannot get rid of banana wilt unless you start with a clean planting material. 

We have got a man called Nsubuga here in Buloba - people have been coming from Kiboga, we have already bought materials from there because we are proactive and we have got clean materials. We need to go to the sources of this technology and take it to our people or to make them know about it. NARO has got a website with all this information apart from what they have laid on Table; there is a website talking about what they have done. 

Mr Speaker allow me also to say that we should not always be thinking about loans, loans. Okay this is the third phase and we shall maybe be going to another one in 2009. 

But my suggestion is that some ministries need to come up with enabling laws for NARO so that they can generate their own funds. Here the ministry I am talking about is that of Trade and Industry. Uganda is a member of the World trade Organisation (WTO) and according to the WTO Agreement, Article 27(3), members of the WTO should come up with appropriate treaties, that is, rules and regulations related to trade related aspects of intellectual property rights, which we call TRIPS. And in there, for example, if we have got a policy on intellectual property rights, NARO will be able to protect its innovations so that it can use them to draw royalties and rights from say people who would like to commercialise their technologies. And they would generate money to run this sort of research. 

Secondly, a part from the Ministry of Trade and Industry, the Ministry of Agriculture - we need in place, for example, the Plant Protection Act, which already NARO had been proactive and drew out a draft of the Plant Variety Protection Act in 1998. It is whereby the breeders, the farmers and even the communities rights can be protected so that a breeder from a given research institute can be able to get royalties from a variety bred by it if it is going to be used commercially in Uganda or by neighbouring countries like Kenya, Rwanda et cetera.  

Again another one from Agriculture is –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think you have made your case.

DR SERUNJOGI: Yes. So, what I am saying, Mr Speaker, is that we are able to draw our own funds if we put enabling laws in place for NARO. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Shouldn’t we really close this subject?

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

SPEAKER: Okay, then what we do? We have another issue of Bat Valley Primary School, which I think we should clear. 

4.13
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the committee report to allow Government to borrow for the case of investing and strengthening NARO and NAADS.

Mr Speaker, they have mentioned very well the importance of research and the achievements of NARO in this country. There is no doubt that NARO has made significant inroads in the area of developing agriculture, which agriculture translates into the well-being of the majority of our population. 

However, Mr Speaker there is one concern. I realise that technology dissemination is important but I also get concerned about the difference between NARO and NAADS in terms of who is doing what. Because from how I understand it, NARO is supposed to generate research and come out with good developmental technology. NAADS is supposed to disseminate this technology and even have technology sites et cetera so that then the population can be able to benefit from this research output. But in this loan that is being requisitioned for, I realise that there is money that is supposed to do what I understand NAADS to be doing. 

I, therefore, want a clarification whether NAADS is going to continue to disseminate research findings or they are both going to do it? Otherwise, we risk repetition of the same work by two institutions that belong to the same sector and in so doing we could be wasting money. Thank you very much

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. 

4.15
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, MR Speaker. I want to support the view that we support research because research has had historical successes beginning with cotton where we have cotton progeny and satu in the North. Later on in recent times we had clonal coffee, which is a selection and we have other crops sustained by research like the Irish potatoes and high breed maize. 

That far, we must recognise and distinguish between the triangle of technology transfer, that is, agricultural development has three elements to deal with. On one aspect of the triangle we have the farmer. That one is there; he is resilient and for the time being we can hold that as a constant. 

Then we have the research perse, which we come to later on. The third arm is the extension. Now on the Floor of the House here, we have people shifting left and right because they did not clearly understand that distinction between research and extension. And they were therefore discussing issues of extension rather that research and I wanted that we hold the discussion on research perse. 

Having said that, I wanted to seek clarification on page 5 and page 2 where it is said, “They have no problem with component No. 1 of technology development and adaptation and component No.3, Institutional development.” But I certainly need some clarification on component No.2 of outreach extension and methodology dissemination. Clearly, this is not a function of research; it is a function of extension and I want to know whether if this money is borrowed and attained will go to support extension in the field - because it is a different component altogether. I hope those members of the committee will appreciate the distinction between these two elements of extension and research.

If they are going to get this money and pass it on to extension support, I have no problem, but if it remains here as it is, then there is a problem. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4. 18
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do not only represent a rural constituency, but I am also a farmer. The previous speakers have been talking – 

THE SPEAKER: A commercial farmer or what?
 
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: I am a commercial farmer. From my own experience as a farmer and also a representative of people in a rural constituency, as much as I would like to support this loan, there are conditions, which I think the government that is asking for this loan should consider. Even us as Members of Parliament – right now, as my constituents watch me supporting this motion, whereby you are saying you want $12 million to do research and training and at the same time you are saying that NARO is only doing research; they are not in extension; how can you do extension without training the rural farmer?

Secondly, they have mentioned the banana wilt and coffee wilt. I am a farmer who has been suffering with banana wilt for quite a long time. I remember how many times I have gone to Kawanda Research Centre and the only remedy they have for you is to just uproot. Is that research? I have 12 acres of bananas, which has had banana wilt and you are telling me to uproot –(Interruption)

MR ODIT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. As hon. Tress Bucyanayandi indicated, we are mixing up two issues, research, technology development and extension. 

For my colleague, I must state it clearly that Masaka has been a major victim for late response to adapting technology. One, during our tour, the most affected area in terms of coffee wilt and banana wilt was Masaka and the intervention by NARO was to develop clean planting materials. Among the things, the farmers are expected to uproot all the affected stems. 

When we went to Masaka, we discovered two weaknesses. In the first place, the young people have left the farms; they have either moved to urban centres in Kampala and Nyendo, leaving only very old people who have no capacity in the villages to uproot the stems of coffee and bananas. Surprisingly, what they demanded from Government was to give them more funds to pay for people who would be able to uproot these stems. In such circumstances, you can never see an impact of technology because the will is not there. I think this is an area hon. Nsubuga needs to address. Thank you very much.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much. I appreciate the information given by my colleague, but when you talk about uprooting say 12 acres of bananas, who is going to compensate this farmer?

Secondly, you know very well that initially we had the traditional coffee – 

THE SPEAKER: I think when there is uprooting, it is like a doctor who says, “I have examined you and we can only amputate.” You cannot say, who is going to compensate me? 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: I appreciate the amputation that is made on our farmers but as far as research is concerned, for example, the modified banana that was made out of research in NARO. It can never be eaten by anybody within our people locally and you cannot even export it. This is a banana, which is too long with so many clusters and nobody eats it. And this is the research you have made, but for whose benefit? 

Secondly, I am sure the presenter of this motion  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give is that these types of crops got from researches or technologies, which are being developed are not only inedible but they are very expensive. If you go to these research centres, the seedlings are so costly for any peasant to afford and if you part with any penny and you take the seeds to your garden, you will be discouraged to take up the advise to uproot.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you for that information. I think you can see that our peasantry community - we are representing rural farmers. We are not talking about scientists who are here because you have the technology; you have the know-how, but I am talking about a rural farmer. You are telling us to uproot 12 acres of his coffee because of your – how come that you cannot – I want these scientists to tell me that for banana wilt, we have come up with research and we can use this kind of medicine which can cure the disease. Tell me that medicine you have other than you telling me to uproot. Is research uprooting?

We have been uprooting our traditional coffee, for example in Masaka, and we are given clonal coffee and after three years, this is the very clonal coffee you have made research on, the wilt comes. Do you want to tell me that there is no wilt in clonal coffee?

MR BIKWASIZEHI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. You asked a question, that is uprooting a technology? And I will say, yes, because that is a technology that has been researched on and found to be the most suitable. 

I had an opportunity to work in your area, Masaka; you had a lot of banana weevils and the remedy was not a chemical. It was a cultural method researched and approved and when it was applied, the banana weevil became a thing of the past. The technology they gave you to uproot as a commercial farmer is the best way and the cheapest way, mark you. Uproot the diseased one and burn it and then plant and then you remain with clean gardens. 

I know that you have, in Masaka, some very good, commercial, coffee farmers who have fought coffee wilt through that system. I also know that you have some very good, commercial, banana farmers who have fought the bacteria wilt of bananas through that cultural method. So the answer is: it is a technology that has been developed. Technology does not mean a new thing brought in, no; it is a system.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for your information. Mr Speaker, I wonder whether you can call amputation technology because that is a method that anybody can use. I wish you told me that you could apply such and such a thing, but not to amputate somebody’s hand because if it is about amputation; anybody will do that -(Mr Kivejinja rose_)– Minister for National Guidance, yes.

THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you very much for giving me way to provide some guidance. The fact is that once a disease arrives, you cannot have all your twelve acres attacked at once. So, the mere fact that you allowed one and failed to uproot it meant that the disease had to spread through your farm and maybe the entire village. Therefore, we do not need to argue whether amputation is a disease; it is a question whose answer is that a stitch in time saves nine. So, once you get information from the research centre asking you to amputate wilting crops, either of coffee or bananas, do it immediately so that the disease does not spread. Otherwise, the moment you do not comply with that, it will require that the whole plant dies; amputation is definitely an early treatment of a disease in a localised area. Thank you very much.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister. I am sure the minister wants us to approve this loan today, but among the documents the chairman has just laid on the Table are the financial accounts of NARO, 2005. None of us has perused these accounts.

Secondly, you also have just tabled documents on the achievements of NARO and you want us to approve this loan now? All of us have been going to the financial institutions to borrow money but when they ask you – because I take this Parliament as the banking officer you meet and he says: “I want your pay slip, I want this and this.”  I know that this is to finance phase I, but has the Auditor-General given any report? I am asking this because I expected you to attach a report from the Auditor-General giving the details of the previous loan that was given - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, this is a committee of Parliament. This committee is the one that has given you those documents. They must have used them to make the assessment before coming to a conclusion. You cannot really say that, as a House, we can examine audit accounts; it is not possible. I think there is some confidence, which you have to place in your committee.

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. However, what I am saying is that the very committee, after looking at those accounts, could not approve that loan. That is why they came to the Committee of the Whole House so that even ourselves, even myself as a representative of the people from Bukoto South who are peasants, can say, “Yes, let the loan go because I am satisfied that the previous one was used appropriately”.   

MR KADUNABBI: Mr Speaker, it is the procedure of this Parliament that a committee does a thorough analysis of whatever is going on; the Committee on National Economy did exactly that. It is also for the information of all Members that we lay on the Table such documents so that they can be referred to. Otherwise, this is an extension of phase II. There is nothing, which has been clearly completed. It was supposed to end and was extended. We actually looked at all the documents and since we have laid them on the Table, hon. Nsubuga is invited to look at them. He will also be persuaded to support it. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for the information.

THE SPEAKER: The other thing that you must take into account is that there are sessional committees, which are responsible for such work; this is not a sessional committee. There is a sessional committee, which is also in charge of NARO and is monitoring the activities of that organisation. That is the committee of the Member of Parliament for Buhweju who contributed in support of this. So, these are circumstances that you have to take into account.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to additionally inform the honourable member that we also have accountability committees. These committees will look at the audited accounts; this is a post mortem. It is just like the budgets, we do not talk to pass the budget because we have not audited the ministries for the past years. So, the accountability committees are going to take care of your concerns. I do not think you need to worry so much. Whoever has eaten or misused the money will be dealt with. I think you have seen how the accountability committees have been handling these matters. You do not need to worry.
    
MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: I appreciate the information given, but my point - and I still want to insist on it - is that for you to ask me to approve a loan when you have not satisfied me on the previous one that you took, I find it very unethical. I am saying because I must be convinced that the previous loan you had was used to the maximum. So, you do not just tell me now that I should approve a loan of US $12 million yet tomorrow, when a committee comes to investigate it will find that nothing was done in NARO.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, this report from which they made recommendations has been with us for a long time. If you had read it you would have no doubt about these recommendations. You should have made your own investigations before coming to a conclusion. But now you did not, it is assumed that you were satisfied with the recommendations. 

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I think let me wind up. As previous speakers have said, we would like to see much of NARO activities in our constituencies. We would like to see much of NAADS activities in our constituencies; it is not a matter of just putting a signpost there saying “NARO”. When you pass through a good plantation, you see a NARO signpost, but I want any Member of Parliament - maybe some of you – otherwise, for me nobody from NARO has ever visited my constituency and given training to my farmers. Thank you very much. Otherwise, I support the motion. 

4.35
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief. I support the committee on this report. I support the committee because in any profession, in any sector, you cannot move forward without research. On that score, I support the recommendation of the committee. 

But I feel uncomfortable when I hear that we should restrict this debate to NARO because it is about research. Research must serve a purpose. We cannot do research for the sake of it and put it on the shelf. We must get the linkage between NARO and NAADS very clearly so that we know that when we recommend a big sum of money like this, it will help the farmers on the ground. 

Mr Speaker, agricultural extension services have disappeared. They are no longer there. All the research that we do, either you go to Kawanda or ministry headquarters; it is not in the rural areas. I am not even sure whether we can still talk about agriculture as being the backbone of our economy. I am not sure even whether this economy has any backbone anymore -(Laughter)- I think the backbone is gone. I think it is broken completely –(Laughter)- we must take our agriculture to the theatre to repair that backbone -(Laughter)- it is finished! 

If you look at the cotton sector, with which I am familiar, the farmers are left at the mercy of very greedy middlemen. These middlemen set their own prices to buy cotton from our poor farmers. Actually, there are no cotton ginneries or stores now. In the North they were uprooted, brought this way and turned into water tanks and so on -(Interjection)- to Kampala here -(Laughter)- because they were sold by Government. The cotton ginneries/stores were all sold off and uprooted. The mabaati were turned into water tanks. So, now the farmers are selling their cotton to the lorries of a very greedy middleman. You go and sell and pour the cotton straight into the lorry and at his own prices. So, Mr Speaker, when we spend money we must get value out of it. 

Towards the end of the first session of this Parliament, the status of loans -(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: I thank you for giving way. Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to give information to the effect that whereas the seven pillars of PMA are segregated, there seems to be an attempt to also design projects in a segregated way. Therefore, I am not surprised when I hear people say that research is research, extension is extension, and technology development is technology development. The old DFIs, which are now NARO research institutes, used to have demonstration as an area of extension because research is for extension not for shelves in research centres. 

In fact on Saturday I went to Bulindi DFI, which used to be a very good area both for research and extension, but I could not get the information I wanted. When I reached Hoima, I was oiinstead referred to a private family friend at Kihongonza who is doing a lot of good work and you will be surprised in Masaka today, they will take you to Kizza’s family. So you now find that more extension is being done by individuals instead of the NARO centres. I thought I should give that information. I thank you so much. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable member for that information. On loans generally, I was saying that the status of all loans was tabled here I think towards the end of the first session. We debated it and found out from that report that some loans, which were borrowed in the Sixth and Seven Parliaments, were lying unutilised and the country was paying interest and penalty on unutilised money. It would be imprudent for this Parliament to continue approving applications for loans day in, day and out without knowing what is happening to the money we are borrowing.

I urge the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy that before he comes before us again, he should avail to this Parliament the status of all loans. Otherwise, this will be the last time I am supporting borrowing -(Laughter)- I am a reasonable being; I should know what is happening to the money I am borrowing. I do not want to be used like a machine. So, please -

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, I think there are a number of laws, which you made that you should invoke to deal with such situations, for example the Budget Act, and so forth. These are the laws that require government to bring a report on the impact of loans and so forth, rather than the committee on National Economy. This should lie somewhere else especially when we are dealing with the Budget. Let us insist on the minister following the Budget Act and I think your problem will be solved. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, Mr Speaker. But whoever is concerned, we must get that report rather than going on and on with borrowing without knowing what is happening to the money we are borrowing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me give the last chance to the Leader of the Opposition to make a comment. 

4.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. It would be very unfair that this matter comes before the House and I do not participate at my personal level, having been in research for a very long time. There was a small break when I was out of the House and if some Members have already made this acknowledgment, it will not cause any harm to emphasise it.

Sometimes you can actually be very smart but because you are not able to evaluate yourself you may not know that you are very smart. The researchers in NARO are some of the people that this country should be extremely proud of -(Applause)- they are very competent; there is a lot of work that they have done; there are products of their research that so many ordinary people and so many not-so-ordinary people do not know and that is their biggest dilemma. I will explain part of the problem a little later.  

Mr Speaker, we have a problem. If you go through the years that NARO has been in existence, you will find that the core activity of NARO, which is funding research, has been dependent on borrowed money. This creates a very clear impression that we do not understand our role in supporting NARO. It is very embarrassing that the fundamental element in our development, which is research, depends on foreign money.  

I participated in the review of NARO. NARO, as an institutional setup, and the product of their activities at the time of the review, was a very good institution. However, because we depend on borrowed money, they will impose reforms that kind of disorganise everybody. Even when you are properly settled, you have to resettle and start a fresh life; and this is the problem. We already accepted the reforms in NARO and this money is now to support the reformed NARO. But before we have moved we are talking about privatising and commercialising. 

Go to a country like the United States. You will find that USDA or the United States Department of Agriculture has a huge component of research funded by the state. The private people who do research are merely specialised institutions like universities that will undertake routine research and therefore you give them money to be able to do the fundamental research that feeds into the overall research. The USDA has been able to do that because agricultural research in America is solidly funded. 

I do hope that next time we do not have ARTP IV and even if we have, government should be coming here to tell us that, “We are merely filling in this gap in what we are already doing in terms of actually giving research funds from our budget,” and I do hope that this will happen.  

Secondly, there has been a lot of talk about extension but this is not reaching us. Research is part of a chain in agricultural development. You generate technology, you adapt it and you disseminate it. Unfortunately, that is the framework we have been operating in. There is a fourth link that is utilisation of technology. What is now happening is that we have neglected agriculture so much that if you produced a new variety the farmer out there is just a subsistence person. As long as he can survive to see another year, that is fine. 

There is a law in ecology, called Liebig’s Law of the Minimum. It says very simply that if a group of sheep are travelling together, then the speed of the group will be governed by the speed of the slowest. This is the crisis. Because agricultural transformation is not taking place, even the most brilliant research becomes irrelevant and, therefore, as much as we give money for research, we must really give money for agricultural development and agricultural transformation. (Applause) And once we do that, nobody will come here to quarrel with research; nobody will come here to quarrel with extension. Instead you will be very happy to talk about the GDP growth that the country is scoring and I do hope that government will take this matter very seriously.

Lastly, I would like to urge my fellow researchers - when they are put under pressure they yield to that pressure and say, “Okay, we are going to include this in the project.” Outreach, extension and technology dissemination is actually the work of NAADS. It is the work of NAADS but I can assure you that when you go to meetings where these programmes are being reviewed and you hear how the researchers are being bashed, it needs researchers with many spines, not only one, to resist that bashing. And so they sit and include projects and other things that become diversionary.  

Otherwise, I support the motion. Let us give researchers money but let us follow up on the issue of government putting money into agriculture. This thing of 3 percent or 4 percent with no targets will not do any work. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I think I should put the question to the motion. The question is to adopt the report, which recommends us giving authorisation to Government to borrow this money.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE PETITION BY PARENTS AND SCHOOL MANAGEMENT OF BAT VALLEY PRIMARY SCHOOL OVER OWNERSHIP OF THE SCHOOL

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): This is a report of the Committee on Social Services on the petition by parents and school management of Bat valley primary school over ownership of the school.

Introduction

Mr Speaker and honourable members, on 06 December 2007, hon. Erias Lukwago, MP for Kampala Central, presented, on behalf of the petitioners, a petition to this august House, and the Speaker committed this petition to the Committee on Social Services for the committee to scrutinise and report to this House by 20 December 2007. The committee did not meet the date. Nevertheless the Office of the Speaker permitted the committee to sit in recess to consider this urgent matter.  

Methodology

The committee met the following stakeholders: the parents and school management committee of Bat Valley Primary School; the board of trustees of the school known as Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal (Hindu Temple). We shall be referring to it as SSDM. We also met Kampala City Council as well as the Kampala District Land Board; we also met the Minister of Education and Sports, and his technical team. The committee also visited the school for an on spot assessment of the facilities.

Part 1.2 is the prayer by the parents and school management committee. The petitioners prayed that Parliament:

1.	Intervenes and stops the intended relocation of the school;
2.	Ensures that Bat Valley Primary School remains a public school at the convenient site where it is. 

The school had 1,120 pupils and 43 teachers at the end of 2007, as compared to 2,317 pupils and 53 teachers in 2004. This decline is attributed to the constant threats to the school by the SSDM. The committee was informed that the school management committee has not been operating normally because the SSDM do not attend meetings, hence denying the committee forum. The powers of the treasurer of the school management committee were usurped because the Hindu Temple administrator was reported to be collecting revenue from projects put up by the parents for example the theatre, the school canteen and the SSDM do not use this revenue in running the school. So the committee learnt that the SSDM continually threatened to evict the school and this had brought insecurity among the stakeholders, parents, teachers and pupils.

2.0 Background to the school

The school was built in 1938 by the Asian community, the Shree Sanatan Dharma Mandal - and the Hindu Temple. The school sits on 4.99 acres of land that was donated by the Protectorate Governor to the Hindu community. It is reported that the public fundraising was organised to raise funds for the construction of more classrooms.

The committee was further informed that members of the public, including Buganda Government, contributed funds towards this project. 

Mr Speaker, in 1964, by an Act of Parliament, Bat Valley Primary School, like all other primary schools in Uganda came under the central government. Even when the Asians were expelled in 1972 by the then government, Bat Valley Primary School was never abandoned and was never declared an expropriated property. In this case, KCC has never been a tenant of the custodian board in as far as Bat Valley Primary School is concerned.

A copy of the interpretation by the Solicitor-General dated 03 March 1992 is attached as appendix 1. Among other things, the Solicitor-General notes that while the foundation body may own land, the management of the school is under government. 

The school was repossessed by SSDM in 1991 and the repossession certificate is marked appendix 2 and it had four conditions:

i)	The property remains a school,
ii)	The school to be managed following Ministry of Education and Sports regulations; 
iii)	The renovations were to be done during holidays to avoid disrupting school activities, 
iv)	The school was to remain a non-racial school.

The committee learnt that KCC was taken to court by SSDM about management of the school after which KCC and the foundation body entered into a consent judgement, which is appendix 3, which was signed in 2001. The consent judgement stipulated that a school management committee would be appointed to include majority members of the foundation body, that is five members out of nine, and the school was to remain a government, grant-aided school.

Note should be taken that both KCC and SSDM did not fully respect the consent judgement. 

2.1 	The SSDM position

SSDM submitted to the committee that they wanted to renovate the school and manage it. They intended to start a secondary school as well on the same site. They preferred to turn the public, primary school into a private school. In this regard, the committee was informed that the SSDM offered to buy land worth Shs 150 million as an alternative for the relocation of the school. In the event the relocation failed, according to the board of trustees of SSDM, they had no intention of closing the school but only manage the asset. They wanted to renovate the school buildings and the property kept well maintained.

3.0	Ownership of the school land

3.1 	The Lease Title

The committee was informed that the 49 year lease given to SSDM in 1957 expired in November 2006. The SSDM applied for the lease extension from the Kampala District Land Board and the board gave a no objection, which is appendix 4. The committee learnt that the SSDM paid a premium of Shs 200 million, ground rent of Shs 10 million to KCC, and another Shs 10 million as land fees to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The receipts are attached as appendix 5.

3.2 The Caveat

The school management committee having been sitting tenants on the land for 70 years, lodged a caveat, which is appendix 6, on the land through their lawyers and petitioned Parliament through the area Member of Parliament to intervene. The parents argued that they have contributed to the development of the school by putting up some buildings like the teachers’ houses, the theatre, the workshop, the 24 toilet stances and the administration block. So, Mr Speaker, what we found out is that the parents had also played a role of putting up such infrastructure.

3.3 	The status of the land

To this date, SSDM has not received the land title for the new lease from the Ministry of Lands in spite of the payments made because there is a caveat lodged in the lands office by the school management of Bat Valley Primary School. Therefore, legally, SSDM has not yet received the new lease title and the land is as of today the property of KCC.

3.4 	The position of the Minister of Education and Sports

Mr Speaker, the committee received a submission from the Ministry of Education and Sports that the lease should not be renewed. The minister informed the committee that the request not to renew the lease was communicated to Kampala City Council in writing; appendix 7. 

The ministry maintains that Bat Valley Primary School should remain a public, UPE school, and the buildings can be renovated if government gives funds to the sector.

3.5 	Kampala City Council and Kampala District Land Board

Mr Speaker, we met these two groups. The Kampala District Land Board informed the committee that it was mandatory to renew the lease according to the Land Act. However, our committee was advised by Parliament’s legal counsel office that this was wrong. The provision under which the Kampala District Land Board approved the renewal of the lease was a transitional provision before the enactment of the 1995 Constitution and the Land (Amendment) Act of 1998. 

Kampala City Council on the other hand submitted to the committee that they were not aware of the approval of the renewal by the District Land Board and KCC is against the renewal of the lease. So, as a matter of fact, KCC informed the committee that they were ready to refund the money so far paid by SSDM.

The committee’s findings

The committee would like to report to this august House their findings as follows:

•	The lease of SSDM expired on 01 November 2006.  Demonstrated attempts were made by the school management committee to secure the land from further renewal of the lease to SSDM.
•	The school has been under constant threats to relocate from SSDM premises since 2004. The reduced enrolment of 2,300 pupils to the current 1,100 pupils is attributed to these threats.
•	At the request of this committee, the Ministry of Education and Sports sent engineers to Bat Valley Primary School to inspect the school buildings and establish their condition and safety for school activities. The school inspection report indicates that the buildings just need repairs and the school activities can continue as long as the renovation is done in phases.
•	The partnership stipulated in the consent judgment failed. The committee noted that both parties, the SSDM and KCC, did not fully respect the consent judgment. The judgment clearly stipulates that SSDM was to provide five members to the school management committee of nine people but these never attended school committee management meetings. Therefore, KCC on the other hand delayed to approve and appoint the SSDM members to the school management committee. 

Mr Speaker, what we found out here was that on the side of Kampala City Council Education Division, I think they had delayed to renew the membership of members of SSDM to the school management committee.

•	When SSDM repossessed the school in 2001, they took over the income generating projects of the school. They collected money and never remitted it to the school for running school activities.
•	The Minister informed the committee that the position of the ministry is that Bat Valley Primary School should remain a public school at its current site. Secondly, the ministry maintains that even if the lease were to be renewed, the lease conditions should include, among other things, leaving Bat Valley Primary School as a public school at its present site.
•	The committee noted that Bat Valley Primary School is a UPE school and serves the majority of children whose parents stay in city suburbs and work in the city centre and cannot afford to take their children to private schools.

Recommendations

•	The Government should not renew the lease of the SSDM.
•	Bat Valley Primary School should remain a public, UPE school, at the same site.
•	Government should find funds to renovate Bat Valley Primary school as a matter of urgency.
•	Kampala City Council should refund the total sum of money of Shs 220 million, paid by SSDM for the renewal of the lease.
•	Government should find an alternative piece of prime land for the SSDM to undertake their investment. It should be noted that the 49 years’ lease title for SSDM was interrupted in 1972 when Asians were chased by the then government till their return in 1991 when they repossessed the school. Mr Speaker, the committee felt it fair, as a matter of trying to promote investment, that other than moving the school, a prime piece of land should be given by government for SSDM to have their own developments because there was that interruption. It was just on a humanitarian consideration.  
•	Lastly, that government should preserve all the city schools from being relocated. This is to enable the poor, and the children of civil servants who work within the urban areas, to access education. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, the committee mentioned this because most schools have had threats from business people who feel they should be developing them into business centres. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman and the committee. Honourable members, I am not supposed to participate in the debate but having followed some of the statements made in this report; having seen the Solicitor-General, Kabatsi’s letter, there are many legal and constitutional issues that have to be considered: the independence of Kampala District Land Board; whether it is a department of Kampala City Council, and so on. 

I would advise that among you here, you get a committee of some six or seven lawyers, before we debate this report, to address the glaring constitutional and legal issues. Because when you say, “Let government find another piece of land and give…” this is tantamount to compensation. It is tantamount to recognising that these people have a claim. 

The fact that they have no certificate of title, the certificate of title is mere evidence that this was given. Whether the title was not given because of a caveat, that can be handled by seeking the removal of the caveat. So, in order not to complicate this issue by debate and as I see many other things are going to be opened up, I would suggest, if you agree, that you select some lawyers from amongst yourselves to address the glaring legal matters that are arising from your recommendation. You recognise him and you say, “Let us give him another piece of land”, why? If he is not the owner then you should not give him another piece of land. But government can compulsorily acquire this land for its purpose but then this will have consequences. So, I suggest, honourable members that let us not open debate on this report yet. We should assign a committee to it. Within two days they will find out the legal implications of the recommendations, and then we can start the debate next week. Otherwise, debating it is going to open the way for many questions not only on this one but also on many others and that may cause us problems.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with your advice but if you leave it to us as Parliament, who will take the initiative? My suggestion is that you go back and tomorrow you come and read the names.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we thank you for the report and we thank the committee.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also agree with you on putting a number of lawyers together, but I want to suggest that hon. Okello-Okello, who has been on land matters for a very long time, be included on this team.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay. Let us close this. That is agreed. I will make up a team; you can explain that to your people. But the status quo should remain.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I agree with your advice but the information I want to give the House is that from Thursday last week, one party was going on to bring sand and insurers to insure their school. So that was also causing disharmony before our report is concluded.

THE SPEAKER: There should not be any interruption. They can bring sand, maybe to repair, but the activities of the school should not be interrupted.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do appreciate your wise counsel and guidance. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done and the thorough study they carried out into this matter and indeed the report they have struggled to make within record time. I thank you very much committee members for the work done and for struggling so much to ensure that schools in Kampala Central are not relocated. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, since when did you change from where you usually sit? Anyway, can w we handle this Bill now or we do it tomorrow? [Hon. Members: “Tomorrow.”] Okay, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)
