Tuesday 22nd February, 2000.

Parliament met at 2.29 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

	MR. OTAGE:  Mr. Speaker,  I have looked at the order paper for today,  and I want to get your guidance about it.  There was a matter before Parliament,  regarding one of the Members who was supposed to apologise to another.  This matter was brought to the Disciplinary Committee,  and I want to know the fate of this particular matter.  I beg for your guidance.

	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  if the order of business had been allowed to proceed as it appears on the order paper,  and I was given the opportunity to make my communication from the Chair;  some of these things would not have arisen.  I think it was the Clerk who jumped the gun,  for reasons which are not clear to me.  I therefore ask him to proceed in accordance with the order paper.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  as rightly pointed out by the Member who has just left the Floor,  before we adjourned last Session,  there was a matter regarding disciplinary action against one of the Members of this House,  namely the hon. Sam Kutesa.  It arose out of a statement he made on this Floor,  which statement was the subject of a subsequent inquiry by the Committee on Rules and Privileges,  as provided for under rule 70 of our rules of procedure.  The statement amounted to information,  which was not substantiated and because of that the Member was investigated for a possible disciplinary action.
	
	Subsequently,  the Committee that carried out the investigation came out with a conclusion that was reported to this House.  The Member was found guilty of breaching rule 70 of our rules of procedure and therefore he had to apologise.  Otherwise,  the Speaker is empowered,  under these rules,  to take appropriate action,  namely to suspend the Member concerned.  In this case,  the hon. Sam Kutesa is to be suspended for the duration of this Session.  
	
	This report was made on the very day the House was going for recess.  It was therefore ruled by the Speaker that the time within which the Member was supposed to apologise,  which is seven days from the day the report was submitted,  would run from when we resumed this Session.  Today is the last day for the Member to render an apology,  in accordance with the rules.  I have been approached by the hon. Kutesa and has communicated to me that he is not in position to render an apology,  and that he is aware of the consequences.  So far as our rules go,  this leaves the Speaker no option but to suspend the hon. Kutesa for the duration of this Session.   Accordingly,  he is suspended for that period.

BILLS
FIRST READING

 CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000.      
	
	THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Members,  I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provision) (amendment) Bill,  2000 be read for the First Time.
	
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE COMMUNITY SERVICE BILL, 1998.
	
Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.
	
	Clause 4
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  in clause 4 (3),  on page five, delete the word "Magistrate" and insert "Court."  This is because this community service is not only given in the Magistrate's Court,  it could also be given in a High Court or in a subordinate court.  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
Clause 4 as amended,  agreed to.
	
	Clause 5
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  in clause 5,  we are proposing an amendment that the number of hours be not more than eight hours.  We believe the number of hours should be the same working hours as those of the Public Service.  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 5 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
Clause 5 as amended,  agreed to.
	
	Clause 6
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  In clause 6(5),  page six,  delete sub clause (5) and insert the following: "if a supervising officer employs the offender for his or her personal benefit,  the officer commits an offence and is liable, on conviction,  to a fine not exceeding ten currency points."  Actually here we are just improving on the drafting.  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  You should also say that someone commits an offence,  before you provide for a fine.  That is a significant amendment.  I now put the question that clause 6 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
Clause 6 as amended,  agreed to.  
	
	Clause 7
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Yes, clause 7,  I propose an amendment to paragraph (c) on page 7.  Substitute the word "the" appearing between the words "is" and "subordinate" in the second line with a word "a."  This is because it could be any subordinate court and not a particular one.  And at the end of the paragraph,  insert the phrase "as if it were a subsequent court".  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 7 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
Clause 7 as amended,  agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.
	
	Clause 9
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  In clause 9 sub clause (1) on page 8, substitute the word "a" appearing before the word supervising towards the end of third line with the word "the."  Here the supervising court is already identified.  I beg to move,  Mr. Chairman.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 9 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
Clause 9 as amended,  agreed to.

Clause 10,  agreed to.
	
	Clause 11
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  In clause 11(3),  in paragraph (d),  insert the word "the" between the words "of" and "Ministry" appearing in the first line.  
	
	And the second amendment,  in paragraph (i),  insert at the end of the paragraph,  the following "appointed by the Minister."
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Why do you not deal with one first?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much.  I will deal with the first one first.  Clause 11(3)(d),  insert the word "the" between the words "of" -(Interruption).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Chairperson,  if you look at item 6 clause 11,  redraft it to read;  "there shall be a national community service committee."  Do you not want to deal with it?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: No, no, we are not dealing with that one.  We are dealing with 11(3)(d).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: So what happens to item six?  If you look at the amendment in your report,  there is an item six.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Item 6 reads,  clause 11(3).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  No.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Then we have different ones?
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Possibly.  Item six, on what I have,  reads clause 11(1) is to be drafted again to read as follows;  "There shall be a national community service committee." 
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman,  I do not have it here in my amendments.  But we should leave it as it is,  because it is an error.  "There shall be a national  -(Interjection).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Unless you are withdrawing that amendment,  but it is in my records.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  No, no,  I it is just omitted in my records.  Actually we amended it.  Instead of reading, "known as the national committee on community service",  it shall be the "national community service committee".  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  It is okay.  Are hon. Members clear about this amendment?  Do you have it in your documents?  I have it in the documents attached to my report -(Interjection).  Yes that is the one.
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah): Yes Sir,  we are dealing with 11(1).  Instead of, "there shall be a committee to be known as the national committee on community service";  it should read, "there shall be a committee to be known the national community services committee."
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Mine reads, "there shall be a national community service committee."  There is your amendment.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  It is the amendment that was agreed on in the Committee.
	
	MR. ONGOM:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  This national community service committee,  as I did raise during my contribution;  there certain things about it that the Committee and the Minister need to explain to us,  before we approve the amendment.  First of all,  we are creating a body that is supposed to be corporate,  but there does not seem to be any provision on how it is going to be funded.  When I talked to the Chairman he said, 'it is going to be voluntary.'  Yet here we are creating a body that is going to be answerable,  in its own personality,  as a body corporate.  Supposing the service committee is sued,  for any reason,  who is going to pay?
	
	And is it very necessary to have a service committee at this level.  The activities of the law are at the grassroots,  even as far down as sub county level;  do we need this national body,  when a district body could do?  So I asked for an explanation,  but in their answers,  both of them did not address it.  I wanted,  before we approve this,  to get this explanation.  First of all,  there is no mechanism for financing it,  and secondly is it necessary at this level?
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE: Mr. Chairman,  we need the national community services committees for purposes of co-ordination of the activities that will be carried out by the various district committees.  They will also draw up programmes, identify problems and see how to deal with these; and to liaise with the central structures.  I strongly believe that we need a national co-ordination committee, or a national community services committee.
	
	The hon. Member would want to know how it is going to be financed.  It is going to be financed by Government and donor funds.  The purpose of it being a body corporate, to be sued and to sue, is in order to keep it financially independent.  That way we will not get into problems with the Ministry of Finance. We want this body to have its own finances, which it will be responsible for managing.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 11 sub clause (1) as amended, agreed to.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  we now move on to clause 11(3)(d).  Insert the word "the" between the words "of" and the "Ministry",  appearing in the first line.  The reason for that is just to make it specific,  to refer to the Minister concerned with Internal Affairs.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  before we go further, I want to move in 3(a),  that the Judge should actually be the Chairman of the national committee.  "A Judge nominated by the Chief Justice,  who shall be the Chairman of the national committee."  I have seen the position later suggesting that the committee should elect its own Chairman,  but I find a problem with that.  For example,  a commissioner could be elected Chairman,  when there is the Judge and when there is another person from the Uganda Law Reform Commission.  I would like to move that the Judge in (a) should become the Chairman of the national committee.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  What about item eight?
	
	MR. RUZINDANA: That is 3(a).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at item eight?
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Yes, 11(3)(a).  The Chairman has just moved to (d), but I want to suggest that in (a),  we should make that Judge the Chairman of the national committee.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: But it is done further down.
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  No.  Down in clause 4, it is the committee which elects.  It may not elect the Judge.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: My understanding of clause 4 is that the Judge, nominated under paragraph (a), which you are talking about, shall be the Chairperson of the national committee, and shall hold such office for three years; but shall be eligible for re-nomination.   
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  So why do we not move it up to (a) and say; "a Judge nominated by the Chief Justice shall be Chairman of the national committee"?
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Well, it is really a matter of drafting.  To me the situation is take care of but -(Interjections)-(Mr. Mayanja Nkangi rose_) hon. Minister, what the hon. Member is saying is that up there, why do we not say, "the national committee shall consist of the following: a Judge nominated by the Chief Justice, who shall be the Chairman"?  He wants that statement to come out immediately.  But of course we will have to split the statement to accommodate the provision that this Judge shall be eligible for re-nomination. 
	
	Hon. Ruzindana, are you saying that (a) should read; "A Judge nominated by the Chief Justice,  who shall be the Chairman and who shall be eligible for re-nomination..."?
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  We should leave it as it is.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I suggest that we accept the principle that this person will be the Chairperson, and leave the draughtsmen to handle the rest.
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  I accept your ruling, Mr. Chairman.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  I now go to paragraph (i).  Add at the end of that paragraph, "appointed by the Minister".  This is to make clear how the NGO representative is going to be identified.  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I think we had not pronounced ourselves on your amendment to paragraph (i), had we?  I therefore put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Then we go to the second one, item seven, paragraph (ii).  I put the question to it.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: That is,  adding "appointed by the Minister".
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Then we go to clause 11(4).  It is to be substituted with a new sub clause as follows;  "The Judge nominated under paragraph (a) of sub section (3), shall be the chairperson of the national committee,  and shall hold office for three years but shall be eligible for re-nomination."  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Provided you spell the word, "eligible".  Mine is reading something else.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: It is "eligible".
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question to it.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  We have another sub clause (5);  "The chairperson shall preside at all meetings with the national committee, and in the absence of the chairperson at any meeting of the national committee, the members present shall elect one of their number to preside."  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 8 should have been deleted, because "shall" has already been mentioned.  "The chairperson shall hold office as the chairperson for three years".  The existing clause 11(5),  delete from it "under paragraph (j) of sub section (1) of this section",  and insert "paragraph (i) and (j)" of the sub section (3) of this section."  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Mr. Chairman,  I have a slight problem with that.  If you delete the word "under" as well,  then you might end up with a problem of grammar.  This is because the appointment has to be under someone.  Although replacing the words you have referred to in paragraph (i) and (j) of sub section (3) of this section sounds a better way of putting it.  But if you remove "under",  then you have a problem on your hands.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  we are not removing that.  We are adding, "nominated under" in the new paragraph, because the "under" here is not included in the previous amendment.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: It is;  because your inverted commas for "under."  It means that you want it to be included here.  That is my problem.  
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I think that must be a typing error.  
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  So, "under" is not affected by this amendment?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  No,  it is not.
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  under 5,  "the Minister may, 'for good cause', revoke...."  What is this "good cause"?  Are we not giving the Minister much latitude,  to change these people whom he is appointing?  Good cause!  What is it,  if I may ask? 
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Would you accept the expression "for good reasons"?  The lawyers normally like using "good cause" though.  Hon. Member, if your worry is the discretion given to the Minister,  whether you use "good cause", "good reasons" or "valid reasons",  it is still up to the discretion of the Minister.  
	
	MR. RUZINDANA: We have had a lot of problems with decisions made by Ministers.  If we by law give them the latitude to revoke appointments at will,  it could be dangerous.  It should be on the recommendation of the Committee or something like that.  But the Minister wakes up and thinks of a good cause and then revokes appointment?  I am uncomfortable with that position.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Let the Minister reassure you.
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Chairman,  I want to remind the hon. Member,  in answer to that question,  that there will be guidelines that will be followed.  They will be drawn up by the national committee together with the Minister,  and I think these guidelines can be termed, "a good cause";  if the Chairperson is not following these guidelines.  Thank you.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  clause 11(6) should be deleted. That is a consequential amendment,  following the one to clause 11(4).  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  Mr. Chairman,  I want a some clarification on clause 11(8).  Although I do not have the report,  it seems there was deletion of that;  if I heard you properly.  Is clause 11(8) still part of the Bill?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Yes,  11(8) is part of the Bill.  But in my documents there was item eight, which I was referring to;  not sub clause (8).
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  My problem is that this is what it says in 11(8); "a Committee shall have district committees,  whose compositions and functions shall be as specified by the Minister, in consultation with the national committee."  Under a decentralized system,  I see that the Minister is appointing these officers in the district,  in consultation with the national committee,  which is a committee he has more or less appointed. Many of the prisons in the districts are going to be under district administrations.  I wonder whether there can be a provision so that there is an input from the district,  in the nominations of the officers on the district committees?
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Do you want to propose an amendment or is this a matter of policy.
	
	DR. NKUUHE: I am asking why the Committee did not see this kind of thing.  And I want clarification on why they have thought about this.  If not,  I would like to amend that at least the districts have an input.  I will have to be guided on the most appropriate person in the district to be on this committee.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  I still have some difficulties in understanding his problem.  But he is complaining about sub clause (8) of clause 11.  It states that;  "the Committee shall have district committees,  whose composition and functions shall be as specified by the Minister,  in consultation with the national committee."  He is saying that power is revolving around the Minister and the national committee,  which he has appointed.  What about the district authorities?  Are they not supposed to have an input?  Is that the problem?   
	
	Okay.  District authorities,  like -(Dr. Nkuuhe rose_)  Are you prepared to go that far?
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  Either the district council or the district Chairperson.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Of the council?
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  Yes.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Mr. Chairman,  if you look at the composition at the national level,  which should be dealt with the same way,  then even the district authority -(Interruption). 
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Where are you?  You refer Members to what you are reading.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  The composition is on clause 11(3).  "The national committee shall consist of the following: a Judge nominated by the Chief Justice...."  Instead of a Judge,  you will find that there will be a Magistrate in a given area;  then the Chairperson of the Reform Commission.  Still if there is one in the district,  he will also be part of it.  The Director of Public Prosecutions or his representative will also be a district representative in that area.  Really,  these people are also involved on the district level,  depending on their appointments in these offices.  It has nothing to do with the local councils.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  What he is saying is that if you look at the composition of the national committee,  that would take care of the concerns of the local people.  For example the Director of Public Prosecutions could easily say that the Resident State Attorney should represent him. The Inspector General of Police could also say that the DPC in Rukungiri should represent him, and so on and so forth.  I think that is what he is trying to say.
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  Mr. Chairman,  are you telling me therefore that we are going to duplicate the national committee at the district?  If that is the intention,  then it should be in the law.
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  I think we shall take the amendment,  because the hon. Member seems to accept that.  We agree that it is something that was overlooked.  So we accept his amendment.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Can you proceed?  Hon. Nkuuhe,  while you are thinking of how to proceed with your amendment,  we shall leave clause 11 for the final enactment.  Meanwhile we proceed with the rest.
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  now that the question of the previous speaker has brought up the issue of composition of the national committee;  have we not forgotten to specify the secretary of the committee?  Usually when you have a national committee like this one,  the secretary - who may be a civil servant - is also specified.  But we have not specified any such officer here.  Perhaps the Minister and the Chairman have good reasons for that.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Which clause are you dealing with ?
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  No.  When discussing eight.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Sub clause (8)?
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Yes.  The issue of composition of the national committee came up and I noticed that we had not provided for a secretary of that committee.  Usually there is a provision for that.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I think he is right.  That position is not identified here,  but it he might be out to suggest that we put the Permanent Secretary as the secretary to that committee.  I do not know whether he will take that suggestion.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  You have to move a formal amendment.
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  The Permanent Secretary is already a member of the national committee.  The Commissioner of Prisons is also a member of the national committee.  Any of those could be the secretary.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  So this is still clause 11(8).  While you are organizing you thoughts about the requirement to have a secretary of the national committee and the proposal to bring an amendment by the hon. Nkuuhe,  we can proceed with the rest of the clauses.
	
	Clause 12
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.
	      
         (Question put and agreed to)
	
	Clause 13
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.
	      
          (Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  We now go back to clause 11(3).  It is the need to have a secretary,  but the question is,  who of those should be the one;  or should we have a different person altogether?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Chairman.  I am suggesting that we have sub clause 3(1) and then sub clause 3(2) to read; "The secretary to the committee shall be appointed by the Minister."  I beg to move.  
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you clear about that hon. Members?  Before you say no,  he is proposing that sub clause (3) should be broken into two parts.  One part to deal with the list of members and the second part to deal with the appointment of the secretary.  
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  Mr. Chairman,  rather than use the words "appointed by the Minister", we can say, "the Minister shall designate a secretary".  In other words,  he can designate any senior officer in his Ministry,  rather than appoint one.  Ministers do not appoint public officers.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  for simplicity,  suppose it is acceptable to the draughtsman to say in (d) that; "the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry responsible for Internal Affairs or his or her representative,  shall be the secretary".  Let us hear from hon. Okumu-Ringa first.
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose that we have a specific designation of a secretary,  so that the representation of the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Internal Affairs remains a distinct one.  This is because the Secretariat will have to be effective and ready to deliver.  If the draughtsman could accept,  we could have sub clause (3) giving the position,  and sub clause (4) providing for a secretary.  Then the current sub clause (4) will become (5).  I beg to propose.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes,  he is proposing that we have (3) listing the composition and then a new (4) dealing specifically with the position of the secretary.
	
	MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman,  I support the idea that the secretary should be a substantive appointment,  so that he could be in charge of running the office even when the committee is not there.  I therefore propose that it should be provided for,  so that he is appointed in the ordinary course of appointment of public officers.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Can you move a formal amendment so that hon. Members can debate it?  "There shall be a secretary who shall be a public officer?"  
	
	MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman,  I move that; "there shall be a secretary to the Committee,  who shall be a public officer."
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  I wish to move an amendment to the new (4).  It should read, "there should be a secretary to the national community services committee,  who shall be a public officer,  designated by the Minister."
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Why do you not synchronise with the hon. Member? He moved one -(Interjection)- Oh! I see,  designated was missing.
	  
	MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman,  I accept the Minister's modification.
	
	MR. WACHA:  What is the meaning of designation in this context?
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  Appointed or nominated,  I think this is language that should be sorted out by the drafts people.  But if the hon. Member has a proposal,  we shall be glad to take it on.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members,  supposing you stopped at what the hon. Baku stopped at?  He stopped at, "...who shall be a public officer."
	
	MR. WACHA:  Sir,  then you have a problem,  because I understand this national committee to be a body corporate.  Is it not?  I do not know whether the appointment of officers under bodies corporate is the same as for public servants.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I think this is now technical.  But as I had suggested,  since this is a corporate body,  I do not think there is anything wrong with the secretary being appointed by the Minister.  I therefore suggest that the secretary should be appointed by the Minister.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Now you have removed "public officer"?  
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  It is alright.  Let us deal with this issue and then - unfortunately hon. Ben Wacha has gone out - he raised an important issue of why this body should be corporate; considering the functions it is given.  I would like raise that,  once we have disposed of this issue here. 
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  "There shall be a secretary to the national community services committee,  who shall be appointed by the Minister."  Should we leave it at that?  So who has moved that amendment?  I do not want to appear as if I am the one doing it!
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  I move that we get a new 11(4) to read;  "There shall be a secretary to the national community services committee,  who shall be appointed by the Minister."  I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)
	
	DR. NKUUHE:  Mr. Chairman,  I am ready.  I would like the amendment to read as follows;  "The committee shall have district committees,  whose composition and functions shall be as specified by the Minister,  in consultation with the national committee and the district executive committee."
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I therefore put the question that a new clause (4) be added to read in the terms as moved by the Minister.  Namely; "There shall be a secretary to the national community services committee who shall be appointed by the Minister." 
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 as amended,  agreed to.
 
The Title,  agreed to.
	 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 
	
(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding).
	
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Speaker, before I report, the Chairman seems to have an amendment on the memorandum,  and we missed that.  I am seeking guidance,  because he is lost.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  I do not see it in my document.
	
	MS. NAMUSOKE:  Mr. Speaker,  I do report that the House considered the Bill entitled The Community Service Bill, 1998 and passed it with some amendments. -(Interjection)-  Mr. Speaker, may I be protected from hon. Elly Karuhanga?
	
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Okay,  before we go to that,  do you have a point top make,  hon. Karuhanga? 
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes,  there is something that a colleague drew my attention to,  and which I think is important.  There is a mention of currency points in one of the punishments,  but we did not provide for the currency points in the Schedule.  I do not know whether this was an omission or we can use other laws we have passed for currency points to reflect this one.  We need a Schedule for the currency points,  and I think it would be an omission not to include it here.  I also want to say that I was not harassing the hon. Minister and I do not want to serve any punishment of community service.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Mr. chairman,  can you confirm the statement of the hon. Member that the currency point is not defined?  Can you confirm it so that we can do the needful?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Yes,  it is true,  it is not in the Schedule,  but the Committee presumes that we are going to take the normal currency points in other laws.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  You see,  we can only take that if it is in the interpretation law.  In which case it will apply to all other laws.  But if each law has its own definition,  I am afraid we have to do the same here.  It means we have to go back to the Committee Stage in order to put it right. 
	
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMMUNITY SERVICE BILL, 1998.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman,  can you give me half a minute to bring it out?  There is something that has to be introduced in the Act,  and then there has to be a Schedule.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  And the Chairman of the Committee might take this opportunity to do what he wanted to do too.
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I can indeed take this opportunity to refer to the Memorandum.  We are suggesting an amendment that B becomes A and A becomes B.  I beg to move,  Mr. Chairman.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  What the Committee Chairman is suggesting is that he wants to give prominence to the aspect of rehabilitating prisoners.  That should come before reduction of congestion in prisons.  Any objection to that?  
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  That is exactly what the Committee intends to do.  Thank you.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: The Memorandum as amended do stand part of the Bill?
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  amendment in clause 3;  to define the currency point as specified in the Schedule,  and then the Schedule itself.  Then we go to the end.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  So the currency point as defined in the Schedule is an amendment,  which has been introduced to clause 3?
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 3 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman,  I have an amendment as follows.  With the Schedule as the heading,  the currency point is equivalent to Shs.20,000. 
	Two;  the Minister -(Interjection)- we first finish one then go to the second one?
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: So your Schedule has got two items -(Interruption).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  It has got two clauses.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 1 is the currency point referred to in clause 3 of the Act.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  It is equivalent to Shs.20,000.
	
	MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think the hon. Member means one currency point.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  You are quite right.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Two,  the Minister -(Interruption)
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Well,  have you accepted his amendment?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes,  I accept the amendment.  
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: One currency point referred to in clause 1 of the Act is equivalent to Shs.20,000.  Chairman,  do you have a point?
	
	LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Yes,  I want some clarification.  Mr. Chairman,  is it really necessary to refer to clause 3?  I would say that one currency point is equivalent to Shs.20,000.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga,  the Chairman is wondering whether the expression referred to in the Act is necessary.  Why not say that one currency point is equivalent to Shs.20,000,  and stop there?  Would you accept that?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA: I do not have any problem with it for although it is superfluous,  it is for clarity so that lawyers do not look for where what such was referred to and all that,  when using the Act.  We want to make matters very easy for everybody reading the Act,  especially lay persons.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us get your final position.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA: I do not mind the amendment.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question on hon. Karuhanga's amendment in the newly introduced Schedule amendment number one;  definition of currency point,  as modified by the Chairman and hon. Ben Wacha.

(Question put and agreed to).
	 
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Two; "The Minister may by Statutory Instrument,  with the approval of the Cabinet,  amend the Schedule."

(Question put and agreed to).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Sorry,  I have just been advised that the power for the Minister to amend should be in the Act,  not in the Schedule.  So I am trying to look for a home for it in the Act.  I think the power for the Minister to do so must be in the main Act not in the Schedule.  So we could put it in section 4 of the Act.  Can I have a little more -(Interruption).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Let me suggest this.  All those advising hon. Karuhanga should put their heads together and come up with a written text.  Otherwise,  we are going to have as many advisors to the hon. Karuhanga as there are Members in the House,  and we shall have a big problem.  Hon. Okumu,  can you join the hon. Karuhanga?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am now ready together with all my advisers.  We have found a home for this amendment in section 12 -(Interruption).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you now revisiting your proposed amendment?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes.  I am proposing a new section 13,  so that the existing 13 becomes 14,  and the new 13 is where the home for this amendment is going to be.  "The Minister may,  by Statutory Instrument,  with the approval of Cabinet,  amend the Schedule."  That becomes 13,  and the existing 13 becomes 14.  So I am making two amendments.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Read your new 13.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  My new 13 is; "The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, with the approval of the Cabinet,  amend the Schedule."
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: No.  I want you to go through the entire scenario, go back one by one so that we -(Interruption).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  That becomes 13 and then 13 becomes 14, which is the transitional provision.  
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: And your Schedule reads?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  My Schedule has already been approved, because we have already approved one.  So we delete the one in the Schedule it and stays just as it is.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: No,  you have dismantled your amendment.  We will not go back, because you are revising it.  
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Then 13 will define a currency point  -(Interjection)- yes,  that is a Schedule.  It will define a currency point,  and we are proposing (1) and (2).  It should be, "a currency point is equivalent to Shs.20,000."  That is now clear.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Let us go one by one and pronounce ourselves on each.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  So we should start with the new 13.  "The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, with the approval of Cabinet, amend the Schedule."  
	
(Question put and agreed to).

	MR. RUZINDANA:  Aa!  No, no, no.  Mr. Chairman,  I want to raise the issue of the approval of Cabinet.  Why do we have to legislate procedures within Government?  A Minister will bring something,  will issue a Statutory Instrument and it is assumed that he will consult Cabinet in the normal functioning of Government.  Are we now legislating about what Ministers may do with the approval of Cabinet?  I do not think it is proper that we should put "with approval of Cabinet."
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member,  are you saying that as Parliament we are now deviating?  Because there are a number of legislations where that appears.  
	
	MR. RUZINDANA: Yes, there are a number of things that have come up like this.  We have also removed, "with the approval of Cabinet."  I have raised it before, but we do not need to legislate for normal working procedures within Government. If it was something outside the Executive, yes, but the Minister  -(Interjection).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Okay,  that will be corrected later,  because we have already pronounced ourselves on this.  
	
	MR. RUZINDANA:  But I had stood up,  Mr. Chairman!  
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Well,  hon. Karuhanga,  please.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  The Schedule.  The Schedule is a heading and then below the heading is one currency point -(Interruption).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: Before you proceed to the Schedule,  we have to  -(Interruption).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA: Oh,  the 13 should be 14.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN: There is a new 13.
	
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 13 as amended, agreed to.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Now the Schedule.  One currency point is equivalent to Shs.20,000.
	
(Question put and agreed to).

The Schedule as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
	      
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Chairman,  I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.
	
(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Speaker,  I do report that the House considered the Bill entitled The Community Service Bill, 1998 and passed it with some amendments.
	
MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House.
	
(Question put and agreed to).
	
BILLS
THIRD READING

THE COMMUNITY SERVICE BILL, 1998.
	
	THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke Sarah):  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Community Service Bill, 1998,  be read the Third Time and do pass.
	
    (Question put and agreed to).
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  this brings us to the end of the consideration of the Community Service Bill.  You have passed it into law.
	
MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE REFERENDUM REGULATIONS.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  the item gives the impression that the Chairman of the Committee would simply shoot up and present his report.  I however think that it would be appropriate if the Minister responsible introduces the subject before the Chairman of the Committee presents his report.  Does any one have information on the whereabouts of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs?
	
	PROF. RUGUMAYO:  Mr. Speaker,  the hon. Minister of Justice informed when he was stepping out that he would be back in good time for the presentation of this report.  He did not expect that you will have to introduce the report first.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  I  do not blame him for that but even then,  I expect him to be around to listen to the report of the Chairman of his Committee.
	
	MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker,  these are Government regulations,  they are not Committee regulations.  It is therefore important that the Minister brings it before the House,  as he did do before, stress what he wants to and then the Committee can comment on whatever he has presented to the House.
	                   
(The House was adjourned at 4.05 p.m for twenty minutes).

(On resumption, the Speaker presiding_).
	
MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE REFERENDUM REGULATIONS.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister,  I apologise for the way in which you have been misled by the order paper.  I have no doubt it made you think that this item will be introduced by the Chairman.  We are sorry for that mistake.  Otherwise,  I give you the Floor.
	
	THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE & CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mayanja Nkangi):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  I apologise for keeping you waiting.  I was actually misled by the way the order paper was prepared.  
	
	Under section 30 of the Referendum and other Provisions Act, 1999,  this Parliament made regulations for various referenda,  particularly for the one coming this year around July.  In that section, "the Minister may,  with the approval of Parliament,  make regulations for the effective implementation of the provisions of the Act."  To that end,  these regulations have been submitted to Members of Parliament.  We have also had consultations with those who are going to implement this Act, particularly the Electoral Commission,  and so we have gone through these regulations.  The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has also discussed them with us,  and I concur with their report.  Sir,  I request that you ask the Chairman to deliver his report to Parliament.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo):  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Section 30(1) of the Referendum and other Provisions Act,  1999 provides that; "The Minister may,  with the approval of Parliament,  by Statutory Instrument,  make regulations as may be expedient for carrying into effect the provisions of this Act."  It is from the above provision that these regulations have been made,  and shall apply in relation to the contract of any referendum for the change of political system, under Article 271 of the Constitution of Uganda.  The Committee recommends that the regulations be approved,  but has minor amendments to be moved at a later stage.  I beg to report.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  the Minister has moved his motion for adoption of the Referendum Regulations,  and you have heard the report of the Committee that handled the regulations.  If you want to say something, comment, make an observation, ask for clarification,  the matter is now open for discussion.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI KEN (Lubaga South, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  My comments will be in form of clarification.  I would like to begin by expressing concern about the way the phenomenon of the Referendum has been dominated by the Electoral Commission.  It is on record that from 1992 to 1994,  the Odoki Commission took trouble to go around the 700 Gombololas of Uganda,  with questionnaires intended to cause public awareness among the population.  Unfortunately in the process of doing so there were several questions that distorted the Constitution making process.  These were especially questions on the political systems,  on the Multi-party system and on the kingdoms.  I put the issue to the Commissioners in several fora,  and they apologised to me at one occasion.  They said, 'but there were not too many questionnaires distorted,  only a few!'
	
	MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker,  I was a Commissioner on the Uganda Constitutional Commission.  I have never been approached by hon. Lukyamuzi in any capacity and therefore have never apologised to him for the very good job done by that distinguished Commission.  Is he therefore in order to mislead this honourable House by those remarks?  Is here in order?
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Well,  if indeed it is untrue that the Commission interacted with hon. Lukyamuzi to the extent of accepting certain faults and to apologise,  then it is a very serious statement.  If nothing of the sort happened,  then the hon. Member is not in order.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, with your permission, let me elaborate.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  I beg your pardon.  I did not hear you.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Would you accept that I elaborate before you commit me?
	
	THE SPEAKER:  The hon. Minister has said she was a Member of the Commission but has never been approached by you, let alone apologise on behalf of the Commission.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker,  she was not an only Commissioner,  there were several.  So for her to assume that because she was not approached everybody else was not,  is wrong in law.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Yes.  That is why I am saying that if what you say is true,   she could be a witness.  You said it was the Commission,  right?  And I am saying,  if it is true that nothing of the sort happened,  then it is a very serious statement and it would amount to your being out of order.  You should therefore examine your conscience.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I particularly brought up two case points of questionnaires,  one on the kingdoms and the other one on political parties.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi let us talk about the point of order.  What do you say about it?
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  The particular Commissioner who accepted that there was distortion of some of the questionnaires was none other than Reverend Father John Mary Waliggo.  I have got data to that effect.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  That is one person,  is it not? But you said, 'the Commission apologised.'  Did the Commission apologise or did he apologise on behalf of the Commission?
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  This is exactly what he said. "Hon. Lukyamuzi,  we accept some mistakes were made,  but the questions were not too many.  So one or two questions should not make the totality of questions faulty."  
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi,  you are actually treading on very dangerous ground.  That is because the Reverend is not here to either confirm or disagree with you.  And if he comes to know that that is how you reported him,  I do not know what he will say.  I would rather you get away from that and continue with the debate.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  There is no reason why I should withdraw,  but let me concentrate on the crux of the matter.  
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Okay proceed.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  What I was essentially saying is that the Electoral Commission recently issued booklets like the one I am holding.  It contains questions and answers.  These are matters of public concern,  which will be circulated all over Uganda.  It is assumed that the decision whether one will participate in the Referendum or vote for a side will partly depend on literature of this kind.  I have noted two questions here in this booklet,  which in my view do not assist the voter.  One such question is on the difference between a referendum and a common general election.  As a representative of the people and noting that I have people in Lubaga South who will vote,  when I see the answer given I get worried.  The question is, "what is the difference between a general election and a referendum?"  The answer is, "in a general election people vote on candidates,  in a referendum they vote on issues."  
	
	Let anybody tell me the circumstances under which people can vote for "X" when he cannot raise any issue.  Can one just stand in front of you and say, 'I am so and so, I am dark, I am tall, I am good looking, I am married,'  and you vote on him?  Is that criteria enough,  seriously?  Mr. Speaker,  the point I want to make is that the framing of these questions should not have been left solely in the hands of the Electoral Commission.  A number of questions are answered in a very short sighted way,  and this is a shame!  It does not help the voters.  These are innocent voters,  they do not have knowledge on a number of issues.  When they read these booklets they are reading gospel truth.  How do we assist them? 
	
	In the circumstances,  as a student of Government,  where I see deliberate distortion by someone attempting to define a political system,  I cannot simply keep quiet.  I do not want to see people being bulldozed in the way they are.  So I am disappointed because the reaction of the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was so brief.  It did not even bother to re-examine literature like that I have talked about.  And as representatives of the people,  that Committee is not helping people.
	
	There is another question that - and this is going to be the final observation - "in case the Movement wins,  what happens next?"  The answer is,  "we will have a Movement Government."  There is no alternative scenario to say provide for the Parties' win.  So the Parties' side is killed in dark silence,  and nobody has optimism at all about it ever winning.  To me that is a shame,  it is bad,  it is unfair,  it is injustice.  
	
	Finally,  Mr. Speaker -(Interruption). 
	
	MR. KARUHANGA: I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, Mr. Speaker,  that if the Multi-partyists win,  they will form a Multi-party Government.  That would be the next one.  If he is not aware of that yet he has been advocating for Multi-partyism,  I am surprised,  because that is the whole purpose of this Referendum.  Thank you.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker,  apparently hon. Elly Karuhanga was not attending to what I was saying.  My argument was;  is what he is saying in the pamphlet?  He is only getting it out of his own head,  but the ordinary villager in Masaka cannot read it.  I would like to submit that this is bad,  this is a distortion of facts and it is bias.  If one read this document and is fair enough to make assessment of issues,  the view developed would be that there is a hidden agenda here.  This is intended to keep those who are likely to vote for the Parties in the dark,  so that they do not see the light.  In the process of doing so,  the Movement will win.  
	
	I put it to Government that I am not happy about this kind of arrangement, because the ordinary people in the village should know that there is a game.  If it is soccer and Cameroon is playing against Tunisia,  give facilities to the supporters of Tunisia in the same way you give them to supporters of Cameroon.  But here you are giving all the facilities to the supporters of Tunisia;  that is unfair!  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Okumu-Ringa do you want to contribute?
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes. 
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Okay, you proceed.
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the motion that Statutory Instruments for the Referendum Regulations, 2000,  which has been presented by the hon. Minister and also the Chairman of the Committee, be considered and passed expeditiously.  
	
	When you look at the provisions of the Constitution and the provisions within the Referendum Act,  the referendum should be held during the month of June,  and in any case not later than the 2nd of July of this year.  If one looks at the processes,  it is important that this regulation be passed so that it guides all the sides that will participate accordingly.  It is also important that the regulation once passed be expeditiously gazetted,  and as many copies as possible provided to the players.
	
	Allow me, Sir, to look at the provision for the ballot paper.  We may have to later reconsider issues such as the arrangement of the symbols,  on page 14.  The symbols should be arranged,  because we are not voting individuals but an issue.  That being the case,  the symbols that will be adopted by the Movement side,  the Multi-party side and any other side,  all these are issues that should be looked at critically.  I would have been happier if we discussed the regulations when the symbols are already in place.  It should have been very appropriate for page 14.  However,  perhaps the Minister will tell us when these symbols will be adopted.  It is important because the majority of the people who are going to vote are illiterate.  They will only be able to tell the difference among the issues they are voting on,  by using symbols.  These would have been availed to them now.  And the time before us is quite short.  I hope the Minister will comment on that.
	
	My last point is on facilitation,  which is provided for on page three of the regulations.  I am indeed happy that this has been well provided for,  for all sides that will take part in the  Referendum.  But judging by what is on the ground,  Parliament did not provide enough resources to the Electoral Commission to give support to the sides.  When you look at the appropriation for the Commission,  and what should go to the sides to manage all processes on the ground,  the money is very little.  Perhaps the Minister may comment on that aspect too.  I am saying so because the budgetary proposal has provided a lump sum for the Electoral Commission.  But the Commission must use the money to procure ballot papers,  provide civic education,  provide all the logistic requirements to ensure that the process is carried out.  This goes to the day of polling,  the counting of votes and the collection of the ballot boxes.  The money is not adequate!
	
	Otherwise I support this motion and would like to urge my colleagues to expeditiously look at it and pass it so that we have these regulations on the ground soon.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I stand to support this motion.  I am pleased especially to see that section 11 of the Political System's Act is being implemented by the Minister.  I think that for clarity,  it is important to note that normally when we give powers to the Minister to pass regulations, it is rare for Parliament to ask the Minister to bring those regulations to Parliament to look at.  We leave Cabinet and the Minister to exercise his powers,  and to put the Act into operation by passing regulations within that Act.  But this Parliament was careful.  We said, 'no, we want to see those regulations.'  And we do not want to simply see,  we want to approve them,  because this is a very important piece of legislation.  
	
	It is in the interests of the House to feel very comfortable with every stage of the process of the Referendum.  I therefore thank the Minister for bringing them,  and I congratulate him upon the Committee's recommendation of all the regulations he brought;  with only one amendment.  I think this is a great achievement,  and I hope that those who have been attacking the Minister in the press will reconsider their position on that.  This is a vote of confidence in the Minister.  
	
	There is one point I would like to stress.  It is also in the regulations that I have seen with the Minister.  I would like to read it out,  for emphasis.  "Every person shall enjoy complete and unhindered freedom of expression and information in the exercise of the rights to canvass under these regulations."  And on sides;  "A side shall,  alone or in common with others,  enjoy complete and unhindered freedom of peaceful assembly in the canvassing in a Referendum."  This is to me an expression of the freedom that is available during the debate for this Referendum.
  
	I have observed something that is a little awesome,  if I can say.  I have followed the debates that are going on.  There was recently a debate where Members of Parliament were involved,  at Makerere.  One of the Members stood up and literary urged the population to go to the bush and bring turmoil,  threatening violence,  urging us to use the gun.  With all the power that is available,  the people have unhindered freedom of expression and information in the exercise of the right to canvass under the regulation, -(Interruption).
	
	CAPT. MUKULA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker and I thank hon. Karuhanga for giving.  First of all I would like to say that I was in Makerere and I was one of the Members of Parliament who were invited by the Student's Guild to articulate critical issues on the way forward for this country.  It is true that one of our colleagues did state very clearly that he was bordering on agitation,  urging the students to rise up against this Government.  He called on the students to take up arms and said that nobody has the monopoly of gun powder, or the gun for that matter.  I would like to say,  in support of hon. Karuhanga's mission,  that it is dangerous for hon. Members in this House to go out there and urge for an uprising against a constitutionally elected Government. (Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_).
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I know my Brother Lukyamuzi has information he probably is interested in passing on to me.  It is better if I let him give it to me.  But my main point on this is that unhindered freedom should be explained to the population; it must be subject to the law.  People who are taking the law into their hands,  under the pretext that this Parliament has given unhindered freedom of expression to say anything one wants; however contrary to the law it might be,  is something I would like the civic educators -(Interruption).
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker,  and I am much obliged to the speaker holding the Floor.  Noting that I was one of the speakers in Makerere on that occasion;  and that the speaker did mention that a number of Members of Parliament were there;  and he said one of the Members urged the students to go to the bush and fight the Government;  as a representative of the people,  I am left in space.  Due to that statement,  one may assume that it is probably Ken Lukyamuzi who said that.  Therefore the point of order I am making is,  is it in order for hon. Karuhanga to say things of that magnitude without substantiation?  Could he tell us who said it? -(Mr. Karuhanga rose_).
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Karuhanga,  please.
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker,  I had earlier on informed you,  before I gave hon. Lukyamuzi the floor, that what he actually had was information.  Even his point of order is really information.  But since hon. Lukyamuzi was in that audience and he has already confessed to not being party to that speech;  he has also agreed that there are other Members of Parliament who were there,  he is best placed to name the people who were agitating students to carry guns than I am.  
	
	Since another hon. Member,  who was present,  has confirmed the proceedings,  I would like to say that the report did not mention hon. Lukyamuzi as the one I named.  He is not the one who incited people to take up arms.  I would like to congratulate him upon resisting the use of that type of language,  which is unlawful.  I would like to encourage him to canvass and have his freedom of speech,  and remain within the ambit of the law.
	
	MR. WACHA:  Thank you very much,  Mr. Speaker.  I am glad that hon. Karuhanga is dwelling on part nine of these regulations.  There is also a section therein,  which talks about unhindered freedom of peaceful assembly.  There was a report over the weekend of Police action in Bushenyi,  on persons who were carrying out debates on the Referendum.  Taking into account this unhindered freedom of peaceful assembly talked about in this paragraph,  does hon. Karuhanga still agree with that aspect of the regulations?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Hon. Wacha has been accurately quoted a number of times by the press.  But he has also been a victim of press reports that were not so accurate.  Therefore,  every time you get information from the press,  you either take it with a pinch of salt or you research it.  I hope the information we are getting from Bushenyi is one of those pieces of reporting that are not accurate.  But if it is accurate,  then it is unfortunate.  Then people should take keen interest in it, and the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs,  who is sitting here and listening,  should take this information seriously.  He should arrest the situation before it gets out of hand, and ensure that the Police is acting within the powers that we spelt out in the Act, and in the regulations.  (Applause).  
	
	PROF. RUGUMAYO:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This matter has been brought to my attention,  and we have instituted investigations,  to find out the veracity of the reports.  Definitely as a Ministry we abide by the provisions of these regulations.  I thank you.

	MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  There is facilitation.  I am not very conversant with how the money is coming into Uganda to carry out this exercise.  I have recently been following a problem in Germany,  and during the Constituent Assembly,  this matter was of great concern to me.  We debated this matter of the financing of politics by foreigners,  but we stopped short of doing what the Germans did.  The Germans are embarrassed that some people involved in mafia activities were using the money to pay for political party programmes.  These people won elections and ruled using funds they were receiving from illegal activities.  I therefore do not know whether the Minister is comfortable with this provision on facilitation.  I would like to be educated about how the finances of these sides are going to be trickling into our country. 
	
	With those few comments,  I want to congratulate the Committee and the Minister upon coming up with these regulations.  It now appears to me that the exercise of the Referendum is well on the way to what I would describe as a fair and plain playing field.  Thank you.
	
	THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I must say I am utterly flabbergasted by what hon. Lukyamuzi has to say about what he calls domination of the arrangements for election process of the Referendum.  First,  it is the constitutional duty,  the binding duty of the Commission, to implement laws relating to elections or the referendum.  Therefore the Electoral Commission is in order.  
	
	Second,  the hon. Lukyamuzi purports to be in position to weigh what the voter can or cannot learn from the little pamphlets that the Electoral Commission has issued.  For the benefit of the NGOs and that of the people,  I am asking the question,  are these crocodile tears that the hon. Member is shedding?  He is on record for having said, 'let us boycott the referendum.'  Who is he now trying to take care of?  The best way for him to care for these people is to go out and canvass -(Applause)-(Mr. Lukyamuzi rose_).  I am sorry I am not going to sit down.  I find it very, very difficult to understand.  If you want to understand the people's problems,  talk to them.  But on the one hand the hon. Member does not talk to them,  on the other he comes to Parliament and says, 'the Electoral Commission does not even attempt to help people understand!'  
	
	Having said that,  Sir,  let us now move to this issue of freedom of speech.  The hon. Chairman has actually said that in according to rule 8,  the exercise should be done subject to the law of this country.  There should be no defamation,  no insult,  no treason, nothing.  This is what the regulations provide.  However,  hon. Karuhanga has referred to an incident that was reported in the press twice,  that an hon. Member of Parliament, a citizen of this country,  went to Makerere and in no certain terms asked the students listening to him,  to go to the bush.  The hon. Mike Mukula was there,  I take his word for as an hon. gentlemen,  he has confirmed this.  I have no reason to doubt the press reports either.  
	
	The question is this;  the people of this country are asked in the Constitution to choose how they want to be governed.  But someone says to them, 'because you have been asked to choose, fight.'  You go a restaurant,  you are given a menu,  and instead someone tells you, 'do not answer the waiter,  hit him.'  Does that make sense?  If the people of this country are going to go to the bush to fight and kill each other because they are being asked to choose,  it is a shame.  You are driving in a taxi,  you get to a road junction and you ask passengers, 'which way now,' and they do not reply!  This is one of the ways you get dictatorships in this country.  We are asking the people, 'please, tell us.'  Meanwhile someone is saying, 'do not answer.'  Someone else is saying, 'boycott.'  The other is saying, 'fight it out!'  
	
	We have let enough blood in this country.  Since 1966,  I dare say 1964,  a gyration of wars has taken place.  It takes someone to have a child,  train this person to become a doctor for 24 years probably and then it takes just a minute to destroy this person!  Here we are being called upon to fight and kill each other, because we are being asked to answer a question?  I find that -(Interruption). 
	
	MR. WACHA:  Point of clarification.
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I am going to let you clarify on it.
	
	MR. WACHA:  I want you to clarify something.
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I find that not quite easy to understand.
	
	MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker,  the Minister has said,  and I agree with him,  that this freedom of speech is subject to the law of this country.  If everything we are saying in respect to the Referendum debate is subject to the law of this country,  why are we quarrelling about a statement that could be handled by the law?  What is the point of first discussing it here?  Why should we even talk about it?  If it is against the law,  the law will take care of it.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  I thank the Minister for giving way.  Mr. Speaker,  we should be serious.  I am a representative of the people;  whether or not I am not going to participate in the Referendum,  there are those I represent that will participate.  So for me to ask a question regarding the regulations is in order,  because I am representing their interests here.  The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should be serious about what he is talking about.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  What is the point of contention?  Hon. Lukyamuzi, I want to know the point of contention you are talking about.
	
	MR. LUKYAMUZI:  The clarification I am seeking is,  noting that I am a representative of the people;  whether or not I am not going to participate is not the issue.  Is it not prudent that I articulate the interests of the people I represent of Lubaga South,  which I was doing exactly?
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister,  proceed.
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  You have heard hon. Ben Wacha.  He is saying that since what he said is subject to the law of this country;  and since what was said possibly amounts to treason or incitement,  why does the Minister talk about it here?  That is his question.  I am talking about it here because the issue has been raised.  I am talking about it here because it is a matter of public interest.  This is why I am talking about it.  
	
	Hon. Lukyamuzi is saying, 'I represent some people so I must talk for them.'  The very people he is representing,  he has already told them en masse, 'do not participate.'  Who is he now trying to help?  I represent my own people of Kalungu,  he is not talking for them.  His own people of Lubaga south,  he already said to them,  'do not participate.'  Where is your interest in this?  
	
	Hon. Okumu-Ringa raised an issue of the ballot papers.  He said that symbols should be in place as Parliament discusses these regulations.  Possibly there might be something that necessitates a comment.  I say that in the nature of things,  yes,  that should have been the case.  But we cannot do this because the symbols need all research possible,  before they are declared or identified.  Two sides re known already:  the Movement side and the Multi-party side. One of these sides,  I have been informed by the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, has already identified its symbol.   That is the Movement side.  The other one has not yet;  and this Parliament may live to see additional sides.  
	
	For the above reason,  we have come for a review of regulations  - without the symbols - because time is against us.  We would like at this point to at least get the regulations out of the way,  as the other systems get approved by this Parliament.  They will become identified sides and they too will be called upon to identify their symbols.  But I dare say here that symbols could affect the vote.  For instance in 1961,  the Democratic Party had a hoe.  Then someone said, 'they have a hoe!  They are going to burry you alive.'  So for now,  I beg hon. Patrick Okumu-Ringa to bear with us,  because time is of essence.  As soon as regulations have been passed by Parliament,  we shall have them gazetted for everybody to know.  
	
	Hon. Karuhanga is worried about the sources of funding.  So are we.  The Committee of Parliament considered this matter and the objection was against excluding sources of funding yet the Bill itself does not have a section on that.  In other words,  where do you derive the authority for having such a regulation?  Hon. Ogalo will have to say something about it.  But I know that what is happening in Germany is worrying the Germans,  and it could equally worry us,  if it did happen here.  But I am hoping that the sources will be okay so that the funding of the sides is done by funds from our budget.  
	
	Inadequate funding is a source of concern.  Yes,  they are inadequate.  Members of Parliament know this,  because they passed the inadequate funds.  They did this because the budget was tight.  But the Chairman of the Electoral Commission has applied for additional funding from the hon. Minister of Finance.  We wait to see whether the additional funds will be provided, Sir.  I beg to move.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  the Minister has responded to issues that you raised in the course of your contributions.  I do not know whether the Chairperson of the Committee would like to say something too.  I however note some amendments,  which the Committee proposed and would like to guide us through.  I am in your hands;  should the Chairman take us through these amendments before the question on the adoption of the report is put?  Because this is not a Bill,  and we do not go into the committee stage.  Can we hear from the Chairperson?
	
	MR. OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  I propose that we go through the amendments proposed by the Committee,  as the Minister has ably answered all the issues that were raised by Members on the Floor.  
	The first amendment is on regulation 8.  The Committee proposes an amendment to add at the end of that paragraph the following sentence;  "Subject to the prevailing law in the country governing freedom of expression and information."  The justification for this is that there are laws in Uganda governing the freedom of expression and information,  which should be adhered to even during the period of electioneering.  This matter has also been commented about by hon. Karuhanga and the Minister.  Mr. Speaker,  I beg to move that this regulation be amended accordingly.
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	MR. OGALO:  The next amendment proposed by the Committee is in regulation 11(2),  and this is to add the words "if any", between "Chairperson" and "of a meeting";  appearing in the first line.  The justification for this,  Mr. Speaker,  is that for the purpose of canvassing,  a meeting may take place without a chairman.  People may go out to canvass,  but they do not need to elect a chairperson before they canvass.  I beg to move that this regulation be amended accordingly. 

(Question put and agreed to)
	
	MR. OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  the Committee proposes an amendment in regulation 12(3)(b),  to delete the words "whether the assistance was obtained before or after the coming into force of this regulation."  The justification for this is that restrictions contained in the regulation should not be retrospective.  They are punishable.  If the regulations are to be retrospective,  it means punishing someone who acted without knowing it was an offence.  I beg to move that that deletion be effected. 
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	MR. BAKU:  Mr. Speaker,  when I read this regulation,  the emphasis is not on receipt of the assistance but on employing the assistance for purposes of canvassing for a side.  The reference to whether the assistance was obtained before or after coming into force of these regulations means that even if you received assistance after the passing of these regulations,  you are not supposed to employ it for purposes of canvassing.  That is what the emphasis is on;  not on the receiving.  So I do not see it as retrospective legislation;  we are only talking of preventing the use of that assistance for canvassing.  
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Minister,  is that the import of that regulation?  Are you outlawing the application of monies received from outside?  Or are you allowing receipt of this money and applying it for canvassing provided you are not punishing someone for doing something that was not illegal before this regulation came into force?
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, 12(a) forbids employment of funds from certain sources.  12(b) says; "an agent shall not employ,  for the purposes of any side's canvassing, any financial or other assistance from any Government institution, body or person described in paragraph (a)."  But paragraph (a) does describe these bodies.  When you add, "whether that assistance was obtained before or after the coming into force of these regulations," that part of it if passed would be unconstitutional. Our Constitution forbids legislating retrospectively.  That is the important thing. 
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman,  I do not see this provision as retrospective,  at all.  It derives its power from (a),  and refers to money that is brought into our country.  This money could endanger the security of Uganda; it comes from foreign Governments,  institutions or persons who have demonstrated the intention to endanger the State of Uganda.  If  you received this money last year and you have been sitting on it,  this Act is saying, 'do not use that money,  it is a danger.'  If we are at war for example with Sudan and we have not finished our arrangements with them,  and you are sitting on funds from Bashir or Tourabi;  we are saying, 'do not utilise those funds for purposes of canvassing for elections.'
	
	In (b) we go ahead and ask you to show the accountability.  So when we find that this money,  which you received before these regulations were passed,  is being used, it is not retrospective. I think that is the correct interpretation.  Therefore I do not support the motion by the Committee to delete this.  In fact,  I oppose it vehemently.  And it goes back to the contribution I made earlier on the substantive motion;  about the level of embarrassment the Germans have found themselves in.  
	
	And it is not only Germany,  but it is a new phenomenon everywhere.  Even President Clinton faced the same,  the enquiry has just ended.  I do not know whether he has been absolved by his Attorney General.  It is a very serious problem,  and we should not close our eyes to it.  These decisions we are taking are Ugandan based ones.  The level of influence,  by those interested in our decision making,  should be as much as possible minimised.  So I call upon the Chairman to withdraw his amendment,  in the interest of good governance and a good referendum.
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker,  the tribe of lawyers is a very interesting one.  You see, 12(3)(a) prohibits obtaining, but obtaining when?  The obtaining has been made illegal,  after the regulations have been passed.  3(b) however says that even if you received the funds yesterday, before the passing of the regulations,  you will still not use it.  But how can that be when you already said that obtaining is not illegal?  If you seek to bring it and say that those funds will not be used,  you are therefore legislating retrospectively.  Unless hon. Members get a way of changing the Constitution now,  this cannot be passed. I however do not advise changing the Constitution,  because of time.  I am saying that the hon. Ogalo is right.  We should not legislate retrospectively.  The obtain in (b) is retrospective and therefore not possible.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Karuhanga,  I am persuaded by the Minister's argument.  What about you?
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, most of the laws that we make are geared towards stopping a certain matter.  When the Minister says the word 'obtain' is meant for after the regulations have been passed,  what does he mean?  Because in the Act those words are there,  and we have passed the Act already.  The regulations are only implementing the Act;  the law was passed sometime ago,  in 1999.  So I still have problems in finding out the exact time of demarcation.  And to me,  we are not stopping one from obtaining these funds.  We are stopping you from employing those funds,  after the Act.  If you had money,  which you did not get in national interest,  do not use it for this purpose.  It is therefore not retrospective.  But since the Speaker is persuaded,  I will just -(Interruption).
	
	THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, no,  I am not part of it. 
	
	MR. KARUHANGA:  We are not challenging the obtaining of money before;  we are challenging the employment of it after.  Those funds can go and do something else.  They can put up a church,  they can put up a mosque,  they can construct a road;  but to employ them on the referendum we say, 'no.  This Parliament says no.'  
	
	MR. OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  hon. Karuhanga referred to us as having made such a provision in the Referendum and Other Provision's Act.  With due respect,  I do not see where we did so in this Act.  
	
	Secondly,  the question here is not whether you can make a law retrospectively.  It is whether you can punish somebody for doing an act that was not an offence at the time he did it,  that is all.  That is why we are moving this amendment.  I invite hon. Members to go with our amendment,  because it is based on a solid principle of law;  that you cannot make retrospective laws, and punish an act that was not an offence at the time it was done.
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	MR. OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  the next amendment we propose is in regulation 12(7).  It is simply to draft it to read; "A person who contravenes sub regulation (3); or (b) who refuses or neglects without lawful excuse, to produce any record or information demanded;  (c) for the purpose of sub regulations (5) or (6),  makes a statement which he knows to be false in any material particular,  commits an offence."  It is simply drafting it again,  and it does not have any new import.  I beg to move.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Chairman,  can you put my mind to rest before I do the needful.  My text reads as follows; "A person who (a) contravenes sub regulation (3); or who..."  I have a problem with that "who".  If you are talking of drafting it again,  does yours also have that "who"?
	
	MR. OGALO:  It should not be there, Mr. Speaker.  I get your point.
	
	THE SPEAKER: I the "who" should not be there,  then you are also moving -(Interruption).
	
	MR. OGALO:  Obliged,  Mr. Speaker,  I also move that "who" be deleted.
	
	THE SPEAKER: The (c) I have reads; "for purposes of sub regulation (5) or (6),  makes a statement that she or he knows to be false in any material particular,  commits an offence...", as one paragraph.  Do you not think the expression "commits an offence" covers the entire thing?  In other words, it should not be part of (c); it is part of (a),(b) and (c).
	
	MR. OGALO:  Yes,  the offence is created against all of them.  The way it is framed there appears as if it is in respect of (c). So it should come down to cover all of them. Obliged, Mr. Speaker.
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE SPEAKER:  You have thus completed the amendment to the draft regulations as moved by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs,  I now -(Interruption).
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I seek clarification on item 13,  which refers to the several forms under the Schedule.  My concern is about the form on page 14.  Would this require amendment at the time when symbols will be introduced,  how will this be treated?  Thank you.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Did you say page 14?
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Yes, Mr. Speaker.  And my clarification is basically with regard to item 13 page 4,  which refers to forms in the Schedules.  They will require amendment when the symbols get here.  I am seeking clarification from either the Minister or the Chairperson as how we shall treat this particular page.  Thank you.
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker, this form is simplistic.  You see that in the first column they put the Movement,  and in the second the Multi-parties.  Suppose we got a cock for the Movement symbol and we put it here for the voter to see -(Interruption).
	
	THE SPEAKER: You put it below the word Movement?
	
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Precisely,  but then the rule will be symbols.  Perhaps the Multi-partists have got a sheep,  they will put it there too.  And suppose there are three others,  each one is going to have its own symbol.  So they will just expand the column below the parties,  there is nothing important about that.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Member,  are you satisfied?  
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes,  Mr. Speaker.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question to the motion of the Minister,  that this House do pass the Referendum Regulations Bill, 2000.
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE SPEAKER: The regulations that the Minister made have now been passed.  That concludes item nine on our order paper.
	
MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON OTHER POLITICAL SYSTEMS (VERIFICATION AND APPROVAL) REGULATIONS, 2000.
	
	THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi Joash):  Mr. Speaker and hon. Members,  the regulations that I bring you to approve are being submitted to you,  by virtue of section 11 of the Other Political Systems.  Last year we passed the Other Political Systems Act to cater for other systems than the Multi-party and the Movement.  Here we want regulations to guide the Electoral Commission,  all the people and particularly those who want to submit other systems for Parliament's consideration,  to know what to do.  This is why for instance we ask for particulars of supporters, full name, vote number, age, and date of submission.
	
	But we have a problem with this.  We had hoped that Parliament would re-assemble sooner than it did,  and had given the 29th of February as the cut off date.  In other words,  after that date,  no other system should submit its candidature for the June/July Referendum,  to the Electoral Commission for purposes of approval by Parliament.  We are proposing a cut off date because someone checky might come a week before the Referendum day and say, 'I have got another system;  under the Constitution you cannot stop me.'  Unless we legally do something about this sort of thing,  the whole thing could be messed up.  I therefore propose that Parliament agrees to have a cut off day.
	
	Today is however the 22nd day.  If you say the deadline should be the 29th,  that is only 8 days,  a rather short time.  I am proposing,  and the Chairman has agreed,  that we extend this to the 7th of March.  Give them 14 days to be able to submit.  There are already about seven systems that have already submitted to the Chairman of Electoral Commission.  I think Parliament has got a lot of work to do.  
	
	The aim of going through a verification sieve by the Commission was for them to inform the Minister and then the Minister brings the whole list here for Parliament to decide.  Then Parliament will vote on the different systems.  If none of them qualifies,  that is the end of the matter.  Sir,  I beg to move.
	
	THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo):  Mr. Speaker,  the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs scrutinised the Other Political Systems (Verification and Approval) Regulations, 2000,  which were drafted in accordance with section 11 of Other Political Systems Act.  Section 11 states, "A Minister may,  with the approval of Parliament,  make regulations for giving full effect of this Act, and in particular for prescribing anything required or authorised by this Act to be prescribed."  
	
	The Committee recommends that the regulations be approved, with one amendment,  which the Minister has referred to.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA PATRICK (Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you,  Mr. Speaker.  I support the motion for a Statutory Instruments for the Other Political Systems (Verification and Approval) Regulations.  These regulations should have been in this House much earlier,  to give time to those who are to comply with the constitutional provision of Article 69(2)(c),  which provides for any other political system.  And having passed that law,  which provides for any other political system,  the regulations should have been in place much earlier.  
	
	My concern is the time frame being imposed on those who should have had an opportunity to earlier exercise their rights.  If we pass these regulations today the 22nd of February,  we technically have seven days to the end of February.  The amendment proposed by the Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs and seconded by the Chairperson of the Committee,  of the 7th March,  gives 14 days.  But these regulations will not be published tonight,  to allow the 14 days to be effective.  Perhaps the Minister may wish to explain to the House the reasons for this deadline,  but the time frame should be pushed up to the 14th of March.  This will allow for the next seven days,  for the publication, gazetting and making of these copies available.  That way we will be seen to be transparent and not be pushed against the wall due to lack of time.  Unless the Minister can justify the 7th of March,  I would like to later on be permitted to move an amendment for the period to be extended to the 14th of March.  This will give enough time to people to exercise their democratic and constitutional rights.
	
	My last point is that as these regulations become a public document,  it will be good to make them understood to everyone.  In the countryside,  people will find it difficult to understand what these other sides could be,  and what rules there are to govern them.  The Other Political Systems law should also be given wide publicity,  so that at the end of it all people are informed and are able to make judgement on political systems appropriately.  I thank you,  Mr. Speaker. 
	 
	MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Speaker,  I am indebted to hon. Okumu-Ringa for his very incisive arguments.  I would however like to say that this Constitution has been in place since 1995.  In a sense it has been a public document,  everybody is supposed to have known its contents.  So the one who wanted to have other systems had about two to three years to think about it.  
	
	Having said that, and because someone might say the Minister is being fictious,  let me say this.  These regulations should have been here before,  but Parliament was on recess.  Parliament could have been called back earlier,  but there was no money for that.  I knew this.  This is why the regulations have come at this time.  
	
	Next,  why not the 14th of March as the deadline?  I urge for the 7th because people already know that a third system or any other,  was on the cards.  
	
	Secondly,  other people have been awakened to submit their systems.  Already seven of them are with the Commission.
	
	The other reason is that if you go on pushing the time ahead towards June,  that means extra time for everything else.  When you submit a system for example,  you have to go back and look for a thousand voter signatures.  Then you come back to the Commission,  then the Commission verifies the system,  then the Commission goes to the Minister,  the Minister comes here.  Parliament will also need time to debate the system.  So I am thinking that since the citizens have been given enough time, enough notice,  the 7th would be okay.  But of course as always,  let Parliament decide on it finally.
	
	MR. WANDERA OGALO:  Mr. Speaker,  the proposed amendment of the Committee to regulation 5 is to the effect that we draft it again to read; "The signatures of the registered voters as required by section 6 of the Act shall,  for the purposes of the referendum,  under Article 271 of the Constitution,  be submitted on the forms provided by the Commission,  not later than midnight of the 7th March,  the year 2000."  
	
	The justification for this is that,  we took into account the reason that the Minister has just advanced. Since the process for verifying political systems involves very many other institutions, if we put it very far ahead, we may be caught up. We may reach the referendum time before Parliament has approved or disapproved proposed political systems, which have been submitted here for determination. That is why,  Mr. Speaker,  we proposed the 7th of March,  the year 2000.  I beg to move.
	
	THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okumu-Ringa, I heard you say earlier on you intended to move a formal amendment in light of what the Minister has urged for.  Do you still intend to do so or is that wise counsel enough?
	
	MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  In submission,  I requested for justification for the time frame given.  Having heard from the Minister and the Chairman of the Committee,  I do not need to move that amendment.  I concede,  Mr. Speaker.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  I now put the question.
	
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members,  that was the lonesome amendment on these regulations,  as introduced by the Minister.  I wish to now put the question to the Minister's motion;  namely that Parliament approves the Statutory Instrument for the Other Political Systems (Verification and Approval) Regulations, 2000.  
	                  
(Question put and agreed to)
	
	THE SPEAKER: That concludes consideration of the Statutory Instrument that the Minister has tabled, and which Parliament has now approved.  We have one more item on the order paper.  I am entirely in your hands.  I think we still have time  -(Interjection)- but let me be specific.  Hon. Beatrice Kiraso, are you ready, are you in a position to proceed?
	
	MS. KIRASO BEATRICE (Woman Representative, Kabarole):  Mr. Speaker,  I would have been in position to proceed,  but due to the length of the agenda,  I had been advised by the Clerk to Parliament that this motion was most likely not to come in today.  So the seconder of the motion excused himself.  And earlier this afternoon,  we had members of the family of the late hon. Hashaka who had come to attend and listen to this motion.  We advised them to come back tomorrow.  I would therefore like to seek your indulgence that we proceed tomorrow.  Thank you.
	
	THE SPEAKER:  On that note,  the House is adjourned to 2 O'clock tomorrow.
	
(The House rose at 5.50 pm and adjourned until Wednesday, 23rd February, 2000 at 2.00 pm) 
	 
