Tuesday, 28 February 2012
 
Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Good afternoon honourable members and happy New Year, belatedly. I have not had the opportunity to do that, so I take this singular occasion to wish you the best in the year 2012. The year 2012 should be a productive one for this Parliament. We should do more than we did in 2011 because we started in the middle of the year last time but this time we are beginning from the very beginning of the year. We wish ourselves all the best in that regard. 

Honourable members, yesterday I had a very interesting visitor and I thought that I should share with you this before we go to the proceedings of today. A young man came to see me in my office and his name is Richard Kawesa. He told me things that sent me thinking. I hope that if I convey this to you, it will cause you to think a little deeper. They call themselves the Institute for Country Pride, the pride of Uganda. He came with something, which I thought I should share, and he calls it “The reason why we must be proud to be Ugandans”. It inspired me and I thought I should share it with you. 

“I take pride in being Ugandan because Uganda is essential to my personal sense of identity. Pride is the catalyst that mines out all the good that is deposited inside of me and allows all Ugandans to share in my shining greatness. We share a common history and a common destiny as a people called Ugandans. 

I am able to dust away the limiting and negative name tags which speak against my collective goodness. My country is amazingly beautiful, wealthy and endowed with resources that will provide for me. Uganda shares in my individual greatness and I share in its collective significance as a nation among nations. Who I choose to become is deeply entwined with who we as a country are all perceived to be. 

The pride that my country collectively takes from the quality of my individual character and values is the polish that sustains that sparkle of pride that makes us proud to be Ugandan. So the pride Uganda draws from my successes automatically inspires my imaginations and uplifts my spirit to achieve and excel to the glory of God and my country.

I am Ugandan by being just, productive and orderly in what I think, in what I say and in what I do.”  

This inspired me, then they went on to say that in Uganda these days because of our backgrounds, we choose to fight everything and yet we could have chosen to do more positive things against certain things. He gave the illustration on the issue of poverty. He said that we have a big campaign to fight poverty; would it not have been more productive if we went positively and said, “let us increase productivity” instead of focusing on the negative fight against poverty when we can actually do the good things of being productive? Also, let our being productive be the one to fight poverty and that should apply across the board in the appreciation of our country. 

I felt inspired by this statement from this young man. If the young people are thinking like this - I am not that young - all of us as Members of this Parliament could start thinking this way and we see how to move this country forward. Thank you, honourable members.

2.44
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. May I also welcome you back to the House. I wish you a happy new year and a good Ninth Parliament session. I take the Floor to raise a matter of national importance. 

The school of hygiene is situated in Mbale, which is my constituency, and it has been there since independence. This school of hygiene has trained health officers and now offers a diploma course in environment. We all know what parents go through to send children to school and worse still, to send them to higher institutions of learning. The students of the school who completed in 2010/2011 have never received their transcripts and testimonials. These students do not have retakes, they submitted all their research papers, sat exams and passed but 64 students have never got their transcripts and testimonials.

These students have been tossed up and down. They have been to the Ministry of Education, UNEB and to the school but they have never been given the reason why they cannot get their papers. What is shocking and surprising is that the principal of the school of hygiene is a member of the Uganda National Examinations Board and if you do not toe his line, then you are finished. This is why these people have never been given results. They did not dance to the tune of the principal. 

Honourable members, I want the Minister of Education and Sports to come to the Floor of Parliament to tell this House why these students who completed cannot access employment and further studies because their transcripts and testimonials are being held. These students came to me since they are in my constituency. They cannot be admitted to any institution of higher learning. 

I want to lay on the Table some of the letters that they wrote to the Minister of Education and they have never been given satisfactory answers. The first one I would like to lay on the Table is a letter dated 29 September 2011, addressed to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Education - “MBL10/06/11, Refusal by the Principal School of Hygiene to allow students to sit exams.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured as such.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I want to lay on the Table a letter addressed to the Minister of Education entitled, “September 2011, incompetence and forged results for the academic year 2010/2011. 

I also want to lay on the Table a letter written to me as Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality calling on the principal to release results. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let it be captured. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: What is surprising is that there was an article in the papers by the Minister of Education declaring that the results had been released but these students have never got theirs. I beg to lay it here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that one you do not lay on the Table. Just quote the date such that it can be captured by the proper people.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: It is in the Red Pepper of Wednesday, 7 September 2011. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have captured the date and the newspaper; the people responsible will look for the paper. Thank you very much, hon. Wamanga-Wamai. I think this is a clear matter and I do not think it will attract a debate. I am going to ask the minister to make some responses.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Jessica Alupo): I would like to appreciate the concerns that have been raised by the Member of Parliament. I promise that I will make a follow up after studying the documents and comparing them with the status that we have in the ministry.

MR MAXWELL AKORA: I wish to seek guidance on the Order Paper. I wish to draw the attention of the House to item No.7 on the Order Paper - consideration and adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Government compensations to Haba Group of Companies and Rhino Investments in the Financial Year 2009/2010. There have been recent reports regarding this particular issue. The debate about the report was stayed last week pending Government consultations with individuals that were mentioned in the report.

Mr Speaker, my plea is that this matter be disposed of as soon as possible since it was stood over last week. Putting it on the Order Paper as item No. 7, we may not get the time to debate it today. Press reports are rife as to efforts being made to derail Parliament and to -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank hon. Maxwell Akora for giving way. Actually, it was Rt. hon. Rebecca Kadaga who was in the chair and Government made a commitment that on Tuesday, which is today, they would come out with a formal statement on the status of the Governor Bank of Uganda, Mr Mutebile. In their defence, they claimed the chairman of the Cabinet committee, Dr Crispus Kiyonga, was in London for another assignment. Now that he is here, I do not know how we can be helped to resolve this issue once and for all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the matter has been substantially raised; can I guide now?

MR AKORA: I want to seek guidance about two issues concerning this matter. At what point do we discuss the report? Secondly, I want to point out that this was a report of the Public Accounts Committee to Parliament; it is not a report of Parliament to Government. We presented our report, Parliament discussed and we were finalising the recommendations that Parliament was adopting. Government then intervened and said that they had to consult further before Parliament could proceed with adopting the recommendations.

I do not believe it is procedurally right for Government to derail the discussions and the debate in Parliament to the extent that the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have to be referred to a Cabinet subcommittee. I am seeking guidance as to whether we need to wait for this subcommittee from Cabinet to report back to the House before we proceed with finalising our discussions and adopting our recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the benefit of the honourable members, I may not have been in the House here but I followed the proceedings from my office. So, I am aware of what transpired. Do not think that I am sitting here for the first time and I do not have a background. I know all the things that transpired, so I am very informed. I was always in my office watching the proceedings.

I think now we have spent a lot of time; by now we would have reached that agenda item already. So, can we proceed and reach there and then we can see which decision to take. Let us clear the first items here then we come to that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we need to move in harmony. You have maximum respect. If we have made an agreement, we should always keep it. The issue we are talking about was agreed upon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not said no. I said let us clear these items and when I come to that, then a decision will be made.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, this is a procedural matter. The issues we want to clear are all lengthy. The issue we are looking at is a small component of the main report. We are remaining with a few items to clear. I do not think it is reasonable for us to abandon what we have done. It would be in your interest that we dispose of this thing as the Leader of Government Business is here to deal with the matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have preceding business before we reach there. Can I finish those ones then we come to that item and we take a decision on it. Now we have the laying of papers, there are reports which are preceding that and we have a ministerial statement on nodding disease; all that is on the Order Paper. I am saying that let us go through all those quickly, then we come to those ones and see how to rearrange the Order Paper to accommodate these concerns.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week I raised a point of national importance and I thought that it would appear on the Order Paper such that I get a response from the Government side. It was about the master drainage plan for Kampala particularly the money we approved in Parliament. Part of the drainage falls in the area I represent.

This morning I heard on the radio that the Minister of Works stopped the work on the drainage because they are going to expand the Kampala Northern Bypass. Remember we passed money for the drainage but now they are stopping it for expansion of the Northern Bypass. That is why I want a statement.

The floods are killing people around Kampala District, particularly my area. We wanted to know the status of the money we approved and how far they have gone because they abandoned the work. I thought that it would appear on the Order Paper but even when I look at the business to follow, it is not there. 

I would have expected it to be an issue of uttermost importance because it even regards the money we passed as Parliament. How could we borrow money to put it on the drainage system and then Ministry of Works comes in and says, “stop, that work is not going to continue, we want to expand the Northern Bypass”? I think it is futile attempt. I need a statement and as Parliament we should be briefed on that matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you raised it as a matter of national importance. It took 15 minutes for the discussion and the matter went and there was no undertaking. Can I now ask the minister responsible for this sector to make a statement on this and the way forward?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba who raised that issue. 

First of all, we borrowed this money in the Eighth Parliament and it is being put to use. As he has stated, KCCA has contracted Spencon to work on the Lubigi Channel. My ministry is also trying to finalise the Kampala Northern By-pass by dualling the whole of it. When we went on site, we realised that there was some conflict between the design of the channel and some parts of the Northern Bypass. However, this should not stop Spencon, contracted by KCCA, to handle other parts of the channel. For us it is just a small area which is affecting the expansion of the Northern Bypass. The money was borrowed and it is being put on – (hon. Florence Namayanja rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He was in the middle of a sentence. Why don’t you just finish that sentence then get the clarification? Please finish. Let him finish the sentence and then you raise the issue.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for protecting me. As I was saying, the money was borrowed, it was dispatched and works are going on. Kampala City Council Authority has contracted Spencon to work on the channel. I think that in our understanding, to synchronise the two projects is in the interest of this country and in the interest of KCCA and very soon we are going to sort it out. I thank you.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister of Works to clarify on how this project is being implemented. 

The Northern Bypass was implemented a long time ago. This Parliament passed a sum of money of US$ 100 million to work on the Lubigi Channel and the project is being implemented and it has a time limit. Spencon services, who were contracted by Kampala Capital City Authority, are now being told to stop working on the channel. The floods, like hon. Sebuliba said, are killing the people of Bwaise. 

One wonders; these are two bodies of Government and I remember – I stand to be corrected - that Eng. Byandala at one time was the initiator of the Kampala Institutional Development Project (KIDP). I want to be clarified how planning has been done - and there are portions of the project, like Kalerwe, where you are supposed to put box culverts - between the ongoing project and the Northern Bypass. I want to be clarified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but you see you are taking a lot of time seeking clarification. Please ask a direct question so that the minister can clarify.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Yes, Mr Speaker. The information I am bringing up will help me to be guided. These are two projects and when a project is being executed, it has terms and conditions within the contract. Now, the Lubigi Channel project is being halted in the middle of its implementation; how are we going to link the two projects, the Northern Bypass and the Lubigi Channel?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Namayanja. First of all, let me make some corrections. We never borrowed US$ 100 million for the Lubigi Channel. It was never for Lubigi Channel. Lubigi was just an element within that component of the loan.

Secondly, we have never finished the Northern Bypass project. This was a stage construction; we finished part of it and now we are working with the European Union to complete the dualling of that road.

Thirdly, we have not said stop the works on the Lubigi Channel. It is just a portion where we have to synchronise the project of the Northern Bypass and the Lubigi Channel. It will be very absurd if we saw a problem and then just went ahead. I think you should be saying, “Honourable Minister of Works and KCCA, thank you for doing the correct thing.” Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon we have Members of Parliament and staff of the Kenya National Assembly on the Implementation Committee - their Implementation Committee is similar to our Government Assurances Committee - and also a Member of the Speakers’ Panel. They are on a benchmarking visit to the Parliament of Uganda and this afternoon, they are here to observe the proceedings of this Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. They are led by hon. Gitobu Imanyara, and his delegation is there. You are welcome. (Applause)

Also in the public gallery this afternoon we have pupils and teachers of St Kizito Senior Secondary School, Bugolobi represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi. They have also come to observe the proceedings.

Also in a special way, we should take this moment to welcome our Clerk to Parliament who is here to sit for the first time through the proceedings. The other time she came to be introduced but today she is conducting the proceedings as Clerk-at-Table. Please welcome her. She cannot stand up but you can only see her from there.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nyakikongoro. The other time I pronounced it badly, I think.

3.02
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for pronouncing my name very well this time. This is a report from the delegation that went to Kigali on the gender responsive budgeting for learning purposes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think it is laying of papers only. So you only lay it on the Table and we will capture it as such.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A group of Ugandan Members of Parliament travelled to Kigali on 4 December 2011 for learning purposes, specifically on gender responsive budgeting. I just want to give you the background -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, lay it on the Table. That is what is required at this moment.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: This is a report on the gender responsive budgeting study tour to Rwanda on 4 December 2011. The members that travelled included the hon. Minister of State for Finance, hon. Fred Omach; the hon. Minister, Sarah Achieng; members of UWOPA, members of the finance committee of Parliament, members of the Committee on Gender and Equal Opportunities and other civil society members. I wish to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so captured. 

3.04
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, according to Rule 30(i) and (ii) of the Rules of Procedure, presentation of reports from parliamentary delegations abroad, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation to the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of Nations and European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, standing committee meetings held in Brussels, Belgium in October 2011. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Let the records capture it as such.

3.05
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table a report of the 22nd session of the African, Caribbean and Pacific and European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Lome, Togo from 19th to 23rd November 2011. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture it as such.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that at an appropriate time in future, this report be accorded time on the Order Paper for debate and for the Executive to inform the House, and also for this delegation to present issues that require their response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE NODDING DISEASE

(Debate continued.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement was made but the debate was suspended because the members from the affected sub-region had gone upcountry. Now that they are back, the debate is open.

3.06
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for this statement and I thank God that today we are able to debate it. The Minister’s statement acknowledges the problem, which I laid before this Parliament for the second time three weeks ago. I had earlier raised the same issue of the nodding disease in Northern Uganda, particularly my constituency, by the time hon. Stephen Mallinga was still health minister. 

Today, we are given the information. I am glad that Minister of State for Health travelled to Northern Uganda and discovered for himself that what we presented before this House as a problem that needs urgent attention was real and pathetic. He has noted all the symptoms of mental disturbances, dropping out of school, brain derail and the like, which are included in his statement. I hope all members have copies of the minister’s statement because they were distributed then.

Mr Speaker, three weeks ago, when I brought this problem to the House, the Acholi Parliamentary Group had met the Ministry of Health and progress had been registered. There is evidence that there is a will to have something done. However, the question is: how has it been implemented? Are there tangible results on the ground? I was in my constituency a week ago and even today I spoke to the technical team on the ground. The submission of the Minister in the statement could be farfetched as long as funds for this purpose are not submitted. The technical team is waiting to be facilitated with these funds so that work can start. As we are all aware, we need to unite and have this money sent to the affected areas.

There was a proposal by the Minister that we have collection or treatment centres, but they are really far apart. In my district, it is Kitgum Hospital but the patients in remote sub counties are not even able to walk, so how can they move to Kitgum Hospital to get medical attention? We suggest that we have sub-centres created as a temporary measure. There is urgent need for the affected families to be helped because the parents are not able to go out to look for livelihood. They cannot even go out to fetch water or firewood, hence -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I give you only one more minute.

MS ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can you imagine that mothers have to tie their children to trees like goats in order to be able to go and fetch water! This is a very sad situation.  I ask us all to unite on this and have food relief sent immediately to these families. 

What about the children? Most of them are school-going and moreover the disease attacks while they are at school. Those not affected by the disease are traumatised. Actually, when one collapses, the entire class takes off, including the teachers. This is because up to now none of us knows the cause of this disease and it is all speculation. Since we do not know how it is spread, everybody is afraid. Have we condemned these children to death since there is no cure? Now that they cannot go to school, have we condemned them to a future without education? 

I am happy to see the Minister of Education before me here; what are you going to do about these children? We are looking at the interventions we can have. The speculation is that it could be related to river blindness, but people have given up and think that it could be as a result of the previous war. After all, history shows that wherever similar cases have been registered, it was a result of wars. People are now asking if this was because chemical weapons were used in the war or a result of relief food distributed. (Member timed out.)

MS FLAVIA RWABUHORO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking some clarification. Is the money we are talking about meant for treatment or for researchers to tell us about the cause and modes of transmission of the disease? Secondly, how is the social services committee involved in the whole issue?

3.14
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The situation that we are dealing with is certainly an emergency that touches all our emotions. I have no doubt in my mind that the entire House should be unanimous in this kind of calamity that has befallen the people of Acholi sub-region and indeed Northern Uganda, and it is a problem of our country. I do not want to believe that there would be any member who would disagree that the situation in the Acholi sub-region is dire. 

I would like to therefore suggest that rather than us going deep into discussing the causes, the transmission, the pathogenesis of the disease, we need to look at practical solutions to the emergency. I read with dismay from the press that Ministry of Finance argued that Ministry of Health did not submit the financial requirements for handling this. Even if it meant just palliative care, - a member was asking what the money is meant for - I am sure the technocrats down there have designed a number of interventions that can help mitigate the challenges that these children are going through. 

To the Ministry of Finance, even if the request reached them late, this is an emergency. It is for that reason that I have always advocated for emergency disease control funds to be readily available for a ministry whether it is Ministry of Health or Ministry of Agriculture. In case of an emergency disease outbreak, we should not be subjected to red tape procedure that is now causing delays and therefore leading to further suffering of the children. So, I think what we need is an answer from Ministry of Finance. Can we have the money as fast as possible and enable Ministry of Health to attempt to contain the situation rather than wait any longer? 

Mr Speaker, to me this is a matter now that is to be answered by Ministry of Finance and we need practical solutions immediately. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.17
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a clinician who has served my country in the ward for more than 12 years, I feel very disturbed to hear people dying of nodding disease in Northern Uganda and yet we see some ministries asking for supplementary budgets when Ugandans are dying. The most important thing we have in this Parliament, and in this country, is life. Forget about all the money we have. If this Government of ours does not want to think about the health of Ugandans, then we are in trouble. I want you to mark my words very precisely because today I am very composed. (Laughter) 

A variety of disease conditions that can result into what is happening in Northern Uganda have very many causes. However, as we talk, according to the research that they have done and samples of blood that have been taken from these children and have been studied, and I am told some children have been brought to Mulago and a CT scan has been done, they have found nothing. They just relate the disease either to a complication of Oncocerciasis or vitamin B6 deficiency. Oncocerciasis is river blindness and it is common among people who stay near fast running rivers. This is something which even the Ministry of Health should know. 

The problem we are having, Mr Speaker, is that the Ministry of Health does not have inspectors of health. They are there but they do not move to see what is happening. They only earn some little salary but they do not work.

Two, the budget of the Ministry of Health should have gone to 11 percent. Dr Acheng, I am seeing you looking at me. We should have gone to 11 percent according to the Maputo Declaration -(Interjections) – No; I am still coming to that. When you go to the Abuja Declaration, it should have gone to 15 percent but from the budget of the country, only nine percent is going to Ministry of Health and that includes even donated money. This means the money that comes from our actual budget to Ministry of Health is too small. 

As a doctor who is in this Parliament - When we were coming here people said doctors should not be in this Parliament but I am happy Dr Kiyonga is here. You have been a senior man in the Ministry of Health. You should tell these things to the people in Cabinet. This is a message for you as a senior member of my party; please tell people that it is either now or never. We need money urgently for Northern Uganda to help these people. They are malnourished, by the way; how do you have vitamin B6 deficiency, Dr Acheng? It is because people are not having enough of it. (Member timed out.)

3.20
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the Eighth Parliament I, as Member of Parliament for Pader District, reported this case and it used to be known as Oncocerciasis. That is what I was told by the Ministry of Health. I am very glad Dr Bitekyerezo has mentioned it. I was also told by the ministry that interventions to ensure that vector control along the river banks of River Aswa and other streams that pour into River Aswa would be done so that we do not see more spread. Unfortunately to date, as we speak, the number of children infected is increasing day by day. 

I do not want to pre-empt the report of the Budget Committee but this morning we were in the committee and the ministry has assured us that there is money allocated from within Ministry of Health. Also, there is a supplementary budget that is going to be passed to ensure that interventions are carried out. 

What I want to request Ministry of Health to do is to help us and isolate these cases. If only we could have these cases isolated as you study them, then at least we will be sure that the children can go to school. But now as we speak, like hon. Anywar has said, there are some schools that are not functioning properly. Children run away from the schools, teachers are scared and the parents of other children also fear to bring their children to those schools. So, the difficulty we have is not only having the drugs being administered to them but also having the cases isolated as more information is got. 

It is called nodding disease now, yesterday it was Oncocerciasis and next week it will be another disease. So, really, we want to request that you isolate these cases. Let us have some camps where we isolate them and you carry out a proper study as we find a comprehensive way of handling the situation.

There is also, of course, the question of vector control. I wonder whether the ministry is looking at the vector control system because we also notice that not only children are affected but there are also adults who you find with elephantiasis and other diseases that are related to the nodding disease. (Member timed out.)

3.24
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. I had the privilege of serving in the Eighth Parliament and if my memory serves me right, we were summoned from recess because there was a crisis of Foot and Mouth Disease. Cows that were infected with Foot and Mouth disease had crossed from Tanzania into Uganda, to Western Uganda, and the disease was very quickly spreading to the north and the east. We were summoned and a supplementary budget was passed by this House. 

There was a crisis in Northern Uganda where we lost one of the most distinguished scholars, Dr Lukwiya, in the Ebola crisis. This House sat and without the matter being given due notice, we passed a supplementary budget at a very short notice.

It makes me wonder why, despite several reports in the media on this issue that was raised a couple of months ago by my honourable colleague on this Floor of Parliament - in the Ninth Parliament despite the history in the Eighth Parliament - this House cannot pronounce itself on this matter that is of national importance. This nodding disease in the north now will very quickly come to the east and reach here in Kampala.

I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Health; are they serious? Are they interested? They need to come out openly and tell us the truth. We cannot dilly dally and debate over money, which monies we have managed to pass in the past. I would like the honourable minister to clarify. There are precedents that we can rely on in the past and pass the supplementary budget to help out colleagues that are having all this suffering that we have been told about. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the ministry for bringing this statement and I thank my sister, hon. Anywar. 

When people talked, in my mind I am looking at how HIV/AIDS came. It started in Rakai and people died and they thought it was the trailers that were bringing some disease which they did not know, until it wiped the families. In some homes, you could not find anybody. I am now looking at the nodding disease. We do not know how it comes, where it came from but it is targeting children and from one area. We need to get scared and think harder than even just talking here.  

I do not know how much and how far the research our ministry has done has gone in partnership with those people who are more developed because this is serious. I think we are not taking it as serious because it is not killing the prominent people. It is still in the children, but this is the future of the country. I think we need to think more than that or do even more than what we are doing. If it means money, let us sacrifice some budget somewhere and put it there so that maybe we find out what it is. 

When Lutaaya came up, by then I think I was at the university, we thought this man was coming to make money. Now with this nodding disease, we are getting concerned. It is in the North but we do not know; it will soon go down and maybe when it starts getting the prominent people, then I think that is when we shall start thinking hard. If it means money for putting people to do research, let us do it as quickly as possible before our people perish.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I ask that we begin focusing on the way forward on this issue. The speeches have been very eloquent but we do not seem to be guiding the minister on what we should be doing. I am now going to request only those who are giving us a way forward and proposals on how we can conclude this. I had allotted 30 minutes, it run out; I am going to extend a little.

3.32
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When Ebola was there, I was secretary for health in Gulu District and I think a lot of attention was given to Ebola from national up to the local levels. However, I want to say Ebola was very aggressive and without us being aggressive in fighting Ebola, it could have finished us all. Now with the nodding disease, it looks like it is very slow and since it is not as aggressive as Ebola, a lot of us have sat back and we have not given the attention that nodding disease deserves.

Centre for Diseases Control said they worked on it but they never came out with concrete results and it is still there fighting us. It is almost like saying, “what have we done?”  That is why a lot of other people could have even come out with some cultural beliefs because there is no headway. I think we need to give nodding disease attention and we need to budget for it. Today, I was very annoyed in the presidential affairs committee meeting because we talked of giving Shs 92 billion supplementary to State House when people are dying in the North and no attention is given. This is very unfortunate. It is unfortunate that we have not given attention to lives and to Ugandans. 

I went to Palaro, that was in Gulu, because after giving all attention to Kitgum, then people of Gulu started calling and I went to Palaro to find out. There were only two cases in Palaro, Aswa County but in Odek, in Omoro County, the cases were so many. In Palaro, information is not there. The LCII of Palaro reported the two cases, which was I think were brought from Pader, Lacekocot, but the family of the two children with the cases got so annoyed with the LC II vice chairperson who reported the cases. Why was that so? It is just because of lack of information-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aol, how do we move?

MS AOL: To me, we need to be vigilant. We need to move more aggressively and we need to inform our people so that they know that this disease is there and we can be aggressive. If we have to be aggressive, we need to budget. Why did I say I was annoyed? Because we have not been giving a budget to this disease and when we allocate a budget to it -(Member timed out.)

3.33
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. As I come with a way forward, I have heard from the members who were in the Eighth Parliament that this is not a new phenomenon. I believe at that time, if the Minister of Health intervened they must have carried out research and come up with some conclusion. If the conclusions were implemented and worked on, I do not understand why at this point in time we are seeing the same symptoms and we are saying we do not know the cause of the disease. We are seeing the same symptoms as were observed way back, probably five years ago. My question is: if what was done way back worked, why can’t we just continue and do the same and save the lives of these people? Why are we grappling like it is something we have never seen? Unless it did not work, then the Ministry of Health should come up and tell us that research should continue. 

If we are doing research in this country, do we do haphazard research? If there is a case of a disease breaking out and we carry out research, we know that probably next time it comes up, research should be conclusive. How far did that research go? When the disease dwindled, was that the end of it? How are we doing our things? I propose that we look at the solutions that we arrived at back then. If they worked, please continue with the same as the research goes on. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Okot, please give us the way forward. 

3.35
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going straight to the way forward. We have been having subsequent meetings with the Ministry of Health. We want to appreciate what they have started doing. In the report, the minister appealed to the House – if I can be allowed to read: “The Ministry of Health therefore appeals to Parliament to support the supplementary budget request to implement the response plan -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is it? Where is the supplementary request?

MR OKOT: I hear they discussed the supplementary request in our meeting today. What I wanted to say is that in the meetings which we held with them several times, they came out with two different plans. The first one, called the first phase, came to about Shs 3.8 billion. This first phase, according to their plan, was supposed to start being implemented this January until the end of 2012. As I talk now, they have opened centres and in these centres, no serious activity is taking place. 

I also appeal to the House to push the Ministry of Health to take a step quickly because without that, we are not going to handle this situation well. In the end, our children are going to die more. 

I also want to ask other ministries – there must be synergy in this country. When you see that children are not going to school, agricultural activities are not taking place, the workers’ sector is affected, that means all the other ministries should not leave this fight to the Ministry of Health only. Even teachers are now traumatised. So, unless the Ministry of Education also comes on board, we are not going to channel a solution to this problem.

We are calling it nodding syndrome, but this disease has not been named. It is a nodding syndrome. It is not a disease of its kind. It has no name and we do not know how to trace it. I also appeal that we should invest in resources. Without that, we are not going to handle this thing properly. Besides, we have the World Health Organisation; if this House can appeal to the World Health Organisation to open an office, since this seems to be an international problem as well, because in the subsequent meetings we had with them -(Interruption)- okay.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I was sitting in the Budget Committee this morning and last week when the issue of nodding disease came up, tempers flared. With your guidance by way of information, I was thinking that - because this Parliament should be seen to have teeth which cannot bite - if the chairperson of the Budget Committee is here and I have also seen the minister around, the agreed position as far as the supplementary budget of nodding disease be brought to this House and the House disposes of it. Since we said this is an important issue just like the way we attended to the cows in Western Uganda, it may not even have to wait for tomorrow when they are bringing other budgets like those of Shs 96 billion for State House. 

The information I was seeking is that if the committee had reached a concrete position, which is agreeable upon on probably the figure, which is actually Shs 3.85 billion, that this Parliament, by way of resolution, passes that figure so that we close this chapter of nodding disease. Everything seems to centre around money. In the circumstances, I beg to move that -(Interjections)- we be advised by the chairperson of the Budget Committee and the Minister of Health in view of the figure the Ministry of Health requested for, the Shs 3.85 billion. That without any further delay, this Parliament appropriates that particular portion and then we can wait and do other things like State House budget, budget for ESO, at leisure tomorrow. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let hon. Okot finish what he was saying based on the information that hon. Odonga-Otto has given and then we see how to move. 

MR OKOT: Thank you for the information. I want to add by saying that it appears there is a kind of ping pong game. Why am I saying this? This issue of the nodding disease did not start yesterday. It has been there ever since but the report still appears as if nobody wants to take a serious step - (Member timed out). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Okot. Honourable members, I am advised that the Supplementary Schedule No.1 will be coming to the Floor of this Parliament tomorrow. The issue we need to understand is, is this matter captured in it? If it is not, even if it comes tomorrow it will still not be dealt with. Is the chairman budget here? Any member of the Budget Committee who can guide the House on this? Yes, hon. Nebanda?

MS NEBANDA: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of the Budget Committee. What I want the House to know is that in the first supplementary which is coming tomorrow, the issue of the nodding disease is not captured anywhere. (Interjections) What we did –(Interjections)- Yes, it is not captured. For the first supplementary budget which we are presenting tomorrow, the money is already spent. Of the money that is already spent, Shs 92 billion is going to State House, then there is security, then there is legal affairs. 

So, the committee advised the Ministry of Health to go and check within its ministry. When the ministry went and decided to do some reallocation -(Dr Nduhuura rose_) I am going to give you way. When the ministry went and – (Interjections)- I am going to give you way, hon. Minister. When the minister went and did reallocation within his ministry, they were able to get Shs 1.1 billion. They are also going to get some drugs from the National Medical Stores worth Shs 750 million, which is not coming to the amount that we need for the first phase. So, we had advised the Minister of Health to go and make a supplementary that they said -(Interjections)– It is not coming tomorrow; it will come in phase two. Hon. Minister, you can give us the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we hear from the minister? These are serious matters. 

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This morning I was invited to a meeting of the Budget Committee but before I report on what transpired there, we had earlier on, as the Ministry of Health, interacted with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They brought to our attention the funds in our budget that we would not need immediately. We, therefore, agreed with the Ministry of Finance that we would reallocate from within our budget a total sum of Shs 1.1 billion –(Interjections)- let me explain. 

We have been having funds in our budget for a programme on malaria and we are not ready to implement that programme now. So we agreed with the Ministry of Finance to get Shs 1.1 billion from that vote and put it on nodding disease. Part of the response plan, which I did table in this House, requires provision of medicines and other health supplies. These can be provided by the National Medical Stores. So, from National Medical Stores, we are getting medicines and other health supplies worth Shs 750 million. These are the figures that my colleague from Butaleja has just alluded to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I never wanted to call the Minister of Health to order. I know him as a very good worker. However, under Article 154, the Constitution is very clear on how money is withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund. I have been in Parliament and indeed there is a time we made a supplementary. Hon. Tanna talked about Foot and Mouth Disease and there was also a time when we lacked water for cows to drink in the Seventh Parliament and again, Parliament was called upon to provide water of Shs 7 billion. 

We are now talking about the people of Northern Uganda. They have suffered and cannot be compared to cows; unless they want to say that cows in Western Uganda are better than people in Northern Uganda – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, I want to plead with you to organise another induction course. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, raise your point of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Health to tell us that he is just trying to look for money within their budget system, a budget which is already constrained, yet the people of Northern Uganda are dying, children are falling into fire, children are not going to school; should he do this, instead of getting money through a supplementary as we got the Shs 92 billion for a family of people who are not sick and leave out people who are sick? Is the Minister of Health in order to say that there is no money for the people of Northern Uganda? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To reallocate funds within the budget is constitutional and to seek further supplementary to finance items that have cropped up which were not budgeted for is also constitutional. Both procedures are constitutional, so the hon. Minister is in order. Please continue.

3.43
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion using rule 46 - motion without notice - paragraph K. I beg that you allow me to move this motion: 

“Having discussed the issue of nodding disease in Northern Uganda, Parliament requests Government:

1. 	To identify funds for research for this disease.
2. 	To identify funds to feed the affected persons.
3. 	That the relevant minister comes up with a supplementary to this House within two days so that Parliament performs its functions under the appropriations law.”  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Motion seconded. Honourable members, I have a motion that has been properly placed within the rules and it has been seconded. So, we need to see ways of handling it. It is moved under K, any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency.

I do not have any doubt in my mind that the matter of nodding disease is an emergency. So the motion can be accommodated. The proposed motion does not, in any way, in my understanding, violate any provisions of the Constitution. I therefore propose a question for debate of that motion that the House does resolve, as proposed by hon. Jack Sabiiti, that:

1. 	Funds be identified for research;
2. 	Funds be identified for feeding the affected people;
3. 	The ministry comes up with a supplementary request to this House within two days. 

That is what I have captured and that is how we intend to proceed. 

3.51
MS CERINAH NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have one amendment to make. This matter of nodding disease has been debated for almost a month in this House. I want to move an amendment that in order for Parliament to be taken seriously, no supplementary budget should be brought in this House without including the issue of the nodding disease. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are other matters that have gone through to committees. Why don’t we treat these matters separately? The committee has identified this; we should see how we can accommodate everything in order to make progress. Honourable member, would you like to withdraw the amendment so that we can move forward?

MS NEBANDA: Okay, I withdraw.

3.53
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to amend the motion by moving that Government should move in to provide special circumstances for education of children suffering from the nodding disease because they seem to be stigmatised and are not coping well with others who are not suffering from the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that tally with the issue of isolation, which was raised by hon. Beatrice Anywar; is that the point you are developing?

MS BAKO: Yes, provide special facilities for them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The mover of the motion has accepted the proposed amendment. So now there is a leg that there should be a procedure for identifying these people, isolating them but giving them all that is required for children to receive education and medicare, food and things like those that have been captured by hon. Jack Sabiiti. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, when we talk about this nodding disease and we have some goals, I think we have to be very specific here. When you say isolation and provision of special needs for these children, for how long do you want this to take place? You may find that the mover of that amendment wants these people to be looked after by Government right from primary school to university and that becomes a problem. I want clarification. For how long will this isolation take place? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Dr Bitekyerezo, if somebody has been isolated because he is suffering from Hepatitis E or something like that and then he finally cures, would that isolation continue? Well, let us think through these processes. The circumstances under which the special treatment was being given have since ended; would that therefore still continue as a continuing obligation on the person providing care?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, you will stop, but the whole thing is about the special needs as far as treatment is concerned because this is a form of epilepsy and people may continually keep convulsing. So, will you take up these convulsing children for life as a government and will you be providing some special needs for education? What about those who have had epilepsy before the coming of the nodding disease? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, people are just thinking through this process so that when we take a decision, it is one that is implementable. I think that is the caution he is providing. Let me hear from hon. Franca Akello. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, the idea is about having a temporary rehabilitation centre that will help to isolate for as long as the study is being carried out. We have these children isolated and put in the rehabilitation centre and the moment it is found that it is contagious they will find solutions to it. The moment they find curative measures for it, definitely the rehabilitation centre will not be there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that makes it clear. 

MR AWONGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that yesterday as I was travelling to Entebbe in a taxi, the people with whom I was travelling were talking about this disease and the impression they gave us was that the nodding disease is a Northern Uganda disease. I think that is a very dangerous statement. 

I want to request all colleagues here that as you go out and talk about this disease, make it very clear to all Ugandans that the nodding disease is not a Northern Uganda disease. Although it is the North facing it right now, there are prospects that if this disease is not attended to immediately, it can spread to any part of this country and even the whole world. It is not just for the Northern Uganda people. It may have started there but may end elsewhere if not attended to. That is the information I want to give to you. 

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am getting confused about this issue of isolating the affected children. If we talk about isolating them, are we going to provide special needs education? If not, what are we going to do with them in that special situation and for how long and above all, have we already identified them as disabled? I am getting confused. 

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion on the Floor and I strongly agree with the issue of isolation. Most of us who are contributing have not got the chance to look at these sick children. Imagine a situation where a child keeps on nodding and it becomes so violent to the extent that if she is seated somewhere, she almost pushes off from the seat. It is so violent. So, in such a case, a mother cannot go to the garden. You are every time in a situation where you are worried and do not know what will happen to this child. That is why members are advancing for the issue of special attention and for these cases to be isolated because it becomes bad -(Interjections) – 

Hon. Minister, we know you may be so protective about the budget but in the budget that we are thinking about, it is not only the money we are looking for. We are also looking for possible ways of how to help and care for these needy and badly affected children. So, the issue of isolation would really help the mothers of these children. 

You can imagine a case where you have other children to take care of but this one is so urgent that you cannot do any other thing apart from feeling for this child who is badly affected. So, when talking about cases of isolation, it is not what we are looking at – (Interjection) - Let us forget about it. Maybe the minister is trying to defend his budget thinking that it will swell, but let us look at the case of the mothers and guardians taking good care of these children. You cannot do it in a rowdy home where there are other children. These children really need special attention. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will ask the honourable minister to make a response to the issues raised plus seeking his guidance, and I think the way to go is to put the question to the motion on the Floor. 

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Dr Richard Nduhuura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The guidance I was seeking is: we are now debating a motion and we have been talking about supplementary budgets, but it looks like we are dwelling on things bordering on technical issues about isolation and the rest of it. I want to advise that we would rather leave these technical issues to the technical people who are already on the ground to determine and advise whether there should be isolation because we are now dealing with a chronic disease. You are talking about isolation, which may lead to stigmatization, and you know all these issues must be considered. 

Mr Speaker, I am not against the motion because certainly, the sector needs money and we need funds. However, what I had wanted to explain is that when we had an interaction with the Minister of Finance, we agreed that rather than at the end of the financial year taking some of this money back to the Consolidated Fund, we would rather spend it now on nodding disease. At the National Medical Stores, we have made a saving because we have had a contribution of medicines from several partners, and that is why we felt that we should use part of this money, which is only Shs 750 million, on nodding disease. 

Mr Speaker, this would still leave a gap of about Shs 2 billion and the – (Interjections)– Let me finish. The understanding with the Ministry of Finance is that in the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 – (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order to the Minister of State for Health. There is a motion on the Floor, and there is no doubt I support it as we respond to the statement presented by the same minister. However, in his submission – not all of us may be having the copies of his presentation - the minister lamented that because the money was not forthcoming, they had to look from within the ministry before they secured Shs 100 million, which was just a drop in the ocean. Also, the same minister in his statement urges Parliament to support the supplementary request. 

The issue at hand is about life; it is not about discussions outside this Parliament. This is where all people are represented. So, we are now talking on behalf of those people. So, is the minister in order to divert from the resolutions of Parliament to urge his ministry to bring a supplementary request so that they can save the lives of the people in Northern Uganda by saying that they had some other arrangements, which they could not have arrived at before Parliament passed this resolution?
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the matter that is before the House for debate is the motion that has been proposed by hon. Jack Sabiiti and amended by hon. Christine Bako. I hoped that when the minister got up, he would say something to indicate that he supports the motion. In that regard, I also hoped that he would make a statement in that direction so as to guide debate. 

On the issue regarding technical input, I hoped that he would propose how to modify that particular provision in order to incorporate issues that would be handled by the technical people. Hon. Minister, you have not done that and so the line you are taking puts you out of order. 

So, unless you come back to the motion, you are likely to generate more debate that is not necessary. So, hon. Minister, would you like to make your position clear on technical issues to avoid generating more debate on the same issue? It will also help the House not to act in vain.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the honourable members to note that the issue we are dealing with is very important and that it regards matters, which if not dealt with, the people of Uganda will not take us seriously. Yes, the nodding disease is now affecting the people of Northern Uganda, but remember we have a motion moved while the person presiding over the House comes from that very place. Can you imagine what will happen if this House fails to relate with the plight of the people of Northern Uganda? Do you know that this motion could have political ramifications and also make people think that as Parliament, we do not care about the people?

The only issue that I would like to caution members about is that isolation is a professional matter. None of us is a professional who has gone to evaluate what is and is not required. (Applause) Mr Speaker, like you guided, let us deal with the issues that ask Government to look for resources to ensure they contain the situation in Northern Uganda. It will be after that that we will ask the Committee on Social Services to go to the ground and provide a report upon which we can make recommendations on how best to improve the situation. That is the only way for us. Otherwise, the motion as moved by hon. Jack Sabiiti is okay and I stand not only to support it but also to propose that you put the question. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you see the issue that I am trying to follow up with the honourable minister is important. I want him to make it clear that there are some technical issues that need to be handled properly. I said that that is important because we do not have to make resolutions that are in vain. I would like to request the Minister to ask a question in that aspect, so that we can see how better it can be captured for us to make the input in regard to the technical people. 

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I reported here three weeks ago, we have a technical team on the ground, which has been beefed up by other partners, for example, CDC, WHO, AFINET; all these work as a team and we are regularly updated on what is happening on the ground. Depending on what they have advised, we move on to act.

I tabled in this House a response plan, and I would like to say that we are moving according to that response plan. The plan is budgeted for and that is how we came up with the first phase that requires Shs 3.85 billion and the second phase that would require about Shs 3.1 billion, giving us a total of Shs 7 billion.

Yes, of course, I have been ruled out of order and so I do not want to go to the issue of the finances. They can be identified. However, suffice it to say that the motion moved by my colleague, hon. Jack Sabiiti, is to the effect that Government identifies the source of funding for research, treatment and all the other things. I want to point it out that what I had started talking about is not very far from that. I want to say that Government has already identified some of the funds – (Interjections) – I said some of the funds – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to seek your indulgence to look at the first part of the motion that was raised by the hon. Jack Sabiiti, that money be found to do research. Does research include the technicalities of moving into issues such as deciding whether isolation is required and all related matters? Can all those be captured under research? If that is the case – because we want to give the technical people the opportunity to deal with it - can we stop at only identifying funds for research and any other related matters?

Let me just recapture the issues in the motion. The first one is about money being available for research, feeding – (Interjections)- no, I am following the old motion; you cannot mislead the Chair. The third proposal was on a supplementary request being designed by the Ministry of Health so that funds can be made available to deal with this issue. Those are the three issues that were originally raised.

The other issue was about isolation, which the minister is raising and which same issue was also raised by hon. Emmanuel Dombo. What I want to say is that those issues can be easily accommodated in the research component of the first leg of the motion. So, if we are together on those, can I now ask – Yes, I will have hon. Ssekikubo.

4.14
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened well to the motion by hon. Jack Sabiiti but I have a component, so that if it is built together, it can lead to a better formulated idea of what Parliament is looking at. From the way he was presenting his issues, they were piecemeal. 

I want to propose that Government undertakes a multifaceted approach to address logistical support like transport or ambulances, and equip and expand the health facilities particularly at Palabek Kal, Padibe, Purongo, under the emergency government intervention. Once you talk about food or treatment, you know that logistical problems are the ones that hinder all these. I would propose that we build all these together so that we move in a multifaceted manner rather than taking to picking up one item, feeding, then treatment, then research and yet you need all. 

I was in this House when the honourable minister presented a statement. His budget then was Shs 7 billion and now he is telling us about Shs 100 million, which is really – (Intervention) - Shs 1.1 billion, which is peanuts compared to what is at stake. Even then – (Interruption)

DR NDUHUURA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought I was very clear that the total budget for the response plan, a copy of which I have here and I did lay on the Table three weeks ago, was Shs 7 billion. I said this is broken up in two phases, phase one taking Shs 3.85 billion and phase two taking Shs 3.1 billion. 

I did state earlier on that out of the Shs 3.85 billion, our interaction with the Minister of Finance was able to yield some money. Now, is it in order for my colleague, the Member of Parliament representing Lwemiyaga, to mislead the House that the Minister of Finance is only talking about Shs 100 million as the budget for managing the nodding disease? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think there was a statement you made that you had identified Shs 1.1 billion. You can forgive the honourable member for pronouncing billion as million. (Laughter) Those can be accommodated. Some of these figures are scary to many of us when they say billion; we are used to millions. 

Hon. Ssekikubo, you have made the point. Let me hear from somebody who has not spoken on this subject. 

4.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INDUSTRY (Dr James Mutende): Thank you. I just want to comment on the issue of isolation. Isolation is a technical aspect of treatment in handling disease. It is not necessarily a way of making people look like they are outcasts. It happens always. In most hospitals there are isolation units for particularly diseases like Tuberculosis. Recently, we had an outbreak of cholera in Mbale and an isolation unit was created in Busiu. It is a normal thing. 

I would think that the idea of putting isolation in the resolution is dealing with a technicality that should be left as administrative. The same response goes to the issue of ambulances and naming centres. That is technical and administrative and should not be in the resolution. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think we should finish this issue? Hon. Abia had moved a motion, which I thought the debate had informed. (Ms Bako rose_) Do you want me to put your motion to vote first? I put your motion to vote first. I put the question to the motion by hon. Abia to amend and insert the issue of isolation. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now propose the question on the motion as proposed by hon. Jack Sabiiti on those three legs - the issue of identification of funds for research, identification of funds for feedings, and a supplementary request by the Ministry of Health to be brought to this House expeditiously. 

I put the question that within – (Interjections) - There are technicalities involved. Within two days?

DR NDUHUURA: Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Health has already submitted a request for a supplementary budget to the Ministry of Finance. I do not know what we are now trying to do. If we already submitted –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are just helping you, honourable minister. If you have put the request – 

DR NDUHUURA: The guidance I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is as to whether the House wants me to go back and prepare another supplementary request when we have already submitted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. If it is already in the process, then it even shortens the period for the House. Isn’t it? I put the question to the motion by hon. Jack Sabiiti. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.22
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNEMNT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I stand to agree with the motion, but I would like to also appeal to the House not to give deadlines -(Interjections)- Let me continue. I appeal to the House not to give deadlines to implementers who may not be able to meet such deadlines for reasons – (Ms Anywar rose_)- No, no, no – (Interjections) - Order, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) Can I finish –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear, particularly when debate has ensued and has been closed. I want to refer my colleague and my friend to rule 68(2), which reads as follows: “If the question of closure is agreed to by a majority, the motion which was being discussed when the closure motion was moved shall be put forthwith without further discussion.”

We did that and finished. So, Mr Speaker, is it in order for my friend to continue insisting on a motion that we have already passed? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Jack Sabiiti, I am very familiar with the rule you have just cited; we have gone through a process and we have terminated that debate. The honourable member rose, with my permission, to make the comment that he was going to make. (Applause) Hon. Sabiiti, you are, therefore, ruled out of order. Please, finish what you were saying. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this wise ruling.  I even said that I supported the motion but I stood to comment on the time limit given, which may, due to unknown reasons to colleagues, appear that we are not fulfilling the demands but we are equally concerned about the problems. So, let us be realistic when giving deadlines. That is all I wanted to say. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Moses Ali, those are guiding benchmarks and parameters. What happens is that should you not be able to meet the deadline, you come back and tell us how far you have gone and also tell us the obstacles you have met. So, there is no harm at all.
 
STATEMENT BY THE PARLIAMENTARY FORUM ON ROAD SAFETY

4.27
MR GEOFFREY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present this matter of national importance. As you may be aware, the number of road accidents on our roads is continuously increasing and causing a lot of injuries and killing quite a number of people.
 
Last week, on the 22 February 2012, we, the executive members of the Parliamentary Forum on Road Safety, received a delegation from the Uganda Bus Drivers and Allied Transporters Association.  During our discussion with this delegation, they presented to us the following issues:

    1. A strike by bus drivers, which had already started by then;

    2. The strike was precipitated by the refusal of most bus owners to comply with the ongoing exercise of mechanical road worthiness inspection being conducted by the Road Transport Licensing Board.

    3. They also noted that most of the accidents, approximately 80 percent, on our roads are caused as a result of human error. 

    4. Many bus owners do not give formal appointment letters to their drivers, and they have also been stressing that a casual driver should not be entrusted with the lives of the many Ugandans on the road. This casual nature of appointment of drivers makes it easy for the bus owners to substitute any driver using any persons that are not competent, like turnboys, learners and even untrained relatives of the bus owners. 

    5. There is a general lack of criteria for training, screening and identifying public service vehicle drivers in Uganda. So, anybody with dubious road experience including trainees can be assigned a bus to drive at any time. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the delegation prayed that:

    1. An independent body be put in place to standardise PSV drivers’ training, screening and identification in order to minimise road carnage in this country. 

    2. Expeditious enactment of the policy on road safety be considered as soon as possible. (Applause)

    3. Government should immediately issue a directive to force bus owners to mandatorily comply with the ongoing exercise of bus inspection for road worthiness so as to screen out buses in dangerous mechanical condition. 

    4. In the interim, Government should require that all bus drivers be given formal appointments and proper identification documents so as to refrain bus owners from assigning buses to anyone who can sit behind the steering without the requisite experience. 

Mr Speaker, we seek an immediate assurance to the nation in regard to this prayer. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We shall have a limited debate because the issues are very straightforward. Why didn’t you circulate the statement; is it a personal statement? I think it was just for information and does not attract debate. We shall get copies and then send it to the appropriate committee so that we will get a formal way of handling it. 

MR OMARA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay this on the Table? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let the record capture it as such.  Thank you very much. 

Honourable members, there has been request to interchange these two items on the Order Paper. However, this is a request I need to make; we are using the Rules of Procedure to do this debate and yet they are under review. In fact, if it was within my powers, I would have proposed an amendment in the amendments to be proposed that in the order of business, amendments to the Rules of Procedure should come as number one on the Order Paper whenever it arises. This is because you cannot determine the progress of business unless your rules are complete. I think that is why the technical people had shifted the issue of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of the rules to come up. 

I think that is the justification so that you finish with the rules and then you can execute business in an orderly way. We had gone to committee stage of this matter. I am also aware, and I followed the discussions on the report, which is item number seven: Consideration and adoption of the report of Public Accounts Committee on Government compensation to Haba Group of Companies and Rhino Investments. 

The debate had gone a long way, and I remember I saw the Speaker guiding that the process of consultation had led to some of the issues already being implemented, by some ministers stepping aside and so on. So, she encouraged the House to wait for a report from the cabinet committee, which would come and may help us expedite the process of coming to a conclusion of this matter. That is the understanding I had, and before the Speaker left, we had a discussion on this and her instructions were, to clear the rules and then we proceed to execute other business.

So, we really need to finish the rules so that we have - and as I speak today, there is an injunction on the rules in the East African Court of Justice. They are waiting for the decision of this Parliament on our Rules of Procedure before they proceed. So, there are issues that are intertwined and that are tied to our Rules of Procedure.

So, I really seek your indulgence that we proceed; finish with the rules, and then we are able to execute business in an orderly way, not piecemeal, because we are going to take decisions based on the rules, which rules are going to be reviewed tomorrow and so on. I really seek your indulgence on this issue so that we have a comprehensive and complete set of rules, and then we go on and deal with other business.

I always believe that rules are set before the game. Would that not be a proper way to proceed, honourable members? Please, I beg you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it, therefore, correct to say that your ruling in effect is that no further parliamentary business will be handled until we finish with the rules? Have I understood you correctly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be appropriate because if there are amendments on the rules concerning the agenda, why should we deal with any other business when we have rules that are uncertain? Would that not be a proper way to proceed with business? Thank you; let us proceed with the rules.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What stage were you at? Committee stage?

4.37
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion without notice in accordance with Rule 46(1)(g) that the House do dissolve into a Committee of the Whole House to consider in detail the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

4.38
Rule 22

MR ODOI: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend sub-rule (1) by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (d) to read as follows, “Short reaction to communication”.

The justification for this is to give Members an opportunity and a limited period to react to the communication by the Speaker. The reaction could take the form of seeking clarification or Members giving more information on what the Speaker has communicated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the practice has been that when the Chair or the Speaker finishes communication, Members could rise and raise matters of urgent public importance. Now the proposal is that we make an amendment to that so that immediately after Communication from the Chair, there should be provision allowing Members to raise issues on what has been raised by the Speaker in his or her Communication from the Chair. That is the substance of this proposal.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, in principle, the amendment is good, but the problem I have is undermining the agenda for consideration by the House. Already we have a problem with matters of public importance. Now we may put in what you may call “short” on paper, but when it comes to actual practice, it becomes long. So, you have matters of public importance, then you have more or less A.O.B. matters arising from the Communication from the Chair. By the time you go to the agenda, you have already eaten too much time. I am not comfortable with that amendment, Mr Chairman.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. At the beginning, the learned Attorney-General said he agrees with the amendment in principle. What he expressed actually, is just a worry about how that item can be managed. I am agreeable to him in the first leg of his argument that in principle it is okay. What we need to do is to guide the Chair and say reactions - and I think the committee did it well because it said “short” reactions. 

It is now the discretion of the presiding officer; the Speaker. If the Speaker, in his communication, has raised very important issues, Members of Parliament should have an opportunity to either comment or add or even bring more information to the Chair. So, I think I will persuade my learned colleague to accept this amendment. But we need to craft it in such a way that the discretion is with the presiding officer. The Speaker should know if the agenda is so important and his communication maybe, is not all that important.

I have seen it before, where a Speaker presiding may say, “On this item, I give 15 minutes and two minutes for each contribution” and that has been followed to the letter. So, let us give it an opportunity, in my view. I seek your indulgence.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that that amendment be made as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it still the same rule? Then you should have guided us because we have not completed Rule 22; we have only dealt with one amendment. Can we go through all the proposed amendments to this and then we -

MR ODOI: Yes, Mr Chairman. We propose to delete paragraph (r) and the justification is that the practice in the House for a long period has been that there have been no half-hour motions, so we have a proviso that is redundant.

We also propose to re-draft sub-rule (3) to read as follows: “(3) A Statement made by a Member under sub-rule (2)(j) shall- (a) be non-controversial, on a matter of public importance or an emergency; and (b) not take more than fifteen minutes.” 

(4) “The Speaker may order a Member to resume his or her seat if in the opinion of the Speaker, improper use is being made of this rule.” The justification is to make the drafting and the reading of the rule clearer. The provisions are to be drafted in a simple and clear manner to avoid ambiguity in interpretation of the provisions.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I thought what is being provided for under sub-rule (4) are the inherent powers the Chair has. As it is here, it is redundant. Whenever a Member is acting outside our Rules of Procedure, the Chair has the inherent powers to guide the debate, rule him out of order or even ask him to resume his seat.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, half-hour motions have not been tabled because, I think, we have not been disciplined. But I am sure as we get disciplined, we shall have the half-hour motions. I do not think it is important for us to delete this because it is not currently being used.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is a standard practice of the Commonwealth and it might be safe to leave it there even if it is not being used. Maybe one day, it will be useful. So, the substantial amendment to rule re-drafting – 

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification. When you read sub-rule (3), “A Statement made by a Member under sub-rule (2)(j) shall - (a) be non-controversial, on a matter of public importance…” who is going to determine that? I may raise any issue from my constituency and yet I am not aware if it is controversial. Now, who will determine that a Member is raising a controversial matter?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You know, the operating rule is that statements made by Members should not attract a debate. So, in order for a statement not to attract a debate, inherently, it must not be controversial. And you see, this falls within the normal principles we talked about that the interests of each Member of the Assembly is subsumed into the general purpose of the Assembly. So, if something should happen to a Member that puts the House in disrepute, the Member owes it to the House to come and explain what led to that situation. That is the kind of thing we are talking about. And because you owe an explanation to the House, you come and explain yourself. That is why it does not attract debate; you are just informing Parliament about the circumstances which led to whatever people have said and has led to the image of House to be in disrepute. That is the purpose of this; inherently, it must not be controversial. So, do we need to specify that it must not be controversial and so on?

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, this is the gist of the matter. If a Member rises on a matter of national importance, I would not expect us to guide or control him on what he must say. If something happened in his constituency and it is controversial in his area, it is still a matter of national importance. So, how are we going to determine if this one will not attract debate? 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The matter referred to under this rule is in regard to Rule 22(2)(j), and talks about personal explanation or brief statements by Members and not matters of national importance. And if you look at Rule 42(1), which talks in detail about personal explanations, it says: “A Member may explain a matter of personal nature, but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it.” And that was the basis on which Members expunged the personal statement of the Deputy Leader of Government Business last week. So, this is not about matters of national importance. That is the information I wanted to provide.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Ssebagala is raising this issue based on the existing sub-rule (3), because that is what the committee is trying to explain so that it is accommodated. The particular rule we are dealing with here is on the “Order of Business”, that is, what follows what? And then there is a description of what can be contained in that thing.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I suggest that we retain paragraph (r) and you put the question.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, when you look at the re-drafting, it more or less realigns sub-rule (3). I do not think there is a need for us to re-arrange it; it should be retained as it is.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Committee chairperson, would you consider withdrawing the proposed amendment on sub-rule (3) so that we can make progress?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: If that is the advice of the Chair -(Laughter)- I withdraw it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 22, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 23

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to re-draft Rule 23(2) as follows: “(2) Subject to these rules, Government Business shall take precedence over private members’ business on Tuesdays and Wednesdays.” And the justification is to emphasise the fact that Government Business shall take precedence over private members’ business on Wednesdays and Tuesdays. But you have also noticed that we have dropped Thursday from our current amendment to allow private members’ business time on Thursday.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What about sub-rule (4)? ­

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, sub-rule (4) remains as it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But don’t you think the issue you are trying to raise here would be better accommodated there so that you leave - because sub-rule (2) is simply explaining sub-rule (1) and giving it specific details because those are constitutional issues. What you are trying to propose could come under (4) because that is where the private members’ business is –

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: It is Thursday, the first two hours.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes. So you are proposing two days?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Only one day, Thursday, for private members’ business. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are proposing the whole day? 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The whole day. Private members’ business will take precedence over Government Business. The committee was of the view that we need to give time incrementally to private members’ business and we need to identify a particular day for private members’ business. We concurred in the committee that we should reserve Thursday for private members’ business. That would still leave Tuesday and Wednesday to Government Business and Thursday for private members’ business. And Mr Chairman, this is not exclusive. It would only take precedence over Government Business for the whole day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, what mischief are you trying to cure here, because as of now, we do not have so much backlog of private members’ business? It has never been a problem, “That you have failed to fit private members’ business on the Order Paper -” Well, because the answers have not been brought. That is a different problem altogether. The problem is that the questions are sent to the ministers but the answers have not come back. So, they cannot come on the Order Paper because the answers are not there, but that does not mean that there is pending business which we have failed to fix on the Order Paper for private members because there has been no time.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am just speculating; I may be corrected by the chairperson of the committee. Under sub-rule (4), the private members’ business is being allocated two hours but maybe on that day, it may necessitate more than two hours. So, we can redraft it and say, “...provide for private members’ business taking precedence over in case it spills over the two hours.” I think that can cure the mischief. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that would mean we take out the two hours.

MR KATUNTU: The two hours and say, it takes precedence in case it spills over the two hours, other than going the way the committee is proposing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What constitutional provision will you be looking at in that case? 

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. How do we harmonise 23(2) which says, “Subject to these rules on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, Government business shall take precedence over private members’ business,” with sub-rule (4)? Sub-rule (4) says, the first two hours must be allotted to private members’ business? How do we harmonise these two? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the principle is adopted in sub-rule (4) then the implication will be that we adjust the other one. It will be consequential. 

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, we need to read sub-rule (4) and sub-rule (5) together because in sub-rule (5) if there is no sitting of the House on Thursday, the Speaker, may, in consultation with the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition, direct that any other day in the week be allotted for private members’ business. 

I wanted to encapsulate our worry in sub-rule (5) in the sense that if there is no sitting of the House on Thursday, or the first two hours on a Thursday referred to in paragraph 4 are not adequate, then the Speaker, “May, in consultation with...” so that we do not have to devote a whole day for that particular purpose because as you rightly put it, the mischief really has not yet arisen to justify that kind of situation. That is my opinion.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: First of all, my reading of sub-rule (5) pre-supposes that there is an entire day allotted for private members’ business. Now, you have to read that in whole, “If there is no sitting of the House on Thursday, the Speaker may, in consultation with the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition, direct that any other day in the week be allotted for private members’ business.” It has no reference to time. It does not say two hours of a particular day should be allotted to private members’ business. But reading sub-rule (1) to sub-rule (4), you do not find any day that is specifically allotted for private members’ business. 

The view of the committee is that we have to respect the constitutional proviso that Government business takes precedence over private members’ business. But private members’ business is equally important in this House and we have to allot time for that. We still believe very strongly that we probably need to drop the two hours in (4) and then make consequential amendments to take care of private members’ business. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The problem is the two hours, Mr Chairman, and I think Parliament has made mistakes by not utilising the Thursday as allocated, and I think this is the first time to understand this rule better. I think we should remove the first two hours to say, “Every Thursday will be allotted to the transaction of private members’ business” and we leave it, and when the Speaker sees that there is need to put up some Government business he can bring it up. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me take this opportunity to welcome you back. My understanding of (2) and (4) is that indeed, in accordance with the Constitution, at all times, Government business shall take precedence, but on Thursdays, some time may be allocated to private members’ business and so, maybe if we want to have more time on Thursday for private members’ business, we can say the first two hours or may be one hour shall be devoted to Government business then the rest of the day can be taken up by private members’ business. That way we have limited the time for Government business on Thursdays and then allotted more time to private members’ business. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: My problem with the wording is constitutional and the problem I have is Article 94(4)(a). It says, “The Speaker shall determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to Government business.” Now, if we put in the rules that we will give priority to private members’ business would there not be conflict? What I am saying is - because if you put it in those words that, “The House will give priority”, then in essence you are saying, the Constitution, therefore, in the way it says it here - because it is the Speaker to say it. That means now, the Speaker has to disregard Article 94(4)(a), which specifically says that - I am just worried about the wording. I think that is why it was framed the way it was framed.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We seem like we cannot run away from the Constitution because it has been drafted in mandatory terms. “The Speaker shall first of all determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to Government business”. 

I think we may have a problem there, Mr Chairman of the Committee. I think at all times it looks like the Speaker much as he is determining, the priority is to Government business. Even the hands of the Speaker have been tied. That is my own interpretation of Article 94(4)(a).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In other words, the old procedure, that one that is subsisting now, was a clever way of untying the Speaker’s hands and say okay, by rule we have already allotted these two hours, but it can be enlarged. We have enlarged time many times.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We need to appreciate that our numbers have increased of late. The Ninth Parliament is much bigger admittedly than the Eighth and Seventh parliaments and Members really have so many issues to raise.

Unfortunately, sometimes, we are limited to two or three minutes of submission on a very important matter. I would, therefore, like to propose in line with that constitutional command that we adjust sub-rule (4) and increase from two hours to three to accommodate - in any case, we usually debate here for about three to four hours to accommodate Members’ concerns on a Thursday. We could amend and increase the two hours to three. Mr Chairman, I beg to propose.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we need to maintain it as it is until we do further consultation with the committee. We withdraw the proposed amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us proceed because they need to look at it again and see how best we can handle it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is good the chairman has withdrawn, but I want to introduce something here as a Commonwealth practice, which you are aware of. I want to make a provision for Opposition business in Parliament. I want to make a proposal under clause 1 that, “Save as provided for this rule, Government business shall have precedence at every sitting. Twenty days shall be allocated in each session for proceedings on Opposition business of which, 15 are at the disposal of the Leader of the Opposition, and five at the disposal of other parties”.

Basically, we are trying to raise it as a Commonwealth practice and remember in the UK, when we were with you, it is provided for; in Ghana it is provided for; and in Kenya and Tanzania it is provided for. So, the 20 days we are talking about are not too many compared to about 110 days of sitting available in every session for the Opposition business.

THE  DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, was this particular amendment discussed by the committee? Don’t you think it would have been appropriate for the chairman to report on it?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, these proposals were brought before the committee and we discussed them in detail. The position of the committee is that there can only be two kinds of business: Government business and private members’ business. That was number one categorisation. The Opposition business can only be categorised as private members’ business. That was the position of the committee.

Secondly, the command in Article 94(4)(a); how can we possibly go past this when the requirement always is that we give priority to Government business by assigning particular days for the Leader of the Opposition and the other parties? The committee rejected this proposal on those grounds and instead provided for a whole day for private Members’ business. That should have included Opposition business.

MS KABAALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I happen to have travelled with hon. Otto to the UK and we attended the Commonwealth Parliament. The information which hon. Nandala-Mafabi is giving is contrary to the Commonwealth practice.

So, I beg to inform this House that the Commonwealth practice is that Members of Parliament can give information and the Prime Minister is given only 30 minutes. But on the side of the Opposition, they give the Leader of the Opposition to respond to any minister’s comment after that minister giving information or making a statement. I think we should maintain that, since he was citing the Commonwealth practice. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate my sister was not hearing very well because what we are talking about - I said save for the rule, Government business shall be the one which is in the front. I mentioned it very clearly, that is why I am not contravening the Constitution. What I am trying to bring up, we were in the UK recently with you, Mr Chairman, and you saw that the Opposition is given days in every session and it is common practice -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, please, that is the position of the United Kingdom. The United Kingdom does not have a constitutional provision of the type we have. That is the problem. So, we cannot extract it just because they are driving four wheels on the right and then we also begin driving on the right when our laws say something else. That is the difficulty we have. We are faced with a constitutional provision that we would have difficulty accommodating positions in our rules and if it is the way it is, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are a lawyer, you know these matters. Please, let us make progress.

Since there are no amendments on this particular rule, we proceed.

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, the Chairman of the Committee has emphasised Article 94(4), but in this Article under (4),(a) gives Government priority, but at the same time, under (c) private members are also given time and mentioned, which means there must be time for them. I believe the committee knew there would be time for a number of Members to come up with Bills. So, it is not just leaving them out and the Speaker when he/she just wants; it is a constitutional matter that Members come with Bills and other business. Therefore, a certain time must be given for this private member to present his Bill and giving one day, surely, I think is justified. They are trying to respond to this constitutional requirement. 

I would, therefore, agree with the committee that at least a day. If there are no Bills and there is more Government business they can – you know, the Speaker determines what to put on the Order Paper. He/she can use that period and given the vibrancy of this House, the Ninth Parliament, I expect many Bills to come on the Floor of Parliament. We do not want to see the Speaker refusing Members of Parliament because there is no time. They must present their Bills.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think we were moving well and I do not think hon. Jack Sabiti needs to get worried about his submission. Why? Because I do not think it is the intention of this rule, for instance, that if a Private Member’s Bill is being debated on the Floor of the House and we start at 2.30 p.m., then at 4.30 p.m., two hours will have passed and then the Speaker will say, “Two hours are over. Let us stop business.” I really do not think so. This is just a guiding regulation and also taking into consideration Article 94 - in any case, private members’ business, more often than not is always subsumed in, for instance, matters of public importance and other related areas. I do not think there is need for worry. In any case, there is no mischief we are addressing or some kind of backlog.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The only qualification to a Private Member’s Bill is that it has to go through that motion for leave. Once that stage is passed, that Bill is a Bill for all practical purposes and it falls within Rule 22 of the Order of Business. So, wherever it falls on the Order Paper, Private Member or Government Bill, a Bill is a Bill. That is catered for under Rule 22. That is my understanding. If, for example, hon. Abdu Katuntu had succeeded with the Access to Information Bill and it came on Monday, and was the only Bill on the Order Paper, it would be discussed on a Monday. Yes, that is what would happen, because it is a Bill before Parliament. Yes, Shadow Attorney-General. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I would like to allay the fears of my colleague, hon. Sabiiti. It does not mean that Private Members’ Bills will only be transacted on Thursday for two hours. Again, you need to look at sub-rule (2) and it says,”Subject to these rules, on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Government business shall take precedence over private members’ business.” That pre-supposes that on these days, you can have private members’ business only; that on those particular days, Government business takes precedence. It is not about Thursday and the two hours, but even on other days, only that Government business takes precedence. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What hon. Abdu Katuntu, my attorney-general, is saying is true. But Mr Chairperson, I agree with what you are saying in Article 94. It says, “The Speaker shall determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to Government business.” Perfect, and that is what he was also saying. But, by the time we were making this Constitution and even the amendments, we were still in a one party system. We may not have gotten grip of what we were trying to amend. That is why you remember, we had 150 articles which we never finished amending. 

Since the Speaker still has to determine the order and will give the business, I can withdraw the issue of the days and I am saying, “The Speaker shall also consider the Opposition business.” I am bringing this because we are in multi-party politics. That is why I want to continue and say, “Save for Government business which takes precedence, the Speaker shall allot some time –‘“

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The law is implemented as it is not as it ought to be. As it is now is what we are discussing. That is what it says, as it is now. What it ought to be is what you are proposing. So, we can only proceed on the basis of what is right now and that is the provisions of the Constitution. Article 94(4)(a) makes those declarations, as simple as that and we are bound by it. As long as it remains that way, we stay that way. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Mr Chairman, I think Article 94(4)(a) of the Constitution is clear. “The Speaker shall determine the order of business….” This is a constitutional command. Actually, no other person can determine the order of business if it is not the Speaker. I do not know what those who drafted this provision had in mind, but I would vaguely guess politically, we are trying to avoid anarchy where no single person is responsible for determining the order of business. It will have more ramifications than the way it is now. So, I would strongly feel that – not even the House, it is just the Speaker. This is in the Constitution. Even if we put it in the rules that two days, to me, it will still be unconstitutional. So, the way things are, it may not be very comfortable for now since multipartism is growing in Uganda. 

But, if my Leader of the Opposition strongly believes in this amendment and is so strongly persuaded that he cannot drop it, then we may have to wait for a constitutional amendment so that we state that in the multiparty era, the Speaker shall do a, b, c, d, but in the circumstances, our hands are tied. We cannot direct the Speaker yet the Constitution has already done so.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Rule 23 is not amended so, we do not put a question. It is a rule.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, since we are considering amendments to the Rules of Procedure, I thought it would be better that we pronounce ourselves even on other rules that the committee may not have made reference to, in their report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, no, no. We are amending the Rules of Procedure. We can only pronounce ourselves on those clauses that are not yet part of the rules. Those which are part of the rules, we cannot again pronounce ourselves on them.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, the reason and spirit with which I have risen is on Rule 24. Much as there is no amendment, I have a very big complaint about the Order Paper being sent to Members in advance. Many a time, that rule is not implemented. I think the enforcement of that rule leaves a lot to be desired. We cannot be subjected to getting an Order Paper just as we are entering into the Chamber. I think we need Rule 24 to be enforced so that Members come to the House when they are fully prepared for the business of the day.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the rule; we shall see how to implement it. 

Rule 27

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, before I move to our proposals for Rule 27, I need guidance from the Chair. Is the Rt Hon. Moses Ali capable of smiling? (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, we propose to delete Rule 27 and replace it with the following:

“27
(1)	Subject to these rules, every application to Parliament shall be in form of a petition. 

(2)	Every petition must be presented by a Member who shall be responsible for the observance of the rules contained in appendix (E) to the rules and inform the House that the petition is properly worded.

(3)	In presenting a petition, a Member shall confine himself or herself to a statement of the parties from whom it comes; the number of signatures attached to each of the material allegations and the request contained in it.

(4)	All petitions shall be laid on the Table without questions put and the petition may be ordered to be printed or if relating to a matter other than a Bill before a committee, may be referred to a committee by the Speaker or on the request of the Member tabling the petition for consideration and report.

(5)	The Speaker may refer a petition to a particular minister where he/she is of the view that the petition will be better handled by such a minister, and the minister shall report back to Parliament within 14 days.

(6)	The Speaker may also refer a petition to a select committee on a Bill under Rule 119.

(7)	A petition referred to a committee shall be disposed of within 45 days from the date the petition is referred to it.

(8)	Any Member may move a motion that the petition be rejected on grounds that it is not properly and respectively worded or on any other ground; if the motion is duly seconded and carried, the petition shall be rejected.

(9)	A petition not related to a breach of the privileges of the House according to the rules contained in Appendix E or usual practice of the House, shall on being received be brought on the Table under the direction of the Speaker.

(10)	After consideration of the petition under this rule, the House may take any decision it considers appropriate and communicate this decision to the petitioner through the Office of the Speaker.

(11)	Petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall immediately notify the Whips and table them before the Business Committee.

(12)	The Office of the Clerk of Parliament shall where necessary afford the Member presenting the petition professional assistance in drafting the petition.”

Mr Chairman, our justification is threefold:

i)	The rule as it is does not provide for a time limit within the committee of Parliament in which it is expected to handle petitions. I need to explain here. The Rules Committee is of the view that we set a timeframe for every business of the House. And this is in order to promote efficiency in the House. If a matter is sent to any committee, the Rules Committee is of the view that it should not take more than 45 days.
 
ii)	It has also been observed that some petitions cannot be exhaustively handled by Parliament, but the ministers may handle them and dispose them off. So, the Speaker in his/her discretion can forward them to the Executive for remedy. What petitions usually seek is remedy and it does not matter where it comes from.

iii)	The amendment also helps to put the rule in a chronological matter. I beg to move.

MR OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to thank the committee chairman for that elaborate amendment. But I want to make three quick observations: One, under (11), where you state, “Petitions shall be filed with the Clerk who shall immediately notify the whips”. I would think that (11) should be moved to be (2) so that it can help the visitors. Most petitions come from outside Parliament and not from within. 

Secondly, I have a problem with (4) which says, “All petitions shall be laid on Table without question put and the petition may be ordered to be printed or if relating to a matter other than a Bill before a committee may be referred to a committee by the Speaker...”. I would move that we have a full stop there because I do not see any other situation where this applies on the request of the Member tabling the petition. It is usually the Speaker who directs where a specific petition should go. I do not see any other person – if I bring a petition, I cannot say, “I forward this petition to the committee of discipline”. I do not see the importance of that provision.

And then under (5), I think 14 days is very little time given to the minister. As the Government Assurance Committee, we are having a very big problem, which we have brought to the attention of the Speaker. There are certain assurances, which are two days: Like the one of bringing the budget for Nodding Disease. This committee has to track it down and before we can sit down to do that and notify the minister, the days have passed. 

So, adding 14 days to ministers yet Parliament committees are given 45 days – I need a thorough explanation. Otherwise, we are going to help our ministers to become ineffective or we shall all collectively fail to track these commitments on the Floor of the House. So, I propose we give them the same number; that is 45 days. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Chairman, I believe 45 days for the petition to be disposed of is quite a little time. There are some petitions that require a lot of consultations. My considered opinion is that these petitions should be given more time, say, 75 days –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ssebagala, I am informing you that even Bills are given 45 days in the committee.

MR MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under (7), I am wondering whether the committee looked at Rule 192, which provides for the days you are talking about and even expounds and says, that suppose you do not conform to the 45 days, there is a provision for you to seek for an extension. Did the committee look at that?

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we did and we have proposals for amendment of the same rule. Actually, our proposal that we shall bring before the House is that even in respect to the Bills, there must never be extension of time. If the 45 days elapse, the House should continue to consider the Bill without the report of the committee. That is the proposal of the committee. Mr Chairman, I concede to the amendments raised by hon. Odonga Otto. They make sense and add value. 

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much. I am referring to No.5 and No.7 where you are giving 14 days for the petition to be given to the minister and 45 days. I am suggesting that we leave the time limit to the discretion of the Speaker because sometimes the petitions may take a shorter time and other times they may take longer. Supposing it needs urgent attention, are we going to give it 14 days? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Within 45 days. It can be after a day. It is the upper limit.

MS AMONGI: Mr Chairman, I am looking at No.8 where the committee states that any Member may move a motion that the petition be rejected on the grounds that it is not properly and respectfully worded, or on any other grounds, and if the motion is duly seconded and carried, the petition shall be rejected. I would rather go with the proposal on 12 where they are saying, “The Office of the Clerk to Parliament shall, where necessary, afford the Member presenting the petition professional assistance in the drafting of the petition” because when you subject it to the issue of properly worded or respectfully worded or rejection, then you miss the core substance of the petition. So, it would be rather better that you let them get the professional help as proposed in No.12 rather than saying we debate it straight away and reject it. You will make the Members miss the service of Parliament that they would have come to really deal with. So, I beg the chair to instead qualify to say if it is not properly or respectfully worded, then it should be taken to the Clerk under No.12 to professionally word it, rather than saying we reject it straightaway.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, if you look at Rule 4 of the sitting rules, those same words are there. I think what the committee was trying to do was to re-arrange them so that there is chronology like they did, but these are the existing rules as they are. They are not new. This is what we have been using. If it is badly worded, then that means you did not go through the processes that are given to you as a Member. If you just show up in the House with a badly worded petition, should you be entertained really? 

MR SSEBAGALA: On 12, “The Office of the Clerk to Parliament shall, where necessary, afford the Member presenting the petition professional assistance in the drafting of the petition.” So, it is already catered for. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there are proposals for some amendments that have been made by hon. Sabiiti. 

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, I think if you look at Rule 8 properly, the petitioner may be denied the chance of presenting his opinion - his complaints, and we should also remember where these petitions come from. They come from our villagers, from complainants who are illiterate and from people who cannot properly write these petitions. So, I think as my honourable colleague said, let us give this work to our Clerk to help such people. So, I propose that No.8 be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the procedure has always been that the members of the public come with these petitions. Sometimes, it is a whole book and they take different forms, but that is why they say it can only come to the House through a Member of Parliament. Those who want may come to the Speaker’s Office and put the petition there, they speak to the press and that kind of thing. That is what has been happening. They come to the Deputy Speaker and speak to the press and give their petition. It is now the responsibility of the people who have received these petitions to indentify a Member who can present this petition formally before the House and it goes through the process of refining and drafting it in the terms that fit within the rules. 

Otherwise, if you bring the petition straight from a member of the public, it would be very difficult to process it in this House. I have received many of them. So, they come with their own ideas because they do not have any professional assistance out there, but once they have accessed Parliament, the system within Parliament is put in action to help them process their ideas and that finds its way through a Member of Parliament onto the Floor of Parliament.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that you put the question. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Odonga Otto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question that Rule 27 stands part of the Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 27, agreed to.

Rule 28

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft the head notes on Rule 28 to read “laying of papers” as opposed to “presentation of papers” and the only justification here is that the correct parliamentary language is “laying of papers” as opposed to “presentation of papers”. 

We also propose to redraft Rule 28 to read as follows: “A paper shall be laid on the Table in the House by a Member” and the justification is that the rule being amended tries to list categories of persons who can lay papers. However, all the persons are listed as Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you dealt with both issues in Rule 28? Have you raised the full proposal?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, with due respect to the submissions of the committee chair, I think there is a huge difference between “presentation of papers” and “laying of papers”. The former involves both, as in when you are presenting a paper, it involves laying the paper on Table, but when we talk of laying papers, it may not necessarily involve presentation of that paper. I have seen Members and honourable ministers coming here, “Mr Speaker, I beg to present a report and so on…” and after that, they say, “I beg to lay.” 

So, unless there is very strong value in this amendment, I would still request that the status quo be retained. Otherwise, I will move and when hon. Ruhindi comes to present, I would just say, “just lay; you do not have to talk, the rules are clear.” I do not know how that would sound, Mr Chairman. 

DR EPETAIT: I tend to agree more with the chairperson of the committee because what my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, is suggesting is the presentation of reports, which reports after presentation can still be laid. But in this case, Rule 28 is just talking about laying of papers. Even the wording of the – because there are two amendments; the heading and the wording. Really, I think it is laying of papers, which are even not subject to debate. However, but what hon. Odonga Otto is referring to is presentation of reports, which reports are laid after the presentation. So, I think the committee’s amendments are fine. 

MR KATUNTU: I think there was a problem, Mr Chairman, with our original Rule 28. There is nothing like presentation of papers in here. Actually, it talks about laying of papers, which you know does not attract a debate.

I would like to propose that the Chair of the committee should revise the heading of Rule 28 from “presentation” to “laying of papers”. So, the proposal moved by hon. Odonga Otto –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have conceded? Then, I do not think we should - I think that is the correct position. I can see that the committee captured it very well. I am saying that because that would have an implication on Rule 22(2)(l), which would be amended. That should be “laying of papers”. “Presentation” only relates to reports and related matters. The correct terminology would be “laying of papers.”

I now put the question to the proposal as moved by the Chairman of the Committee that Rule 28 be amended in the terms proposed, “laying of papers” to replace “presentation of papers.” 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Rule 28, as amended, stand part of the Rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 28, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 29

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, there are consequential amendments arising out of the amendments we have just made to Rule 28. These amendments cover rules 29 and 30. I propose to handle both of them together.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But there is also a consequential amendment on Rule 22, not so? I mean the wording.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Mr Chairman and we shall correct that. The committee proposes to redraft Rule 2 to read as follows: “Mode of laying of papers.” You know that it is a consequential amendment to Rule 28.

And Rule 30 on presentation of reports of parliamentary delegations abroad, we propose to redraft the heading to reading as follows: “(1) The leader of a parliamentary delegation or any Member acting on his or her behalf shall, within 21 days of sitting, after the return to Uganda, lay on the Table, a report to the House on the activities of the delegation. (2) After the laying of the report under sub-rule (1), the Speaker may appoint time for debate.” Mr Chairman, that is the consequential amendment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, this is a very good proposal because it enhances accountability by Members. However, where the proposal talks of the 21 days of sitting after return is giving a lot of latitude. What would be good is that when a committee or delegation returns, within two weeks, Parliament should be having a report and if Parliament is sitting, that group should present it within 14 days.  Otherwise, if the report comes and Parliament is on recess, then they will have to wait for the first sitting to present the report.

The justification for this is that 21 days of sitting can make people – those are seven weeks and two months at that. So, in two weeks after return, the report should be ready for presentation to the House.

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, under the original rule, these are reports of parliamentary delegations abroad. I would like to seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee why, the committee now wants them to be laid and not presented as it is in the old rule. I am saying this because the old rule allows for debate. But in the new rule, the Speaker may determine whether or not to debate.

In the circumstances, I find the old rule better because the report is presented and a limited debate may ensue. May I get clarification on that?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have participated in several parliamentary delegations with some ministers. What I want to point out is that given the nature of some of the delegations, honestly speaking, a report cannot be written. If it is written, it will not be relevant to anyone who bothers to read it. There are some short conferences, which are more of – with all due respect, Mr Chairman.

My thinking is, it is true, a parliamentary delegation may travel, but they should not report to this House. What I would like to suggest is that the clerks who move with those delegations – and that should be in the rules – should submit a written report to the Clerk to Parliament. I am saying this because if we are to require every trip to produce a report to this House, then we are arming a certain group of people to now find out, which trips we are talking about, something that is not of their concern.

That said and done, let me point out that there are certain standard trips that are very well known to the Speaker’s Office. Those ones can be qualified because certain trips are just exchange or exposure trips. I beg to be helped there, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Otto, the issue here is; has Parliament spent money on that trip? If it has done so, then you owe it to the House to present a report. But if you have gone on your own without any parliamentary expenditure, then you do not have to report.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I want to agree with you that once Parliament has spent money, it cannot be on anything that is not worth it because this is taxpayers’ money. But I think this rule will help us – there were concerns during the parliamentary score card to the effect that some Members would be outside on official duty, but they were recorded absent. To me, if you present a report, that will be proof that you were absent officially. So, I doubt that there is any –(Interjections)– has he conceded? Then that is okay.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I have withdrawn and conceded with apologies. (Laughter) That should not be coming from the Chairman of Government Assurances Committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, it is good he has withdrawn. Otherwise, there would be disciplinary –(Interjections)– even in football, that is right. But, Mr Chairman, from what my brother, hon. Mugabi Baka has said, I want to agree with him that the old rule is good. I think we have only not been applying it. What we need to agree on is the fact that the phrase, “within 21 sittings” is dangerous. If we agree that the report should be ready within two weeks of return, that would be okay.

But also, we should not hold others accountable when we cannot account.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Attorney-General, would you like to wait a minute and I listen to hon. Juuko – okay. 

MR RUHINDI: I thought this being a very important provision in terms of accountability, there should be some level of sanction. No person should be allowed to travel on any trip unless he or she has accounted for or made a report for the previous one. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are administrative issues and they are handled through the Clerk’s office. That is done there and I can guarantee you that. Right now, there are forms you fill, where you declare whether you have done these things; laid reports on previous travel. It is already being implemented - with boarding passes among other things. (Mr Nandala Mafabi rose_)

Hon. Nandala Mafabi, can I listen to hon. Okupa, he has been standing for a while now. 

MR OKUPA: Chairperson, I just need to be helped. Although hon. Otto has withdrawn, I don’t know whether re-introducing another sub-section would help. I am just looking at a situation where I am serving on a budget committee of ACP-EU. It is routine work; I keep going for those budget committee meetings; I am, therefore, wondering what kind of report I will come back to make here. How do I handle that under this rule? Do I come back and report the issues we discussed in the budget committee of the ACP-EU?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. A report need not be a hundred pages. It may even be two pages- The Rt Hon. Speaker, I attended the ACP-EU budget meeting in Lome on these days where we discussed the following, blah blah blah. This Parliament will not draft the report for you. It is you who attended this particular function and you need to inform us. 

Secondly, you are a Commissioner representing the Backbenchers. The Backbenchers should know why their Commissioner was away. So, you don’t have to imagine that you are going to write a huge report. This institution which has spent funds on you to travel should know that you attended this particular function and you discussed this business. (Honourable members rose_)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Thank you. Honourable members, I think these issues are clear. There are so many other issues we need to deal with. Can we conclude on the issue of the timeframe? Members are supporting the issue of laying it under sub-rule 1 and the Speaker may appoint a time for debate depending on the substance of the report. Mr Chairman, the only issue now is the period within which they should report.  

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Fourteen days upon return would suffice. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Fourteen days; honourable members, I put the question that -

MR BAKA: I am now tempted to move an amendment that we maintain the old rule, which provides for presentation of reports, and on that particular day limited debate may ensue. Because you are now going to create opportunity for a small issue to appear on the Order Paper, on the day it is laid on the Table, and on the day the Speaker may appoint for debate. So, why can’t it be handled at once. It is presented, limited debate ensues, and it is finished. So, let’s maintain the old rule with the amendment of 14 days instead of 21 days. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I am giving hon. Stephen Baka information. What this amendment is doing is to say it is now the Speaker’s discretion to determine which report needs urgent debate. There are other reports that even to you suggesting it, must be presented and debated accordingly, and may initially appear time consuming and then probably may have no content, if it is one page. 

We are saying, it can be debated, but let the Speaker exercise discretion. Say, tomorrow if I travel to Rwanda, are you trying to say it is automatic that I should be on the Order Paper within two weeks to present an issue which will be debated. It may not necessarily have to be debated. This is why we are now saying that the Speaker must exercise discretion. Assuming you are presenting a report today on your trip to London, but the Speaker knows a PAC report is in the queue, where are we going to put our priorities. 

So, it is still the same thing, only that we are giving the Speaker discretion to decide that this delegation’s report does not require debate, other than making it mandatory that whatever is going to be presented is going to be debated. 

You remember what happened to hon. Obua on the delegation that went to Sudan. We had a very ugly scene in this House. You saw the report, the problem of where they slept, how they were received, honestly speaking. I don’t think you would want the House to be bogged down every other day with this kind of report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposition is that we amend rule 30, and the terms proposed by the Chairman of the committee, taking into account that the position of the Chair has changed to 14 days instead of 21 days of sitting. That is now the new situation of this rule. 

I put the question that rule 30, as amended, stand part of the rules. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 31

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we propose to redraft rule 31 in the following terms:

1.	A minister shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions asked of him or her. 

2.	Question time to ministers shall ordinarily not exceed two hours, except that the Speaker may, in exceptional circumstances, exercise his or her discretion and permit questions after the expiry of the two hours.
3.	The questions shall be asked on Wednesday and Thursday of the week of sitting of Parliament. 

4.	A minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.

5.	It shall be disorderly conduct for a Member to fail to ask or for a minister to fail to answer a question listed on the Order Paper without leave of the Speaker.

6.	The response by a minister to a question asked of him or her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days and the Clerk shall distribute the response to the Members within five days. 

The justification is contained on page 40:

1.	To provide for the days and time when ministers shall attend sittings of the House to answer questions.
2.	The amendment also introduces the aspect of seeking leave of the Speaker if a Member fails to ask a question listed on the Order Paper or a minister is not in position to answer a question asked of him or her when it is listed on the Order Paper. 

3.	Responses sent to Members will keep them informed of Government’s commitment and the answers to their questions. I beg to move. 

MR BAKA: Mr Chairman, one of the concerns we had in the Eighth Parliament was the time we spend on question time. Originally, it actually used to be three hours and at times two and a half hours, and if you looked at our output in terms of the Bills we pass during a session, it is still wanting; we are still at 19 to 21 Bills during a session as opposed to 20 to 70 in other parliaments. We have travelled widely and studied this issue very well; the Chairman of the rules committee has personally been to Westminster and seen how business is conducted there. I am surprised that he is now shifting from one and a half hours in the original rule to two hours. This is too much. 

I would suggest that we either maintain the one and a half hours for question time or even reduce it to one hour because that has been a major concern. Thank you.
 
MS NALULE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I wanted to bring up this issue where there was a provision we were discussing before. Sincerely, when I came here in the Eighth Parliament, I realised that we were wasting a lot of time. So, when our Committee of Equal Opportunities visited the Kenyan Parliament, we witnessed that when it came to question time, those people only give a minister chance to give a response within five to ten minutes.  

This question of giving a minister a question through the Clerk and that kind of thing is not there. When we were there, they were discussing the issues of traffic jam in Nairobi. The minister was given the question in the morning and he had to give the answer to Parliament in the afternoon when plenary was sitting. Sincerely speaking, one and a half hours is too long to give to a minister to respond.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it is for all the questions for the whole day and not just for one question. In the House of Commons, they do 30 minutes for all questions and they can release up to 48 questions. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I do not have a major concern on 31(2) for two hours considering all the questions that are there; that is adequate. But my concern is on clause 3; “The question shall be asked on the days of Wednesday and Thursday.” I will beg for your indulgence, but I imagine that questions from Members are part of private Members’ business and in the spirit of 23(2) and the provision of Article 94(4) of the Constitution, which talks about giving priority to Government Business. 

Bearing in mind that we have sittings on three days every week, and you give four hours, that is two hours each on Wednesday and Thursday for consideration of questions, we seem to be giving very little time to Government Business. So, I would be comfortable with the original provision of Thursday and we leave Wednesday out.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, actually, in relation to questions, there was no day assigned. If you could ask questions on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, that is the position of Rule 31.  There was no particular day assigned for them. So, those are some of the things that were considered because when you are given time to come and tell Parliament about the sector; it is as good as Government Business. So, I do not know why you are beginning to limit the days because Rule 31 did not limit the days. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Chairman, my understanding of this rule and probably why the committee came up with it is probably because we have questions for oral answer and then the written questions. I was looking at this as the days for written questions where we have to go through the procedure that is laid here. But for questions for oral answer, which we always ask here and the ministers immediately answer, and if they are not ready, they ask for time to answer on another day. So, that is how I was looking at it.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, actually, in the Commonwealth, “questions for oral answer” are “written questions.” I mean it is a wrong phraseology if you look at it literally, which means you are asking orally,  but  it is a written question that goes through the Clerk and is processed properly and then to the minister who subsequently comes and answers. So, “questions for oral answer” are actually written questions and replies. The answers are meant to be oral, but here we have text that is read. That is why it is faster in the UK Parliament than here. The honourable member is saying something else. Can we proceed please, honourable Chairman, on this particular 31? 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chair, we shall withdraw this one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You want to withdraw 31(3)? 

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Yes, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: 31(3) stands withdrawn.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Chairperson. I am looking at clause 5, which states that: “It shall be disorderly conduct of a Member to fail to ask or for a minister to fail to answer.” And in clause 6 it says: “The response by a minister to a question asked of him/her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days and the Clerk shall distribute the response.” Now, in a scenario, for example, where a minister fails, which has been happening; we present questions and they take ages. There are many questions which have not been answered up to now.  

The rule you have put would mandate that if I ask a question today, I should know that my question would be answered next Thursday, within five working days. So, I would avail myself within four working days. 

What happens if the minister does not answer within five days, will I still be disorderly under 5 because the disorderly here would mean that I am not there? In any case, Members’ questions come when they are abroad or in the constituency and they have no choice other than asking colleagues to ask the questions on their behalf because it is not their mistake that it came up on the Order Paper in their absence. So, I would like clarification; if the minister does not abide by the five working days, within which I know I would have availed myself, would I not be subjected to the disorderly rule? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the rules of this House require Members to attend the proceedings of the House. If you are absent with leave of the Speaker, you cannot be disorderly. But if you are just absent the way most people do or in any other way, except where you are required to give notice to the Speaker and be given the authority to travel, then you cannot be held as having committed a disorderly conduct because then the record will be clear that you are out. 

Now, on ministers, it would be disorderly conduct of a minister and once a conduct has been found to be disorderly, the Speaker has discretion to issue some sanctions, don’t you think so? 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, the amendment itself also provides for leave of the Speaker just as it is. It says, “It shall be disorderly conduct of a Member to fail to ask or for a minister to fail to answer a question listed on the Order Paper, without the leave of the Speaker”. So, I think that allays the fears of the Member or the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The fear of the honourable member is - he is saying here, I cannot ask for leave when I am not there. So, what we are saying ties up with the requirement that for you to be absent, you must have sought leave of absence from the Speaker. So, the whole thing would have been synchronised. And if the minister is not going to be able to answer that question on that day because he or she is absent or something like that, that should also be within the notice of the Speaker in which case the honourable minister would be in breach of the rules.

But if you are too busy in Cabinet or something like that, then it would be proper for Parliament to move in the way that has been designed in the rules.

MR LUGOLOBI: Mr Chairman, amendment 4 says, “A minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.” It appears alright, but then I need clarification. There have been occasions where an item appears on the notice of business to follow continuously for more than two or three weeks. I could even cite an example of the ministerial statement on financing of roads that has been appearing on this Order Paper for almost the last one month. 

I thought we could provide for where a question has been raised, the minister is ready to answer but then the issue is not coming on the Order Paper for the minister to respond and the Member who raised the question is continuously coming here to receive a response, but he is not getting it. So, I thought we needed a provision to cater for that problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, those will be administrative. I think we are also - within the Clerk’s department and the Speaker’s office - trying to see how to tie those ends together so that it becomes functional.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In the series of contributions from Members and considering our experience from the last Parliament, I would move that sub-rule 2: “Question time for ministers” shall not exceed one hour. This is in order for us to maximise efficiency and effectiveness; after all, the rule also provides for the discretion of the Speaker to go beyond one hour.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendments - the proposal is that -(Interjections)- Can I first handle this proposal? It is still hanging. They have proposed an amendment. Is that proposal seconded for reduction from two hours to one hour? We do not need secondment of the committee? I put the question -

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you remember when we had one and a half hours, it was also based on the numbers of Members. Now that our numbers have increased and assuming we are very effective, would you be able to cover the questions from those Members within one hour? I believe that was the reason why, in the wisdom of the committee, they decided to up it from one and a half hours to two hours. Assuming each Member is effective and he wants to ask a question, and we have about 385 Members – So, the issue of reducing the hours from one and a half hours to one hour will not enable Members to ask questions.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are proposing we retain the two hours proposed by the committee?

MR OKUPA: Yes, I propose that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Achia, are you maintaining your position so that I put the question on your issue or you withdraw?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Mr Chairman, I would really appeal to hon. Okupa. Since –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, I asked if you are withdrawing.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I maintain it, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by hon. Achia that we reduce the time to one hour.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, after your ruling on that particular matter, there is something that may be considered small, but it is not small, and that is in paragraph six of the proposed amendments. “The response by a minister to a question asked of him or her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days.” I do not have any problem with that. “...and the Clerk shall distribute the response to the Members within five days.” 

When you look at our rule as it is now, the practice has been that a minister gives a copy of his or her response to the person who asked the question, but now we are taking it to give copies to every Member. I do not really have any problem with this, but substantially, we are a paper Parliament. We have developed ICT - I think each one of us now has an IPad, and you can access your e-mail. For as long as you find paper everywhere in the corridors - when we leave Parliament and you find the paper hanging around, that is wastage by the way, and as a matter of fact -

Mr Chairman, I propose that we maintain a response to the Member who asked the question and for the rest, we can make it administrative, maybe through ICT, Internet and others.

MR SABIITI: Mr Chairman, the learned Attorney-General is assuming that Parliament is fully equipped and that every Member of Parliament has an IPad, a computer in his office and is on e-mail. Surely, if you look at all these Members of Parliament and visit their offices, what he is trying to say may deprive Members of access to information. So, I would suggest, that as we equip our offices, let the Clerk continue to provide information to Members of Parliament so that they can access questions and answers because what you are suggesting can be a problem to Members of Parliament. 

You may wish to reconsider what you have put on this Floor, but as far as I know, we have a big problem of accessing information. Concerning the Order Paper, even those who have the relevant facilities you are talking about do not have the Order Paper. So, why can’t the Clerk try and circulate such questions and answers?

MS KABAKUMBA: When I read the amendments that have been suggested, it is like we are trying to merge the questions to ministers, that is Rule 31, with the questions for oral answers, specifically the one hon. Ruhindi was referring to, which is in Rule 38. The way I understand Rule 31 is that Members just rise up and ask ministers questions. 

You are saying when we are debating and questions are being asked, we should not take more than two hours. But at the same time, we have written responses in sub-rule (6) and yet in sub-rule (5) you put these questions on the Order Paper. Yet previously, we have just been having questions for oral answers on the Order Paper. Are we changing the practice now? Mr Chairman, I do not know whether I am clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, you are clear, but the issue here is that the Rules you are citing are about the same thing: Questions for Oral Answer. Those are just elaborations on how it should be handled. Rule 38 is on the manner of asking those questions once they have already been brought. What we should do is to ensure that the questions should be short and sharp, requiring short and sharp answers – precise answers, not verbose ones with a preamble, which take a lot of time. This will enable us to make the whole process efficient. Sometimes, we have ministers coming to respond to questions and they take 30 minutes just responding to an oral question. 

I always give the example of the Kenyan minister who was asked a parliamentary question that: “Is the honourable minister aware of the potholes on this road? If so, what is the minister doing about it?” The minister got up and said: “Honourable member, I am not aware of the potholes and so the second leg of the question does not arise.” And he sat down. (Laughter) 

You see, these things are supposed to be precise; you do not need to keep elaborating. That is why the proposition was that it goes to one hour. If you give two hours, you are just killing –(Laughter)- So, the questions have to be framed in such a way that they can attract short and sharp responses, and not long statements. That is why, if you are coming with a statement, then you come with a ministerial statement rather than an oral answer to a question.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, I need to be helped here: If we read sub-rules (4) and (6) together, I seem to be getting lost on the timeframe. Sub-rule (4) says: “A Minister shall not take more than two weeks to respond to a question from a Member.” And then sub-rule (6) says: “The response by a Minister to a question asked of him or her shall be sent to the Clerk within five working days.” I am failing to comprehend the timeframe.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, sub-rule (4) should have come after (6) so that it provides for a period within which you will not be permitted to do anything. If it came after (6), it could make a lot of sense. So, it is a matter of re-arranging them.

MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Chairman, we shall re-arrange them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 31, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, the Committee of the Whole House considered the report of the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and adopted in part with amendments the said rules. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted by the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this would be the appropriate time to adjourn; it is 6.30 p.m. Can we agree on starting tomorrow at exactly 2.00 p.m.? Let us start tomorrow at that time and not 2.30 p.m. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
