                                               Wednesday, 21 February 2007  

Parliament met at 2. 55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome you back for this afternoon’s meeting and to request you to join me in welcoming master’s degree students from Uganda Martyrs University -(Applause) They are here to acquaint themselves with the parliamentary debates. We should thank the government for facilitating an environment where we have several universities.

Secondly, on a sad note hon. Frank Tumwebaze lost his sister. I should have informed you yesterday but I forgot.  The burial is taking place today in Kibaale District.  Hon. Omolo of Soroti County has also lost his sister. He left for Soroti to organise for the burial.  The hon. Elijah Okupa is graduating with a Master’s degree in Economic Policy of Makerere University.  He is inviting you to the graduation party in the parliamentary gardens on Friday, 23 February 2007 at 6.00 p.m.  

Honourable members, you will allow me to adjust the Order Paper. Yesterday we requested the Minister of Finance to come back to us on the issue of Tri-Star. He is going for a meeting soon.  So, we shall allow him to complete the matter of transport facility after the Minister of Health before we go to the other issues.  

2.59
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma Islands, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I raise an issue of national importance regarding the on going dispute between Mukono District Local Council and Buganda Government. Yesterday Mukono District Local Council carried out an operation whereby they captured the management of three landing sites which fall under Buikwe South and which are the landing sites on Buvuma Islands. We all know that this Government returned some of the property of Buganda Government and likewise the local Government of Mukono passed a resolution to return some of the property to Buganda Government.  

To our surprise last year the local Government attempted two times to evict the management of the markets in Kiyindi, Kisenyi and Katosi landing site. I am raising this because yesterday I was also attending a burial near Kisenyi where people were just captured unaware. The district brought very many soldiers with guns and took over control of the market.  There was a lot of dispute within the people and most of them were beaten, property was lost and even tones of fish went bad because they could not cover the fish.  

I would like the Minister of Local Government to take key interest and solve that dispute. I am saying this because it looks like Mukono District Local Council is using the ongoing atmosphere in the Buganda Government of having no substantive Katikiro. They want to take control of such markets. We do not want such things to happen. 

The second clarification I would like to seek is about these markets like Kiyindi which were to benefit from the loan, which was passed by the Seventh Parliament.  The persistent dispute really has hindered the ministry and the whole project to takeoff.  So, as Ugandans you are bound to fail; and as you know, Madam Speaker and honourable members, Government is actually paying interest on these loans, which are not being used.  

So, the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Agriculture should take keen interest in making sure that these disputes are settled such that even the developments which are supposed to take place in Kiyingi landing site takeoff. Otherwise, the people are bound to lose.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fortunately the Minister of Local Government has come. We will ask her to look into the matter and report to the House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  Yesterday a number of issues were raised relating to the Meningitis outbreak in the West-Nile Region and Kotido District.  I promised here that today I would come up with a statement to address some of the issues raised and clarify on how my ministry is managing this epidemic.  Also raised were issues relating to other diseases of epidemic potential and I will also clarify on some of them.  

I am now presenting a report of the Ministry of Health to Parliament on Meningitis outbreak in Kotido and West-Nile districts and other diseases of epidemic potential namely, Rabies, Rift Valley Fever and Avian Influenza- copies of my report are being circulated around to Members. 

As a way of introduction I would like to state that Meningitis is an infection of the meninges (coverings of the brain and the spinal cord).

Several different organisms can cause Meningitis but the one that causes Meningitis epidemics is the Neisseria Meningitidis.  

In Uganda, the districts that lie within the Sub-Saharan Mengingitis belt, include the districts in the West Nile region: Nebbi, Arua, Terego, Maracha, Adjumani and Moyo. In the Northern region, we have Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, Oyam, Amulatar, Dokolo and Apac.  In the North Eastern region, the districts are Moroto, Kotido and Nakapiripirit. All these can at one time experience an outbreak of Meningitis in epidemic proportions.

Madam Speaker, let me also add that Meningococcal Meningitis epidemics occur normally once every 10 years but some times it can occur before 10 years, that is it can occur between seven, eight, nine or 10years. That is why yesterday I stated here that from the epidemiology of this Meningitis, we expected it this year because we had an outbreak last year and normally when we get an outbreak it can occur for about three consecutive years before it dies out for the next 10 years or so.

Further, as a way of making clarification, I would like to highlight on a number of definitions so as to address the issues that the Members raised yesterday and I will begin by addressing myself to the cause, mode of spread and the risk factors. 

The causative organisms I have already said is Neisseria Meningitidis. Normally there are various serogroup, we have the A, C, X, Y and W135. In the West Nile region, we have identified the A serotype as the one causing the epidemic. In Kotido, it is the Y sero-type. Sero-type B causes sporadic cases and does not cause epidemics. You can only have a few cases and so the B serotype is mild.

The bacteria are transmitted form one person to another through droplet infection or through respiratory secretions. You can inhale it through the air. It is available in the air in the form of droplets and it goes through the nose where it normally stays and from there it penetrates into the brain.

The risk factors for transmission include: Overcrowding as in the case of IDP camps and Manyatas or any situation that brings a high density of susceptible people close together. Population movements, travels, migrations, nomadism, and displacement facilitate, quick circulation of virulent strains between areas. So, yesterday Members were raising concern about the neighbouring districts. Yes, there is a threat to the neighbouring districts but when we control it in the areas where it is now in epidemic proportions then we shall be able to cut off transmission to the neighbouring districts. But it is possible through movement.

Madam Speaker, delayed case reporting due to poor access to health services or poor health seeking behaviours increase spread of causative organisms and contribute to increase in death. That is why we always stress the issue of early case detection and treatment as a way of combating this disease.

A number of issues were raised yesterday regarding why we have not been able to immunise or to vaccinate people through out the West Nile region. Through this presentation I will be able to make clarifications on those matters, by first of all clarifying on key definitions, which definitions call for time and a number of cases to be identified and the realisation of a threshold before an epidemic can be declared.

A suspected case of Meningitis among people of five years of age and above can be identified when you have a sudden onset of fever, 38 degrees and any of the following signs: headache, neck stiffness, vomiting, altered consciousness, photophobia, that is, the patient fears to look at light and prefers to stay in dark places, petechial or purpural rash, you get red kind of rashes over the back and a situation of epidemics. All those can help you to suspect a case of Meningitis. Among children below five years of age, suspicion of Meningitis can be made when the child has acute fever, irritability and lethargy - the child is weak, does not respond, bulging fontanelle, the soft part of the head starts bulging, convulsions, petechial rash, hypotonia the child looks soft, vomiting, stiff neck and in a situation where you are experiencing Meningitis in an area.

The other thing that I would like to clarify is what we call a probable case. A probable case is any suspected case and cloudy or purulent CSF. If we remove a fluid sample from the spinal cord, then if it looks purulent in a suspected case, then you get what we call a probable case. With gram-negative diplococci, when we stain it with ink, we get something that looks like coffee berries, that is what we call gram-negative diplococci and they will stain red.

There was an issue about the ongoing epidemic and epidemiological link to a confirmed case. I want to define a confirmed case. This is a suspected or probable case and positive latex agglutination test or positive culture. If you grow the CSF, you will find the organism of Neisseria Meningitidis growing there.

There is what we call an epidemic threshold a standard which is set by the WHO. The Meningococcal Meningitis epidemic threshold is ten cases per 100,000 people for two consecutive weeks. This is one reason why in some of the districts like Koboko we delayed to start the vaccination. This is because we could not attain this epidemic threshold. The cases were coming slowly and yet we must satisfy the WHO criteria that for us to begin immunising. We must have confirmed five cases and we must be having ten cases per every 100,000 people for two consecutive weeks. So, ultimately what we normally do for that period is focus on another mode other than vaccination. 

Madam Speaker, the other mode that we have been using is treatment using Oily Chloramphenicol where we give one shot of the injection. If the patient does not respond within 48 hours we give the second dose and normally that is enough to cure the person.  

Let me also inform Members about the control measures that are available. As I have already said we have treated individual cases with the super drug, Oily Chloramphenicol using the single dosage treatment to reduce on the need for admission thereby overwhelming the health units. In some cases we give one shot of injection and the person goes home to avoid overwhelming and crowding the health facilities.  

For those who are very sick we admit and isolate them and monitor them for the next 48 hours. If they are not improving then we give the second dosage. The other option is early detection and that is what we have been doing. The prognosis or chances of survival are better when the cases are detected early and the patient is taken for treatment.  Therefore, my ministry has intensified on community sensitisation and surveillance as a way of ensuring early case detection. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, prevention of spread is by vaccination and this is the best way of limiting the spread of the Meningococcal epidemic.  

Madam Speaker, let me also inform Members that sero-group A can be vaccinated against using the Bi-valent vaccine (A/C).  

For serogroup C, we can also use the Bi-valent vaccine (A/C). For serogroup Y, we use the Trivalent-valent vaccine, which contains (A/C/Y/W135)

For serogroup W135 we can us the Trivalent - vaccine (A/C/W135) –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the minister is presenting a report to the august House but I believe I am not the only one who is lost.  The minister is as if he is lecturing medical students. I thought the minister would come and give a report in simple terms that can be understood by someone who is not a doctor but it is like the minister is addressing students who are doing masters in medicine.  Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable members, I do not know how we shall satisfy you. Yesterday he attempted to answer in simple language and you said you needed a complete and comprehensive answer and this is what the minister is giving. Now, I do not know because this is what you asked for.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. I think it is only in order that we give the honourable member enough facts so that they can in turn educate the masses that they represent.  

Madam Speaker, Sero-group X has no vaccine and this is the type that has been occurring in Kotido District. What we have been doing in Kotido is early case detection and treatment using Oily Chlorampenicol. As I said, we anticipated the outbreak and put in place the District Epidemic Preparedness Task Force. 

Last year, we had an outbreak and this year we expected another small outbreak around the same time. Next year, we still expect a small outbreak before it finally dies out.  In Kotido we have been managing the epidemic through early case detection and treatment sensitisation of communities, which has brought the disease to a control.  

Madam Speaker, let me also inform Members that for the mass vaccination campaign to be effective in halting spread, it must be carried out after knowing the causative sero-group.  Like I have been telling you about the various vaccines; you cannot get a vaccine that is effective against sero-group A and you use it on sero-group Y. That is why I now answer the question, which was raised here yesterday that, “since we expected the epidemic why didn’t we begin vaccinating people in advance?”  

We could not identify which sero-type was going to cause the Meningitis. For example as of now we cannot even vaccinate people in Kotido because we would be wasting resources, as none of the antigens is effective. That is why in Kotido we are using early case detection and treatment using Oily Chloramphenicol.

Secondly, you need to vaccinate the population at risk very fast that is within a period of not more than two weeks and this is what we have done in those districts where we have gone. For those districts in West Nile where we have not effected the vaccination, it is because the cases have been coming slowly over time thereby rendering us unable to realise the threshold. What we are doing in such areas is case treatment. 

Presently all the districts have realised the threshold required by World Health Organisation and vaccines are available. We have imported the vaccines from Oslo and within the next two weeks we shall have completed vaccination in all the districts.

May I also clarify that the World Health Organisation criteria for accessing vaccines from the International Coordinating Group (ICG) to conduct a mass vaccination campaign is an attack rate of ten cases for every 1000 people in the population for two consecutive weeks. It has been very slow in some areas because as we were not realising this attack rate, we did not qualify to import the vaccine.  

Secondly, we are also required to have at least five cases of vaccine responsive Meningococcal Meningitis confirmed in a reputable laboratory and this ministry has been able to do that. We managed to get five cases from each district confirmed in Oslo, Norway.  

As regards the age for vaccination, Madam Speaker, yesterday honourable members raised queries on whether they should be vaccinated or not. Allow me to say that other than hon. Odonga Otto who I know is not above 30 and the other honourable members do not necessarily need to be vaccinated. 

The target group is actually between the ages of two and 30 years. Children below two years normally may not mount a good immune response and there is also a danger of injecting them with this vaccine because they might react adversely to it. Those above 30 years have already got the exposure to these organisms and so they have already developed immunity against the organism. Immunising them therefore would actually be wasting resources -(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Honourable minister, I thank you for your advice but I wanted to know if I am the only one who qualifies in this Parliament to be vaccinated against Meningitis because he was specific on my name.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I was only making reference to hon. Odonga Otto because I knew that when he goes back to the community to interact with his electorate he would be a very susceptible case. So, I was only doing this in his favour. The rest of the honourable members from the regions I stated earlier on are generally above 30. But in a situation where we begin to experience deaths or infections of people above 30 we can raise the threshold to 45 years. 

So, the other Members if you also realise that in your area people of that age group is getting infected then we can still vaccinate you. The vaccines are available, we can make arrangements for Dr Makumbi to come here one day and vaccinate these honourable members- (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish you could allow the minister to give you- you know you asked all this yesterday. Let him complete his statement.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, let me move to Page 4 and move a little faster and make an update on the Meningococcal Meningitis epidemic in West Nile region and Kotido District. If you look at that table, honourable members, you will realise that so far we have a cumulative total of 2,728 from the West Nile region. In Kotido we had a total of 158 cases. Also in Kotido we have not realised any new cases for the week ending 18 February 2007. 

For the rest of the districts you can see the number of new cases, deaths, the cumulative deaths and the case fatality rate.

Madam Speaker, what I can say from this table is that our performance has been good. I don’t mean to imply that I neglect those Ugandans who have died because every death is painful but we have managed to control the epidemic to the tune of having a less fatality rate, if you make an average of this case fatality rate it comes to about 7.8 percent. That is within the normal acceptable range of WHO because the World Health Organisation recommends a maximum of ten percent case fatality rate. That means that if 100 people are infected ten of them will die even in the best hands. So, I did not mean to offend the honourable members yesterday when I said that my ministry was in full control.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, if you disregard Nebbi, which has actually made our case fatality rate to go quite high, the average of these other case fatality rates from the other districts comes to 3.3 percent. That means that on average three to four people were dying out of 100 and that is the best performance we have put so far in recent years.

Let me also highlight that the general trend of Meningitis epidemic in the West Nile sub region is declining as you can see from there. Significant reduction has been registered in Koboko and Arua/ Maracha-Terego districts in the last week. The trend in Adjumani district is still on the rise while Yumbe and Moroto districts have registered an insignificant reduction in the last week. That means that the cases are almost stagnant. 

The entire five sub counties in Koboko have been vaccinated from the 2nd to 8th February this year with a total of 128,467 people vaccinated. Our target population for vaccination was 126,750 and this gave us coverage of 115.31 percent. This was mainly because about 1,717 people were vaccinated who came from outside this district, some of who were actually health workers.

Let me also highlight something. Yesterday a question was raised here that we are segregating and only selecting health workers. No, that is not our policy. We regard all Ugandans equally. One thing is that these health workers had started abandoning patients in their places of work because they know they are potential cases by virtue of being in contact with the cases all the time. So they had left their districts to come where we were vaccinating and indeed we had to protect them because they are the ones who are handling the rest of the citizens. That is why we gave them the vaccination as a priority. We shall scale up the vaccination to cover all the other districts that are having the epidemic.

Following the drastic reduction in the epidemic trend in Koboko District may I also inform the House that all schools have opened on Monday, 19 February 2007. However, this has brought in another dimension of fear since a number of students are expected into Koboko from other districts that have not yet had mass meningitis vaccination campaign. 

My ministry has plans underway to take census of this category of students in order to verify whether their number is significant. If it comes to about 20 percent of the school population then we shall go there and vaccinate them.

Partial results of Mass Meningitis Campaign in 13 sub-counties in Arua-Maracha-Terego districts conducted from 3rd to 14th February show that a total of 184,603 people have been vaccinated. Our target was 189,716. 

Despite the reduction in the number of cases registered in Koboko and Arua districts, treatment centres have remained open and active surveillance continues.
 
We also engaged in micro-planning and preparations for mass vaccination campaigns in the districts of Yumbe, Moyo and Adjumani, and the exercise will be conducted soon. As I told you, what delayed us was to realise the threshold that enable us to buy the vaccines. Now the vaccines have arrived in the country and we are going to start it soon for these specific districts, because we make requisition for each specific district.  

In Kotido, the last case occurred on the 5 February 2007 and the surveillance is on going. I want to say that the sero-type in Kotido was the X sero-type, which does not have a vaccine and what we did there was early case detection and treatment.

In summary, Madam Speaker, the action that my ministry has taken includes the following: coordination, surveillance, confirmation of the cases, community sensitisation, early case detection and management and mass vaccination. 

Let me highlight the issue of funding, because yesterday, some honourable members implied that my ministry had relegated its duties to NGOs such as, Medicines and Frontiers. I want to state here categorically that we work with NGOs and other international agencies as partners, mainly the World Health Organisation, Medicines San Frontiers and UNICEF. My ministry shares the national task force and we have designated duties to each of these partners. 

So funding has come in the following ways: The Ministry of Health provided some medical supplies to Kotido and Arua districts. Partners have provided financial and material support to the Ministry of Health and districts in the areas of training health workers. They gave us the funds and my ministry’s technical people carried out the training in all these districts. My ministry did the investigation and confirmation of the epidemic. 

Active case search and community mobilisation and sensitisation - this duty we allocated to the district health teams.  Provision of the Oily Chloramphenicol was allocated to the World Health Organisation.  

World Health Organisation further supported us by providing Ugshs 5 million to each of these districts of Koboko, Arua, Maracha, Terego, Adjumani, Yumbe, Moyo and Kotido to support them in their response to the epidemic.  

Madam Speaker, may I also highlight that the responsibility of my ministry is mainly in terms of resource mobilisation, technical support, which includes training and ensuring quality of standards. 

Implementation of the various activities in consonance with the Ministry of Health Policy is squarely the responsibility of the districts. It was this august House, Madam Speaker, that passed the decentralisation policy empowering districts to implement the various policies of ministries.

Madam Speaker, the action taken in Kotido District, where the sero-group is one, which does not require vaccination includes investigation of the cases, surveillance, confirmation, provision of drugs and other medical supplies; World Health Organisation supplied the Oily Chloramphenicol. Other drugs like Ciprofloxacin, Ceftriaxone and assorted medical supplies like IV fluids, giving sets, et cetera were provides by my ministry.

Madam Speaker, let me also hasten to add that we discouraged the issue of people taking antibiotics prophylactically. Let me put it in the lay language that the honourable members will understand. That means, taking antibiotics before you actually get infected. We discourage this because you make the country run the risk of developing strains that are resistant to various antibiotics. 

So, I actually discourage the honourable members from going to that region - from taking prophylaxis. In fact the earlier you get the Meningitis, the better because you develop immunity. But there is also a risk, which you must be cautious about; you might be one of the unlucky ones to die from it. But with early case detection and treatment using Oily Chloramphenicol, the success result is quite high, over 95 percent.  So, we discourage the use of prophylaxis.  

Madam Speaker, my ministry and WHO did the training of health workers in Kotido - treatment of cases, community sensitisation and others. 

We had constraints namely- I want to agree with the honourable member who raised the issue here yesterday that the health workers are very scarce on the ground. As you are aware, most districts have not implemented the new staffing norms, which my ministry has been negotiating with the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  So, please encourage the honourable members to prevail over the district authorities, especially the district service commissions to make sure that they recruit staff according to the set norms by the Ministry of Health.

Secondly, we had insufficient Government funds. As you all know, our resources are limited, but on a positive note, the honourable members of this august House are the ones who appropriate resources. So, yesterday, when I was being bashed here, I knew you were concerned because death had occurred. But when it comes to allocating resources, let us also allocate appropriately knowing that all of us are concerned about the health sector. It is a key concern for all the honourable members and all the citizens of this country.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to highlight another concern, that is the Rift Valley Fever. The other day, it was reported that there was a suspected case of Rift Valley Fever. Right now, there is Rift Valley Fever epidemic in the neighbouring country of Kenya, which has consumed large quantities of vaccines resulting in shortage of Rift Valley Fever vaccine globally. 

Rift Valley Fever is endemic in all East African countries; it is a disease of animals that can be transmitted to man through contact with the animals, bites from mosquitoes that have bitten the animals or through contact with animal products, such as, meat, milk and others. But may I also hasten to add that conditions for its transmission are not favourable in Uganda. The Ugandan livestock are also known to be resistant to the virus. 

In the last two-three weeks, about four suspected cases of Human Rift Valley Fever were reported in Nakapiripirit District of Karamoja region. The first case was from Kenya; it was seen in Amudat Hospital on Friday, 9 February 2007 with symptoms not consistent with RVF and the patient returned to Kenya the following day and thus could not be properly investigated. 

The other three suspected cases all of whom died were from Arengeboche Parish of Karita sub-county and investigations carried out by district health authorities concluded that the cause of death was Dysentery or Malaria and not Rift Valley Fever.

Investigation of livestock deaths in Karita sub-county done by the district veterinary officer of the district concluded that deaths are most likely due to CBPP and not RVF.

Given the on-going outbreak in Kenya and possibility of RVF importation into this country, my ministry has taken the following steps to address this risk:

i) 	The National Task Force on RVF will be reactivated and will be meeting regularly.
ii)	To ascertain the true picture of the situation, a multisectroral team comprising Food and Agricultural Organisation, the Ministry of Health, CDC, Uganda Virus Institute, and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries will be dispatched to the Kenyan boarder to conduct outbreak investigations and assess capacities of the districts to detect and respond to any outbreaks of the disease, initiate training for District Veterinary and Health Officers and bring back human and animal samples for analysis.
iii)	The team will be led by the Commissioner for Livestock in the MAAIF, Dr Nicholas Kauta and it will be dispatched on Monday 26-Februrary-2007-02-21.
iv) 	The team leader will develop detailed terms of reference for the team and write a budget proposal for the trip for joint funding by WHO and FAO.
v) 	The team will also disseminate simple radio massages designed by FAO and CDC through Karamoja radio.
vi) 	FAO has already developed a programme aimed at training and community education about RFV.
vii) 	The need to alert the District Veterinary Officers and District Directors of Health Services of other high-risk districts bordering Kenya like Mbale and Kapchorwa to beef up surveillance and community education for RVF has already been noted and we are going to inform them.

The next meeting, Madam Speaker, is actually scheduled for Monday, 26 February 2007

There was an issue raised about lack of vaccines for Rabies. I want to inform Members that vaccines currently available are a leftover from the ones that were bought by the sectors for the health sector strategic plan. So, vaccines are available. The balance is now estimated to be 400virals and it is enough for 100 people –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, can I be protected? We make requisitions depending on the number of cases; the cases of Rabies are very rare. It would be a waste of resources for us to stock 1,000 doses when we don’t get those cases in a year. The Ministry of Health got a release of Ugshs 33 million to purchase more vaccines and the process of procurement is on going. 

Let me also highlight the issue of Avian Influenza, or Bird Flu, which was also reported in the Northern region and also on going in Southern Sudan. The suspected case, which was investigated, proved to be a case of most likely AIDS, and a sample was taken and taken to Uganda Virus Research Institute and it did not prove to be Avian Influenza. 

The districts have been sensitised on recognition and management of cases in case they occur and surveillance is on going. I think that clarifies some of the issues that were raised by Members yesterday and I beg to lay this paper on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Now honourable members, we had a lengthy debate in this matter yesterday, and the minister is just really – I think he has answered all the questions –(Interruption)- on Meningitis? No, it seems you want to talk about other things. Okay but very briefly.

03.47
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, District Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to the minister’s report, it seems he hasn’t got the update report from the neighbouring districts. Yesterday we were in Masindi; I got a call from a health worker informing me that five people had died instantly. And just as he was reading, I consulted the secretary in charge of health; five people have been reported dead and eight were reported to having been infected by meningitis, one is improving.

I want to find out from the minister, when do you intend to vaccinate people in Mutunda and specifically Nanda village in Nyamahasa Parish in Masindi District?

03.48
MS ROSE MUNYIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for his presentation, except when he was highlighting the meningitis belt in Uganda, he did not include the Eastern Region and yet in many times there have been outbreaks of Meningitis. 

I remember very well when I was still teaching in Tororo Girls School, we had to immunise girls and to take some to hospital who were infected. I don’t know how you take care of the areas, which are out of what you have described as the Meningitis region?

Then the minister also talked about Rabies vaccines that they managed to import, what is enough for 100 people. In my district, we have had to relay on Arupe Centre, which is in Kenya to take people to be vaccinated because of shortage of vaccines. I wonder whether this will cover the whole country. 

03.49
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): I would like to add my voice to thank the minister for the presentation. But then I would like to find out from him that if there are three cases reported of Meningitis, do these people get vaccinated or they get treated, because the threshhold has not been made in that place.

3.49
MR BARTILLE TOSKIN (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwa): Madam Speaker, my major concern here is about the Rift Valley Fever – Bukwa is not being mentioned here. Bukwa is directly linked to Kapengulia District of Kenya, which is on the Rift Valley. So, I would like the minister to take note of that and know that this is an area which must be handled immediately.

Secondly, the Minister of Health should take the issue of staffing in the health units very seriously. I have been treating a patient in Mulago but the nurses are overstretched. You find one nurse handling up to 170 cases, and by evening the nurses are so tired that they are failing to handle. This is the same in the health units outside.  

I also wonder whether the Minister is aware that for the last one year there has been an on-going problem of recruitment of nurses because of their failure to register nurses. There is a conflict between the Nurses Council and the Ministry of Education. This is again causing problems nationwide. Is the Minister aware of that? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.51
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, People with Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is not really a question but a humble request to the minister in regard to the formulation of future statements. There are three key questions to look at when looking at a statement of this nature. The first, what is the situation? The second, what is the government doing? The third, what should the public and we, members of Parliament, do about the situation? 

Madam Speaker, for the first question regarding the situation, I award one percent. For the second –(Interjections)- yes, Madam Speaker, I am also a teacher. For the second question, what Government is doing, I award 95 percent. For the third question, I award 50 percent. Why? When you look at the text, the minister has not articulated the role of members of Parliament and the role of the public in combating this current situation. 

On page 6, point H, for example, under articulation of constraints the first point there is the constraint of inadequate workers. The Minister verbally said that MPs should go and encourage districts to hire more health workers, but it is not here on paper- it is not documented. If I get a copy of this document, I do not know what I will do when I go back to the constituency. I beg the minister next time to please help us with the third issue of concern, that is, the role of MPs and the public in helping with this situation. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, maybe I could also add that I was distributing drugs in many health centres in my place but the first thing I would find was shortage of staff. They said you have a ceiling, but you have not mentioned the ceiling. You are telling us to go and urge the District Service Commission to recruit but tell us about the ceiling. Is there a ceiling or not?

3.54
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much honourable minister. If the information you have provided to us here is to allay the fears of the people here yet you have not been there; it has done its work. If the information you have provided here is the theoretical part about Meningitis, it has done its work. However, if the information is to call for action, to report what the ministry has done and the gaps that exist, and therefore, to call for action from the other stakeholders not only within this Parliament but the world over, the report leaves a lot to be desired. 

I would like to refer to this small clarification in your speech here. Yes, you work with partners like World Health Organization, MSF, and neighbouring countries, but in the area of facilities and logistics what have you as our Government provided? As I speak, Yumbe District is grounded; they have done thorough work mobilising religious leaders, traditional healers to prevent –(Interjections)- Yes, this is an area which he never mentioned here. 

Honourable members, you know the concept of traditional healing is here in Uganda; because of the shortage of drugs, people in the villages run to the traditional healers when they get Meningitis. The health workers have the obligation of educating the traditional healers so that they are able to differentiate between what they can manage and what they cannot manage. So, my position here is –(Interruption). 

MR OLEGA: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the previous speaker for trying to raise issues, which are pertinent regarding the issue of meningitis. I know the situation is appalling in West Nile, but I wish to correct the impression that the traditional healers are involved in this meningitis issue. I have been down there to sensitise and they know once you get meningitis, you go to hospital. The issue of traditional healers should not arise in this case.  I thank you.

COL (RTD.) BUTIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is talking about traditional healers; I request you not to encourage them to involve themselves in scientific matters, otherwise, Meningitis will spread like fire.  

Number two, as a broadcaster, when you are speaking I know you are very angry but please stand six inches away from the microphone. Thank you.

MR BABA: Honourable Speaker, I want to add to what the honourable Minister of Health has said, in particular reference to traditional healers. In the case of Koboko we registered so many deaths because people were going to these healers. People were using herbal medicine instead of going to the health centres to get scientific drugs. 

So, I would like to encourage my brother and my neighbour, hon. Funagaroo, not only to avoid the traditional healers and herbal medicine in this terrible thing, but to stick strictly to medical treatment. Thank you.

MR STEVEN KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that in primary health care, we have three major facets in handling diseases: we have the primary prevention, the secondary prevention and the tertiary prevention. The issue of the traditional healers you are talking about, I think, comes under primary prevention, which the Minister has ably elaborated on page 5. He talks of community sensitisation, where they have deployed film vans, carried out information education and sent Information Education and Communication (IEC) materials. With community sensitisation, the issue of traditional healers can be addressed. In fact honourable member, it is very good you have identified it. It is very good the Minister gave a very detailed presentation. You can use this to join the struggle of primary health care, to sensitise your people to avoid traditional healers. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. I am pleased to see that you share the same values and fears like me, honourable members. The issue of traditional healers has come here not because I encourage them but as I was there I saw a problem. Most of the people died in shrines, in the hands of the traditional healers, because of desperation and lack of medicine in the health centres. 

What I have done includes taking the Oily Chloramphenicol, which has been referred to here. I carried it from World Health Organisation myself. You talk of having medicines in Kampala, but the medicine is required in West Nile. How would people get it from your ministry if you do not deliver? 

Honourable members, scientific matters are not understood easily by everybody. You have seen the difficulties we have had here when the doctor was speaking to us. Help the traditional healers to avoid deaths and yet to participate, so that the people do not mess themselves up because of the lack of medicine and supplies from the Ministry of Health. Convenience stocking from the ministry will endanger us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, some of you contributed yesterday.

4.02
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for this very detailed and technical report. I have one question to ask. The Minister and the ministry seem to have done very well in terms of mitigating the possible risk of Rift Valley Fever being imported into Uganda. This is represented on page 7 of his statement. 

I also observe that the districts that are currently affected by this Meningitis outbreak border other countries, namely, the Sudan and the Congo. If you have been to West Nile recently, you will appreciate that there is a lot of human traffic and other forms of traffic crossing the border. There is a possibility of us exporting Meningitis into the Congo and Sudan, and that Meningitis could in turn be re-imported into Uganda. Once these people go to the other side and there is no treatment, hon. Kiwanuka Ssemakula, you realise that they could re-infect our people. 

Madam Speaker, I want to know from the Minister what his ministry has done to ensure that Meningitis is not imported into this country, especially after we spend a lot of resources tackling our own Meningitis. I thank you very much.

4.04
MS BAKO CHRISTINE (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Minister for attempting to save the situation. The Minister has elaborately said that they take some samples to Oslo. How long does it take for those tests to be confirmed true or otherwise? If it is an issue of equipment and the like, have you incorporated that requirement in the next budget, so that next time it will not be another story of having to take these things to Oslo? 

You have said that close interaction with people is one of the easiest ways of spreading Meningitis. Since 2002 till now, the medical ward in Arua Hospital that serves the Sudan and Eastern DRC is non-functional. There were adverts made to that effect but there is nothing up to now. The last time the honourable minister visited, he only talked about having this medical ward renovated yet the technocrats have affirmed beyond reasonable doubt that it is actually a risk. So, when is this medical ward going to be built? We would not want to see a scenario where there is an issue of congestion in the hospitals. For now the expectant mothers are actually with the children and the male adult patients are sharing wards with the children. The whole situation is pathetic! To what extent have you worked on our medical ward? I thank you.

4.06
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for his comprehensive report, but I would like to get one answer from him. What are the factors that make some parts of the country susceptible to Meningitis and others not susceptible? There is even a belt, a Meningitis belt. Is it environmental, is it climatic? What are the factors?

4.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH, PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for the questions you have raised. My colleagues have already answered some of them so I will not bother to repeat those that have been answered, but allow me to highlight those that have not been answered.

There was a question raised, “When are we going to vaccinate in Masindi?” I clearly elaborated here on the threshold required for an outbreak of Meningitis to be declared an epidemic. All of you have this handout, and five cases so far in Masindi do not qualify the situation to be an epidemic. I did say that there must be ten cases for every 100,000 people for two consecutive weeks. As of now what we can do in Masindi if the five are cases of Meningitis, is to treat them until that threshold is realised and then can we begin to vaccinate. That is an international standard set by the World Health Organisation because as you saw from my report, these vaccines are expensive depending on the number of antigens. Some of them cost Shs 28,000 per dosage. So, you can imagine if we just started vaccinating without actually approving.  

Woman Member for Busia: “Why did I not elaborate on the Eastern region and yet there was an outbreak one time in Tororo?”  I did clearly clarify the Sub-Saharan Meningitis Belt and clearly those are the districts but it can also spread to other areas. And I did clearly warn the honourable members that, yes, the possibility of spread is there and I cannot really ascertain whether the type that occurred in Tororo some few years ago was the bivalent that occurs in sporadic cases. But since the honourable member said that people were immunised, perhaps it was the A or C sero-type. But in case it occurs in those other Eastern region districts then we shall follow the same control measures.

Rabies vaccine; why people go to Arupe in Kenya? I think it is a matter of accessibility and we in this region do not discriminate; when Kenyans come here we do not discriminate against them.  So, it is an issue of access –(Interruption)

MR KALIBA: Thank you very much honourable minister for giving way. I would like to get a clarification from you since you are telling us that the sero-type Y covers all other types, I wonder why we could not use it in our routine immunisation against Meningitis? You have said it is very expensive but if we look at the cost of actual case management vis-à-vis the prevention aspect, is it not possible for us to use the routine vaccination as we do mass vaccination for other immunisable diseases? I thank you.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, on page 2, at the bottom I clearly elaborated on the various sero-groups and the various effective vaccines. Nowhere have I stated that there is a vaccine Y, which is effective against all this. It is very clear I did say sero-group A is the bivalent vaccine A or C; sero-group C is A or C; sero-group Y we can have A or C or Y or W135, but this time we have not had an outbreak of sero-group Y, so we could not vaccinate people. We are experiencing an outbreak of sero-group A in the West Nile region and sero-group X in Kotido, so we cannot vaccinate people against Y. I hope that puts the matter to rest.

Madam Speaker, if I may continue; three cases of Meningitis - another question was raised here that one is similar to the one of Masindi but it has not reached the threshold for vaccination. We can use early case detection and treatment using Oily Chloramphenicol, which is available in enough dosages. 

Bukwa: I want to assure my colleague from Bukwa that it is actually one of the districts that we are very keen on about Rift Valley Fever and it is well taken care of because I did mention Mbale and all the other border districts neighbouring Kenya. 

Staffing: there was an issue raised regarding staffing where the honourable member said that the staffing in hospitals is quite appalling, including Mulago. It was only this year that we negotiated with the Ministries of Public Service and Finance to allow us review the staffing norms. We have revisited the staffing norms and established new ones, and this is what I said. I hope the honourable members will follow-up this matter with the various districts where they come from because the authority to recruit now lies with the districts. 

Public Service has given us the assurance; Ministry of Finance has given us the assurance that they are going to provide the funds for the wages of the newly recruited people. So, we expect to recruit people according to the new staffing norms. We are further going to discuss this under the inter-ministerial discussions with Finance so that we are sure that this coming financial year we have funds to recruit adequate staff. 

Registration of nurses: my ministry has been holding dialogue with the Ministry of Education; I think we have had about three meetings so far regarding the registration of nurses and the matter is going to be concluded. Both parties have agreed that the nurses should not be subjected to two examinations. They should undergo one examination and instead the Nurses’ Council should also be part and parcel of the body that sets examinations so that questions relating to nurses’ ethics are also set in the final examinations other than subjecting them to two examinations and delaying their registration. So, that matter is being handled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Chair of the Social Services Committee has something to say.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Madam Speaker, I would like to give more information that this matter has reached our committee. Several petitions have been brought to our committee and to the best of my knowledge, both ministries are in agreement but it is the Nurses’ Council that is defying. We are likely to call the Nurses’ Council, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health one of these days, and we resolve that matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister.

DR OTAALA: Further information on that matter: my colleague the hon. Minister of State for Health in charge of General Duties, who has been at the forefront of resolving that matter, has assured me that the case has now been resolved. So, the registration of nurses will go on as required. 

Ceiling: the ceiling is there and it is according to the new staffing norms. So, you will not be expected to recruit beyond the new staffing norms. I think at an appropriate time - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No honourable minister, what are the new staffing norms? Will you have one nursing official running a sub-county?

DR OTAALA: At an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, I am going to provide this House with the new staffing norms according to various health facilities and this will show what is expected at a health centre II; health centre III; health centre IV; general hospital; and a regional referral hospital.

Madam Speaker, if I may continue -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clarification, hon. Amuriat?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Thank you very much, honourable minister. Related to staffing needs, I just want to get an impression from the Minister whether it is his feeling or that of the ministry that staffing in the health units are adequate. Because you have talked about norms, yes, they are available in the ministry and I am sure that the ministry should be in the position to tell us whether staffing is in conformity with the norms. And if it is, whether it is actually adequate because the outcry is everywhere you go; I do not know why your ministry has not heard that outcry! Thank you. That is what I really wanted to find out.

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to state clearly that adequacy depends on the available resources. I did say here that we as hon. Members of Parliament, we are the ones who appropriate the resources. But these norms are new. We have all along been using norms that were set over three decades ago. Our task now – we have set new norms. We have calculated and found that this is what we need in each of these facilities. And I said that we have agreed with the Ministries of Public Service and Finance that money will be available for this. 

Also to address the issue of areas, which are hard to reach and hard to stay, like the Northern region, this time around the Ministries of Finance and Public Service have agreed that in the next financial year’s budget, there will be a thirty percent incentive on top of the salaries of those health workers who will accept to go and work in those hard to reach and hard to stay areas. This is because many times the districts advertise and they do not get people. Otherwise, last year my ministry helped some districts that could not attract workers by advertising and recruiting centrally. We can still do that if they submit to us and tell us that they need our intervention.

As for the regional referral hospitals and national referral hospitals, the responsibility is with the Health Service Commission to recruit and it depends on the submission of the executive directors and the medical superintendents from these places. We can only recruit basing on the available vacancies according to the norms.

Hon. Fungaroo asked a question regarding what I had already talked about whether we are already doing sensitisation but his main concern was on traditional healers. Just a few weeks ago, I was in Luweero talking to these traditional healers because they are part of our health system. I will at an appropriate time inform you so that we can go to your constituency and talk to these traditional healers because we need to bring them on board. Like the honourable member from this side said, “Let them keep their hands off treating Meningitis because they cannot manage it using their local herbs.” So, the major thing really is sensitising them so that they appreciate that they are partners with us and we are not pushing them far off.

I want to thank the engineer, hon. Amuriat for saying we are doing very well in terms of addressing the Rift Valley Fever. Yes we shall continue to do such activities whenever there is a threat of a possible epidemic.

Risk of importing or exporting Meningitis from the neighbouring countries especially Congo and Sudan: as I talk now there is also an outbreak of Meningitis in Congo and it is not within the mandate of my ministry to go and treat people there but those who come across are treated; and the World Health Organisation, AFRO is already in control of the situation. AFRO is the body charged with overseeing good health in the region.

On equipment, “What assurance can I give to Arua regarding renovation of the ward?” I must say that we have started on renovating a number of wards. The other day the honourable members here passed a resolution for my ministry to get a loan from the African Development Bank, which is going to go mainly in renovating most hospitals and health facilities in the west. Already a number of health facilities are being renovated in the east, and the North has also benefited, but we are mainly depending on donors because of our limited partners. JICA is doing a very good job -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you are seeking clarification?

MS BAKO ABIA: Thank you honourable minister. The situation in Arua is in such a way that the whole building technically speaking is sinking and it is supposed to be destroyed and rebuilt. Before this year and two years back, adverts were made for that structure to be reconstructed and until this date nothing has been done. Are you talking about renovating what is supposed to be demolished and rebuilt?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Minister?

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I do not have a ready answer to address that issue. I am going to cross check and furnish my colleague with a definite answer but I hope that the authorities in the district will also be able to give us a report why the ward is condemned and not fit for renovation. But I want to say that it is one of our priorities in the next financial year’s budget. This is the budgeting season; you can always follow it up with me but I want to assure you that it is one of our priority areas.

Madam Speaker, let me also highlight that at each health centre, regarding the issue of norms, at health centre IIs, we need at least seven health workers, which is according to the new staffing norms. At health centre IIIs, there must be 17 health workers and at health centre IVs, there should be at least 37 health workers, including two doctors. That is the new norm.

If I may make further clarification on the Rabies vaccine, the 400 vials, which were referred to are what is remaining out of the 9,800 dozes. As I did say, Shs 33 million has already been dispatched to procure more dozes. Nine thousand and four hundred vials have been distributed to districts since October last year. So we are actually doing very well in terms of controlling Rabies. I would encourage people other than going to Alupe, we have the resources here, but maybe it is just due to easy access. I know those at the border find it much easier to go to Alupe other than Busia or Masafu. Madam Speaker, I think those are some of the issues that I needed to clarify. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister for Primary Health Care.

REPORT ON THE LOAN REQUEST FOR FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry the Minister has had to go away. We shall defer it to tomorrow.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 11/1/08

4.29
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terogo County, Arua): Madam Speaker, hon. Beti Kamya has gone for a burial in Masaka. I was able to get in touch with her and she kindly asked me to request your indulgence that this question not be answered today; that she has a number of supplementary questions, which she would wish to put across to the Minister responsible. I do not know how it ogres, but I wish that if it were possible, we defer it to tomorrow when she is in the House.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Question 11/1/08 is deferred to tomorrow. 

QUESTION 14/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS 

4.29
MR KIYONGA FRANCIS (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. “What strategies are in place to sustain peace talks between Government and LRA in light of the seeming determination by the International Criminal Court to try the indicted leaders of the LRA?

Does the government intend, as a measure to promote peaceful resolution of the conflict, through diplomatic channels, to request the international community and ICC to give a chance to the peace talks and consider the issue of justice later?”  

This question is still relevant even though I have waited for some months to ask it. 

4.30
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. It is true that hon. Kiyonga, Member of Parliament for Upe County, asked the Rt hon. Prime Minister the question and the question was, “What strategies are in place to sustain the peace talks between Government and the LRA in light of the seemingly determined stand by the International Criminal Court to try the indicted leaders of the Lord’s Resistance Army? Does Government intend as a measure to promote peaceful resolution of the conflict through diplomatic channels to request the ICC to give a chance to the peace talks and consider the issue of justice later?

Madam Speaker, the Rt hon. Prime Minister instructed me to answer these two questions and the answer for the first part of the question is that, colleagues will recall that ever since the National Resistance Movement  captured the reign of power in this country, there have been vigorous efforts to pursue peaceful solutions to our problems. This fact is exemplified by successfully held negotiations with a number of rebel groups which have since been dissolved after successfully reaching a peaceful resolution of the conflicts. Some of their fighters have been integrated into the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the rest have been reintegrated in normal civilian life.  

The Lord’s Resistance Army is not an exception. Efforts to reach a peaceful settlement with the Lord’s Resistance Army date back to the 1980s when Government engaged those who were supporting, training and arming the Lord’s Resistance Army. Many meetings were held both here in the region and abroad. Delegations to these meetings were at different levels ranging from the Presidency; President Museveni attended a number of these meetings; meeting his counterparts in Sudan, in Libya and other countries and it went down to lower levels of governance, to ministers, military officers and senior Government officials. In addition, many local and international organisations were involved in some of these efforts. 

Honourable members are also aware of the Betty Bigombe efforts in 1994 when she met Joseph Kony in the bushes of Acholi and the efforts made in 2003 when the Rt hon. Eriya Kategaya headed the peace team, which included quite a number of Members of Parliament especially from the affected area of Northern Uganda.  

Members are also aware of the combined efforts, which involved Betty Bigombe and myself, in December 2004 when we had a meeting with the LRA at Paruda in Kitgum District. All this goes to show that Government has always preferred a peaceful end to the LRA insurgency.

The effective operations of the UPDF forced the Lord’s Resistance Army into Garamba. Faced with this situation, the Uganda Government enlisted the support of the international community in order to bring the LRA to book. The Government referred the matter to the International Criminal Court, who carried out investigations as a result of which five of the leaders of LRA were indicted. It was not possible to execute the arrests because the ICC has no police of its own to carry out these arrests and UPDF received no authority from the DRC to go into Garamba to operate against the LRA. Even the UN force, MONUC, said they had no mandate to operate on the LRA. 

In view of this, the government of Southern Sudan did approach the government of Uganda with a proposal for a peace initiative. Since the proposal was in line with Government’s policy of peacefully resolving problems as stated above, the Uganda Government accepted the peace initiative and the mediation of the government of Southern Sudan, hence the current peace talks in Juba.

It is true that the ICC has taken steps to ensure that the indicted leaders of the LRA are tried for the crimes they have been indicted for. ICC’s stand is that impunity should never be condoned and that those responsible for crimes committed must be brought to justice and punished. The Uganda Government fully supports this stand. Those responsible for violating others’ rights must be punished. It is for this reason and in view of the fact that the indicted LRA leaders cannot easily be brought to book using the normal criminal justice system and the fact that the affected population is longing for peace and is willing to forgive so as to start new lives, that Government has proposed the use of the Acholi traditional system of justice called Mato put. 

This alternative justice system will require the LRA to accept the crimes they have committed; apologise and ask for forgiveness and also pay reparation. In addition, they will have to serve the sanctions that may be imposed on them through this system.

Secondly, the victims will first accept the apology and then ask for the reparations. The Government of Uganda is ready and willing to work with both the LRA and the victims on this matter with a view to getting an amicable solution to the problem. This course of action will help us address the issue of impunity. 

Madam Speaker, it is not possible for the ICC to review the indictments before the question of impunity is adequately addressed. This is why Government has proposed the Acholi traditional alternative justice process of Mato put. The Government will formally engage the ICC only after a formal peace agreement has been reached or signed and after the LRA has gone through the process of Mato put. The Government has, however, maintained close contacts with the ICC and the UN on this very subject matter. 

A number of countries and international organisations have expressed support for this Juba peace process. As part of the strategy to ensure that the peace process succeeds, Government has set up a Mato put implementation committee to advise on the very process. The ICC is not an obstacle to the peace process. On the contrary, the work of the ICC, which is an independent international body, is complimentary to Uganda’s struggle to end the insurgency and achieve lasting peace and justice in Northern Uganda.

In addition, Government has facilitated a number of delegations, which have gone to Garamba in the DRC and also Nabang in Southern Sudan and talked to the LRA leadership about Government’s proposals and about the feelings of the people especially in the affected areas. The idea has been to make the LRA appreciate their situation, that in Uganda, the plight of the victims, the problems caused by the insurgency and arrive at a peaceful conclusion to this conflict.

Madam Speaker, I am happy to say that many Members of Parliament here and other key stakeholders especially religious, traditional, local leaders and relatives of some of the leaders of the insurgency including Joseph Kony’s own mother have been to Garamba and to Southern Sudan, Nabang, as promoters of a peaceful resolution of this conflict. 

Ndugu Kiyonga, Government remains committed to a peaceful resolution to the conflict; Government sees the ICC as complimenting the work of Uganda to see a peaceful end to this conflict. I thank you.

4.42
MR FRANCIS KIYONGA (Independent, Upe County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, there was an allegation some time back that Uganda forces were reported to be following up these people even when they were supposed to be settled in those allocated places and that made the rebels move deeper to Garamba. What can the Minister say about that? Maybe this could be an opportunity to understand that also. Thank you.

4.44
MRS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for his response. However, I still have some few clarifications and issues to put to the Minister. We do appreciate all the efforts that the government is making so that the Northern part of Uganda can achieve peace. I am one of the people who would have wished peace to have been there yesterday but as we have heard, there are a number of technicalities, which are dragging the process backwards.

When I read the Minister’s presentation right from page 3, if I can quote a few things that: “This alternative justice process will require the LRA to accept the crimes they have committed, apologise and ask for forgiveness and pay reparation; in addition they will have to serve the sanctions.”  Madam Speaker, when I looked at that statement and the last part of the conclusion by the Minister that there is already a process whereby the selected members like the lawyers, the traditional leaders have been consulted to put in place what should be entailed in this process of Mato put, I found it as if it is already contradicting because the first part spells out the procedure of how it will be like and yet on the other end we are still consulting the relevant people to give us a way forward of Mato put. Probably the honourable minister could clarify that to me.

Two, we are quite aware that when two elephants come into conflict the grass suffers. According to the Minister’s presentation, I find that he has clearly spelt out that impunity of crime should really not be condoned. I am also wondering from the Minister what would happen to the other elephant, which was involved in the process of causing this insecurity in the Northern part of Uganda like some of the troops who as members of the press got involved in some crime. What will happen to them if we take on this process of Mato put? Are they also going to face the Mato put justice table? What will happen to them?  

Three, Madam Speaker, I would also want to find out from the honourable minister; he has also put it clear that the ICC is still there and it is on condition - I am wondering: “How can the government and the people who are looking on expect the LRA to come to the table of Mato put to ask for an apology and the rest of it when they know they have this string?”  What is being done to assure them of their safety at the Mato put table so that they can ask for an apology for that matter? 

You know, this is an issue, which is making the process drag backwards. The people back home are quite aware of this and have said if the ICC is an issue, which is blocking the peace process, let it be dropped. But now according to the Minister’s statement, it is still a condition therein. What is the government doing to assure those people of this condition so that they can come out to the Mato put table?

Lastly, I would like to find out from the honourable minister because these peace talks’ process has been on as it has been stated. Many attempts have been made previously and somehow slipped by. Even right now, we find that it is being shaky. The people who want peace today really are also worried and probably it is not very clear whether we are really succeeding today or tomorrow. I would like to find out from the honourable minister, suppose this process stalls on as it has shown previously, what is the government going to do to quickly bring peace to the people of the Northern part of Uganda, which they are thirsty for? Thank you.

4.49
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wait for the coming of Kagadi District I can speak on other issues. In this matter, I want to thank hon. Rugunda for the effort he is putting in talking to the LRA to make sure that peace prevails in the Northern region. But, I have a concern whereby one of the main reasons why they are in a serious break, after which we are not sure that they may resume, is that the other party does not trust the place they are negotiating from and also the chief mediator. 

That is what is on the ground and I believe if those issues are not solved urgently this process may continue to be derailed. Is there no way we can locate another alternative place? This place has suffered for 20 years; have we run short of places, which we can trust that can bring peace to this area? Have we run short of manpower in this world that can stand in the position where Machar has been to bring peace to this Northern region?  

Madam Speaker, as I rest that case of the Northern region, I was in my constituency last week and they told me of two cases of people one of them is called Ngubi Vincent, he has disappeared for two months now. He was a regular man, everybody knows him, in Muhoro Trading centre, and he cannot be found. Everybody is concerned and they asked me to raise this matter on the Floor of Parliament. I am asking –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Tinkasimire, that supplementary will come with the other question of hon. Kamya. You wait for when hon. Kamya’s question comes and the supplementary of the gentleman who is lost will come in.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, but he is here he has already heard it. 

4.52
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (NRM, Mawokota County, Mpigi): With due respect, Madam Speaker, I want to remind you of my name because new Members will think that that is my real name –(Laughter)- so, I am called Mutuluuza Peter a Member of Parliament Mawokota North, Mpigi District.

I want to thank the government of Southern Sudan. I remember when our President was swearing in, it is when the President of southern Sudan actually brought the good news that the LRA soldiers were ready to discuss peace with the government of Uganda and since then the peace talks have been going on. I also want to thank the government of Uganda for having also accepted to pursue this peace and of course hon. Kiyonga for having brought this question to the august House and the Minister for having answered it.

I expected the Minister to tell us how the discussions are going on because what we read in papers kind of implies that the peace talks have stalled completely. I request the Minister to tell us the situation of the talks now as we speak. 

Secondly, we are reading in papers that the LRA leaders have actually moved from Garamba to Central African Republic. These are intelligence reports we are just reading from the papers. I just request the minister since he is the Minister of Internal Affairs and the one pursuing the peace talks to tell us the truth about where Kony and his team are now.

Lastly, the deadline: When these peace talks started, there was a deadline, which was agreed upon after which maybe we lose hope. Now after the deadline, will the peace talks continue or we shall just forget and lose hope in peace talks? Thank you.

4.55
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Persons with Disability, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I wish to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs who has been the leader of the Ugandan delegation in Juba to talk peace with the Lord’s Resistance Army. These talks have been looked at by the people of Uganda as the last meaningful attempt to pacify Northern Uganda and give the people of Northern Uganda peace. I, therefore, hail Dr Rugunda so far for his personal style of work in keeping these talks on course and indeed once the peace talks fail, it will be a very big disaster for this country. 

But some issues, which I want to raise concern the indictment of the Lord’s Resistance Army top leadership, which seems to be the obstacle in having these peace talks concluded. I want to know from the leader of the delegation whether Parliament or the Government of Uganda could have a direct influence on the International Criminal Court to make their terms of reference on which they are basing their work changed. If the International Criminal Court sets and it has its terms of reference for which it operates and there is no flexibility whatsoever of changing that course then this may be a waste of time. I wish the minister to be clear on that position. But as a country, we must reflect deeply on the 20 years –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are supposed to ask supplementary questions arising from his answers but you are making submissions. 

MR KATURAMU: Okay, Madam Speaker, that was the first question I want the minister to answer. But this is a very important topic in our midst and maybe it is not through questions alone but even some few supplements, which we can give. We are aware that this government has made many attempts as the minister has said in talking peace, but so long as we have not accomplished achieving it we should not be tired or even stop. 

As I end, there is something I borrow from the Bible although I belong to another faith. I forgot the book, the chapter and everything but the wise teaching is that, Jesus was teaching people and he is teaching us Members of Parliament who are now debating this crucial issue that: “Happy are the peace makers, they shall be called children of God.” I wish that as we pursue our debate and the questions, which my colleagues will also raise, we bear at the back of our minds that we want to be called children of God. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No more submission, please, ask supplementary questions.

5.00
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, mine is just a question. The honourable Minister of Internal Affairs has given us an elaborate state of affairs regarding the peace process, which has been going on for sometime. He also says in his presentation that a number of countries and national organisations have expressed support for the process for the “mato put” and the peace talks. 

It is said in the same document that some countries have refused to take action on the LRA wherever they are like in Garamba and so on. We are being informed that they are even moving further to the Central African Republic. If these countries constitute those that have supported this process, is there no meaningful way of getting these people back here so that we are in position to conduct mato put at least and then get the peace agreement signed? I am sure with mato put it has got to be done here within the country not elsewhere. Thank you very much. 

5.02
MR ABRAHAM JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question is going to rotate around mato put. I thank the Government of Uganda for the patience and the efforts they have put in to bring peace to Uganda as well as the Government of Sudan. 

In this war, there are three views or three groups of people: there are those who are saying this war is for the northerners; there is one group whose image is that it is “our” war and not theirs and the third group is saying this war is for Uganda. I am in that group that says the war is for all of us here in Uganda. I have lost many in this war and somebody is telling me, “We are doing this under “mato put”.  What is “mato put”?  I even do not know what mato put is. I am not alone.  There are very many Ugandans who do not know what “mato put” is and we should not take people for granted. In my view mato put can work for some cases. Somebody gets you with his wife, stubs you, you die. Matoput there can work. But somebody routinely is killing people for 20 years and you say it is mato put! I think we may be deceiving ourselves. 

I am of the view that let these people face the law then we can follow other routes. Presidential pardoning, which all of us know, but not mato put. What is mato put?  If you are going to use mato put, first educate us about mato put.  Otherwise, me I do not know what mato put is. I have lost people and I am bitter. Therefore, honourable minister, I think this use of mato put needs further study so that Ugandans are all on board. Thank you very much.

5.04
MR FRANCIS KABAGAMBE MUGARRA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern was also on “mato put” because as hon. Byandala put it, I really fail to grasp what “mato put” is in relation to the magnitude of crime that LRA has subjected the population of the Northern Uganda to. Maybe because at one point the minister talks of forming a group of lawyers that are looking at it; is it going to be a mix between the modern and the traditional sanctions? 

Could we get an explanation as to whether this mato put is really going to give the impression to the Ugandan population that has suffered that something has been done? Or we are just trying to say, “No, ICC go away, we have a traditional method”, which actually may not at all give any psychological satisfaction to our population. I thank you.

5.05
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the process through the negotiations and according to me, when the minister was presenting he talked on the side of the government. There is no spokesman for LRA here. But according to me, I think LRA is getting a lot of time to fill the peace process, organising, counting their numbers and they may be getting more ready and these press reports being just diversionary. 

Madam Speaker, the process the minister has explained is not satisfactory to me as the only alternative. It is just monolithic process with one outlet. Supposing this process fails, honourable minister, what other alternatives do we have either by peace or by any other methodology to ensure that this country is at peace and the war is ended? Thank you.

5.06
MR WILLY WASHINGTON ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report, which I think, is clear enough for some of us to make some judgment. The war in Northern Ugandan has been there for 22 years or so. Two generations of children of Northern Uganda have lost many things in life and I do not think there is anybody here who would like that war to continue for even one day.  

I want to say that there are many things in this world, which we do not know and I do not think lack of knowledge should bog us down on achieving peace.  What I would like to enquire from the minister is that, you see the change of venue is probably now the thing which is making the peace talk process hanging in balance and I am sure the Ugandan Government is keen to see that peace return to Northern Uganda, is there any way the government can bow down and accept change of venue? That is one thing.  

The other question is that, you have stated here that government is setting up a mato put implementation of meeting to advise, does government have a timeframe for itself in setting this committee?  Honourable minister, the people of Northern Uganda, as you all know, have suffered and they do not want to continue like this any longer.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have one supplementary question but maybe before I say that, I would want to just caution fellow MPs that our comments should not interfere with the difficult work hon. Ruhakana Rugunda is doing in Juba. So, certain comments, which can alarm those who do not have a lot at stake in this world, can really make Sudan a very harsh place for Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda. 

The only comment I want to make is, honourable minister, do we have a possibility of bringing an enabling law before this Parliament, maybe like the Traditional Reconciliations Bill, so that we can encompass all the other traditional methods of reconciliation not only the mato put, which is an Acholi thing. We have in other tribes all over Uganda, so that when we have problems in future, we can have a municipal law that can be used to counter international law. 

As of now, mato put to me is a traditional measure of resolving conflicts in Acholi and it has not been ratified or passed into law by this Parliament, and it can be a very strong ground for the International Criminal Court just to go away that our actions are in any way not in conflict with the laws of the country of Uganda.  I think if you could turn this into an Act, it will answer the concerns of hon. Byandala and hon. Kabagambe. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. As the minister prepares to answer honourable members, I am not chasing you from the House, but just to remind you that the Catholic Chaplaincy will have a High Mass at about 5.30 p.m. in the Members’ Lounge.  

Then tomorrow, honourable members, those interested in growing rice should go to the Conference Hall at 9.30 a.m. –(Interruptions)- no, it will not be “mahogany” this time, the Japanese Ambassador will be there.

5.11
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker, the last page of the paper that has been distributed missed out the sentence I talked about on ICC. So, I would ask the secretariat, with your permission or the Clerk’s Office, to distribute the correct version of the last page so that we are all speaking the same language.

Madam Speaker, I thank the colleagues who have raised a number of important issues. I will briefly touch them.  Hon. Kiyonga raised the issue of us following LRA and, therefore, chasing LRA from where it is to Central African Republic. We have not entered DRC to chase the LRA so, that information that you have is not accurate. 

My sister hon. Anywar has raised a number of points procedure of mato put committee. Well, actually government has set up a committee and there has been some kind of consultation with other people in setting up this committee and there are three key people of this committee. The three are all lawyers including Mr Owenyi Dolo who is not only a lawyer but also an expert on conflict issues and also knowledgeable about the culture of the people in the affected area. When I say an expert on conflict issues, I mean he has a Masters degree in conflict resolution not that he has been causing conflicts.  

The second one is our own good friend, Jacob Oulanyah, who lead us in the last Parliament through a big and important process and who enjoys substantial support across the House. The third one is a very respected international lawyer Abane Afako, a Ugandan lawyer who is really very schooled in these matters. Perhaps I should take this opportunity to inform colleagues that on 2nd of March (next month), there is going to be an important discussion on the situation in Northern Uganda with focus on ICC. It is going to take place in London and among the people to address this very meeting will be the Prosecutor Ocampor of ICC and one of the discussants will be Mr Abane Afako –(Interruption)

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek some clarification, honourable minister. The government has gone ahead to set up a committee to work on “mato put”. Mato put in our people’s knowledge is a traditional method of reconciliation of any conflict. It has been there since our existence. I would like to be clarified whether when you were setting up this committee, as a government, you consulted our traditional leaders who are custodian of this “mato put” process. I thank you.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, actually there were not only consultations with a cross section of people including the traditional leaders, but the traditional leaders are the reference points of this very committee. 

Now, the question of impunity has been raised by my sister again. Two elephants fighting, one elephant is going to face “mato put” how about the other elephant? I am glad you have raised this very point. The elephant you must be referring to is the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces, as you very well know, is governed by UPDF law which was passed by this House and has a very well defined system under the national legal framework where offenders in UPDF are investigated, disciplined or punished depending on the findings of the investigations and decision by the legal system and the court martial or even under the civilian court. So, therefore, the UPDF Statute and legal system in Uganda has always meted out justice as and when necessary involving members of the armed forces of UPDF and the question of impunity has never been condoned and will never be condoned by this government. Therefore, there is no need for UPDF to undergo this mato put process because the national legal system has adequately provided for offenders as and when they occur within the UPDF. 

Government has guaranteed the safety of all the people who may come to participate in mato put and in fact, there is cessation of hostilities now. So, they should have nothing to fear, they can come they are covered by the fact that government has offered to talk and have peace. So, if there is anyone that you are aware of who is fearing, please, reassure him/her that they can come not only to Juba but also to Kampala for pursuing peace.

Then the question of dropping ICC: ICC is an independent body set up by statute by more than 100 nations. Therefore, when we are talking about ICC here let us give no impression at all that ICC is a body there to be told by the Parliament of Uganda, hon. Mutuluuza or anybody else to do this or that, no, it is far from that. In fact, even now - fortunately, Madam Speaker, you are more schooled you are a lawyer in these matters - we should be talking about ICC with substantial amount of reverence. 

As hon. Odonga Otto said, that what we are saying could be subjudice; could really affect what is happening in The Hague. So, I appeal to all of us and I agree with my younger brother that we should be refrained as possible and we should not provoke the ICC to exercise its overwhelming authority over these matters. It has a lot of authority and definitely the Government of Uganda does not order ICC, we have no authority. We are using the word “engaged” very deliberately. We are in contact, we have a good relation but we can never attempt to undermine the independence and the authority of the ICC –(Interruption)

MR JOHN ODIT: honourable minister seems to be threatening us. I want to understand from him. When the Government of Uganda took this case to the ICC, did you know that this power existed before and if so, why have you instituted this mato put?  

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda has always been fully aware of the authority and powers of the ICC. That is actually the very reason why we took the case to ICC because we tried to catch Kony and Otti and other leaders but we could not catch them. So, we said, who has the powers that can reach them and we found that ICC had these powers. So, we went to them very deliberately.

Secondly, we are going to them again now. Again very deliberately because we know they have powers but we also know that they have some limitations. If they had their own Police force and there was adequate international cooperation, they would have arrested, indicted people, but they have those limitations. So, we have gone to them because we think that this peace initiative, initiated by the Government of Southern Sudan and embraced by us in government and the country as a whole, is a viable route forward. So, government is consciously doing these matters dealing with ICC –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Honourable minister, you have actually confused me the more. From the onset you do admit and accept that ICC has bigger powers than we as the government who went to report a criminal to them. Recognizing that ICC has bigger powers and knowing that it is a court of its own, we again went further to engage ourselves into a subjudice act by putting in place mato put. You have gone ahead to say you again went to ICC to say, “Look, we do appreciate your weakness, you do not have an arresting institution of your own” - are you not trying to use the peace talks and mato put as a trap to lure Kony and his people into your custody and then thereafter say, “ICC come they are in my possession you can now come”? Do you not think that will really not only undermine ICC but even the confidence that these people would have laid in these peace talks? Would you kindly clarify on that?  

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: I just want to find out from the hon. Rugunda whether it would be prudent for a democratic government not to listen to the advise of the sufferers? Because who am I, whether a minister, not to listen to the people of Kitgum, Gulu and Padre if they so think that mato put would help us.  As a democratic government, would it not be nice to listen even if the court was so powerful?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Well, I think I will start with hon. Mukwaya’s clarification that the NRM administration and government, as a democratic government, has no choice but to listen to the rational call of the people.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the point raised by my brother Kassiano - actually a number of people have said, “Oh! There is a trap.” Hon. Kassiano has helped me to make this point that the Movement Government does not engage in intrigue. It uses open methods of work. When we want to punish you we state so categorically; if we want to offer you amnesty or pardon, we state so categorically. So, there is no trap whatsoever. Open methods of work! My sister whispering about teargas, when we want to use it we have no shame about it we do so openly. So, I should not be diverted by my sister but we are open there is no trap. Let me use this opportunity to reassure the people in Garamba that the talks are open for them; they should come as quickly as possible so that we can make progress. 

Now, other points on peace talks, well I think those are questions that I have answered from my sister Anywar.

Now, hon. Barnabas and a number of people have actually advocated for changing of the mediator and changing of the venue. Government has made its position that that is an initiative that was brought to us by the President and the Government of Southern Sudan. Government accepted that mediation and also government accepted the venue of Juba and Government of Southern Sudan brought up this matter because of their knowledge of the problem and because of the fact that many of their people have been killed by the LRA insurgency. Approximately 4,000 Sudanese have been killed by the insurgency of LRA. So, they want peace not only in Uganda but also in their own area. 

It is difficult to leave a government committed to the process like the Government of Southern Sudan where a Vice-President, a Minister of Information, a Minister of Youth and Culture, people who were deeply involved in Navaisha negotiations with Khartoum Government to bring about the comprehensive peace agreement, to have so much time available to the Ugandan issue and then you go to Kenya because two or three NGOs are trying to hijack the talks. This would really not be correct. So, the Government of Uganda is firmly in support of the peace process, firmly in support of Juba and firmly in support of the mediation by the Government of Southern Sudan.

Then hon. Mutuluuza asked how the talks are going. The talks are having a cough at the moment. My own assessment is that, they are going to be back on track. The cough has been brought by the rather unilateral declaration of the Lord’s Resistance Army about change of mediation and venue. Actually, if the Lord’s Resistance Army had wished to change a venue or mediation, because we had already developed very close ties in our discussions as my colleagues who have been to Juba know, they should have brought it up and we would have discussed it.  We had already agreed with the Lord’s Resistance Army that if there is any stumbling block, we should handle it together so that we do not allow any roadblocks in the peace process. They did not. 

They have communicated with us and we have indicated to them that the reasons they have given are not adequate. We have appealed to them to reconsider their position and come back to the negotiating table in Juba. It is true that President Chissano is being kept posted in this whole process.

Another point raised by hon. Mutuluuza was whether peace talks will continue after the deadline. You know there is no deadline as such. It is true there is a cessation of hostilities agreement, which had been extended for two months, up to the end of February. What government would like to see is the two sides meeting again, resuming negotiations, including extension of the cessation of hostilities agreement.

Ndugu Katuramu, yes, I accept the compliments made, but let me highlight this point. Actually, the Government of Uganda discussed this matter and President Museveni did a lot of work to persuade the government that this time there may be something really good in these peace talks. The government then eventually agreed to engage in the talks. So, first and foremost, President Museveni has played a critical role in mobilising government to engage in these talks and ensure that we are not wasting time. President Museveni has played a key role. He came to Juba in October and did everything possible to push the peace process. Although, as you may have heard, he extended a hand of friendship but two members of the LRA delegation rejected this offer. This did not deter President Museveni nor did it deter government from continuing to push for peace.  

I must use this opportunity to say that Parliament has done very well in this process. Apart from passing a resolution, which gave us a boost in support of the talks, the Leader of the Opposition came in leading a powerful team, the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group came in and many other Members of Parliament. I saw Ndugu Akena there. I saw Betty Amongi and many others. I saw my brother Otto. They all came, and I must report all of us from Uganda, irrespective of our political parties and political affiliations, are speaking with one voice and one message. (Applause) This message was so powerful. Our Sudanese brothers saw that we were united, and the Lord’s Resistance Army saw that the people of Uganda are united for peace.  This message has also been repeatedly made by the religious leaders and the traditional leaders who have been almost permanently in Juba.  

On the question of the terms of reference to the ICC, I think I have really made that point. The ICC is an independent body, it has its own constitution and it has its own methods of work. Uganda is just one of the more than 100 countries that are members to this body. If the Parliament of Uganda has got some good ideas, and I know we do, we can send those ideas for consideration by the ICC but we cannot tell them to do this or not to do that.  

The question of mato put was raised by Ndugu Okecho and a number of others and passionately by hon. Byandala. This is a unique situation we have. We have not faced a similar situation in Uganda.  Whereas there are traditional ways, there are also known ways internationally for solving some of these problems.  Ugandans have said we have our own system. We used to have conflicts in the past, this may be a bigger conflict but how were we solving our conflicts in the past. We are, therefore, tapping from our rich history, our rich culture and our rich experience. 

We want to see how mato put can be made relevant to help us solve this problem. We believe it can, and that is why we have set up an experts committee to see how best it can be done. I believe that it will eventually be brought to Parliament because the role of Parliament in this whole equation is central. I will not go beyond this because the committee of experts is already considering that very point. We should wait for its report.  

Ndugu Byandala’s point that whose war is it, whose conflict is it? The insurgency has deeply affected our brothers and sisters in Northern Uganda and even a number of parts of eastern Uganda, but it is true that everybody in Uganda has been affected.  In supporting UPDF to fight the insurgency, every Ugandan as a taxpayer pays our sons and daughters. They are in the conflict. The LRA does not say, “We will not kill you because you are from Kisoro”, no.  All of us have been affected and all of us have every responsibility to come and help in ending this conflict.  

I am happy to say, Madam Speaker, that whenever LRA issues came up for debate here, the House would get polarized. Now although it is a bad situation, the House is solid and united in handling matters of ending the conflict in Northern Uganda.  

Ndugu Kabagambe raised the issue again about the mato put and these question marks raised by colleagues about mato put will be answered I believe conveniently and convincingly. I call upon my brothers and sisters, honourable members, to really continue to fully support the peace process as you have done before. What I see in the current stalemate are the hitches, the pains, the pangs that we go through in search for peace. I am very confident that we will together overcome these pangs and these roadblocks and lastly achieve peace in Northern Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Now, I do not want to be in conflict with God, I want to release Members to go for the High Mass before they start the fasting season. So, we adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 22 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)

