Wednesday 24th February, 1998.

(Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair).

The House was called to order

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA CITIZEN AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL BILL, 1998.

Clause 48.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Due to the gravity of these offenses,  the Committee suggests the following amendments.  As the tyrant of the employees in Immigration,  we are suggesting that in sub clause (2), we delete, 'from a fine not exceeding,'  at the end of the sub clause,  and insert the following "fine not exceeding 400 currency points, and imprisonment not exceeding five years."  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I want to remind you that you seem to have decided on the policy to follow in imposing punishments.  You recall that hon. Okumu-Ringa brought an amendment yesterday,  where he wanted to have a very stiff sentence imposed.  It was rejected on the grounds that if you prescribe very severe punishment, you may find that courts may sometimes decline to convict people,  and then you find that people go away unpunished.  I would think that the same policy should be borne in your mind when we are debating this.  But that is the Motion.


MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Following your wise counsel, I would like to propose an amendment,  to the fine being imposed in this particular section.  I am proposing that instead of 400 currency points, we reduce it to 250 currency points,  which is equivalent to Shs 5 million.  And we reduce the imprisonment period from five years to three.  This in itself will also act as a deterrent - the time frame.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You mean you want to amend the proposed amendment of the Chairperson?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman.  In that, 400 currency points is too high a punishment to act as a deterrent,  and five years is also too harsh a punishment to act as a deterrent.  So my proposal is to reduce it to 250 currency points and three years imprisonment,  or both.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  I thought that in view of the wise counsel you had given, Mr. Chairman,  the issue raised by hon. Okumu-Ringa should be put to rest.  Because the words he used - as the Chairman has reinstated - the original position is not exceeding three years.  So,  I think we do not really need to push this very far,  especially when there is a purpose.  The Chairman had originally wanted to make it compulsory,  because of the gravity of the intended offence.  But since now the judges and magistrates have been left with the latitude of giving sentence, I would want to persuade hon. Okumu to withdraw his amendment.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Any reaction, hon. Okumu-Ringa? (Laughter).

MR. KIYONGA FRANCIS:  The purpose of that amendment was to enable these peasants who violate these laws to be able to pay.  Of course offenses are sometimes not committed deliberately;  they can be because of illiteracy, documents can be signed because of -(Interruption)-  Can I proceed,  Mr. Chairman?  

I would like to support the amendment to reduce this 400 currency points to something which is affordable.  Our intention is not to send so many people to prison because of failing to pay fines,  nor do we make these laws purposely to punish.  Basically,  Mr. Chairman, I support the amendment to reduce the currency points to 250,  as moved by hon. Ringa.  Thank you.

MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, I thought that the intervention of hon. Okumu-Ringa had been that this was a fixed position.  But from what the Chairman said, the latitude is left to the judges.  That being the case,  he was advocating for a range.  His condition is already on merit, there is no need for us to labour this further.  I propose you put the question, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, it would appear that Members have not grasped the real meaning of the amendment by the Chairman.  What the Chairman is saying is, he is not going to fix the fines.  Although he is saying that on top of the fine, the culprit must also be imprisoned.  And that, I think,  is a bit too harsh.  That is what the amendment says;  instead of "or," it says "and."  I think that is a bit too harsh.  

The reason we usually give alternatives is that somebody may fail to pay a fine, in which case he must go to prison.  But in this case,  the Chairman says he pays a fine not exceeding 400 currency points, but still go to prison.  Otherwise we are back to where the Bill is;  where there is no need to amend it if we keep the original.  But the effect of his amendment is that he is deleting "or," substituting it with "and."  I think that is very harsh indeed. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Perhaps we should ask him to repeat the amendment for purposes of assisting those who did not get it clearly.  Please Chairperson, would you tell us exactly what you want?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Hon. Members,   I will take you to the Bill and the fine related to this offence.  Section 48 (2) says: "Any person who without lawful authority of the Board,  makes or prints or binds any material whether in part or in whole,  with the intent to produce a passport or any other travel document, commits an offence and conviction is liable to this plaintiff."  Because, this cannot be a peasant in the first place.  It must be a very intelligent crook, at least as far as this Committee is concerned.  So the amendment goes on to say that  "If such a person is found, a fine not exceeding 400 currency points and imprisonment not exceeding five years."  It means he should be fined and also imprisoned.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Are you suggesting that a fine should be followed by imprisonment?  What do you then say about "or both"?  Because at the end of it there is,  "or both."  Which means that in the present form in which it is,  the court may fine somebody or imprison him,  or it may fine him and imprison him. That is what it says.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Here then,  "or both" is deleted.  Because if it is put as it is, then we cannot include "or both".  We will be repeating ourselves.  So "or both" is deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You have heard the amendment by the Chairperson,  so I better put the question.  The proposed amendment is intended not to fix the fine which the court may impose, but once the court has imposed a fine, it must be coupled with imprisonment.  That is what he is saying.  Whereas the present formulation which is in the Bill is leaving it to the court to decide whether to only fine,  to imprison,  or to fine and also imprison.  It is leaving it to the discretion  of the court.  So,  I think it is now clear what the Chairperson wants you to do.  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  This means that the position is as it is in the Bill.

MISS. BABIHUGA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to section 48, clause (2) at the end that,  "that person is liable to imprisonment not exceeding five years."  I beg to move.  There should be no fine;  that person who falsifies documents should be imprisoned. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Okay.  It is seconded I suppose?  If the amendment is not seconded,  then the position is as it is in the Bill.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, if the position is going to remain as proposed in the Bill, then I beg to withdraw my earlier amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Fine.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you.

MR. MED KAGGWA:  I have a problem,  Mr. Chairman, which touches on (3) and (4), but arises out of (2).  Here they talk of not exceeding 400 currency points,  and five years.  When you come to (3), you talk of 100 currency points and two years, and then in (4), not exceeding 60 currency points and two years.  I find this non-proportional.  When you consider the 400 currency points with five years, then 100 currency points with two years and then 60 currency points with two years,  I want to know the criterion used to determine this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The point is that the sentence of imprisonment is not proportional.


MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr. Chairman,  I am proposing that when we get there we will solve the problem. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well,  hon. Members, I am about to put the question on clause 48. Unless there is an amendment, I am definitely going -(Interruption)-(Mr. Kaggwa rose_).

MR. MEDI KAGGWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would want to propose that in sub clause (3),  we make it 200 currency units and one year,  or both.  And then the fourth one will also be 200 currency units and one year,  or both.  In five also, it will be 200 currency points and one year or both, so that it is at least more proportional than it is.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister,  have you found a solution?  Is it seconded?  I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  In view of the Members wanting to be so lenient to these wrong doers, I withdraw all the other -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No. It had been defeated already.  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I was going to Amend the other ones also, but then I want to withdraw all the other amendments as well.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 49 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 50.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 50 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 51.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, delete clause 51 and insert the following:  "The Commissioner may designate from the among Immigration Officers such a number of Immigration Inspectors and Investigators as unnecessary for carrying the purpose of this Act".  Here we have added,  "among the Immigration Officers",  to avoid appointing other officers than those in Immigration themselves,  to carry out investigations.  I beg to move. (Mr. Okumu-Ringa rose_).  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You mean this is for clarity?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to support this amendment,  but seek clarification in the terms of drafting of the fourth line which says, "carrying out the purposes".  Why do we not redraft it to read  "effecting the provisions",  because we are talking about the provisions of the Acts,  rather than the purposes of the Acts?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, the provisions are the laws,  the purpose is the policy.  The two are different.  The purpose is the policy behind the law.  The provisions are the laws that uphold the purpose.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 51 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 52.

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to get clarification on clause 52 (b), where it says:  "The following persons are prohibited immigrants,  and their entry into Uganda is unlawful except in accordance with the provisions of this Act" and it says: "One of those prohibited may be a person suffering from mental disorder or mental defect".  Whereas I understand what this is supposed to protect.  I wonder whether we are here stopping also those who may be seeking medical treatment because of mental problems!  If this is not the case, then I would like to move an amendment;  if the Chairman agrees.  I have not submitted any amendment, but I would like clarifications first.

MAJ. BUTIME: What hon. Ongom is saying is that are we not closing our non-citizens who are coming to Uganda to meet a consultant?  But that one is a matter which the Minister of Health - since he is here,  can explain.  If there is a patient coming to Uganda,  he has all the documents of the consultant from the country he is coming from,  and he has got a health problem, would this law stop that person from entering Uganda?

Because we are now talking about clearance.  That person would have been cleared.  But what we are saying is that you cannot just come here without proper medical forms,  and enter this country.  We know that that would require the consultants and medical authorities to allow him to enter this country.  But we are saying this should not be an area where everybody who is sick will just run and load us with problems in future. 

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification on 52(c).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean you are satisfied with (b)?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Yes, I am satisfied.  

MAJ. BUTIME:  The hon. Ongom said, "the following persons are prohibited immigrants and their entry into Uganda is unlawful except in accordance with the provisions of this Act. (i) those prohibited may be the destitutes, or persons suffering from mental disorder or defect."  It also provides for any person who refuses to submit to a medical examination after having been required to do so under this section 50 of this Act; any person who is certified by a Government Medical Practitioner to be suffering from a contagious or infectious disease which makes his or her presence in Uganda dangerous to a community, and so on and so forth.  In other words, this provision is there,  and if it is proven that you should enter the country because you are sick, so it will be.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But I think the clarification from hon. Ongom is to the effect of one who has a mental disorder,  and thinks that one can get good treatment here in Uganda,  what happens to that person?  A man is coming from Congo or Kenya or even Britain,  and he thinks that there is a doctor here who can attend to him.  That is the clarification he is trying to seek from you, isn't it?

DR. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The way I interpret that request for a clarification is to the effect that first of all, the spectrum of mental disorder is quite broad.   It ranges from certain levels where you may be unable to detect the morbidity - by morbidity I mean the degree of affection of that individual, to the extreme where you may have an outright case of a very mad individual.  

Whichever the case, if this particular  person has got relevant reference letters - either from a neighbouring country or from wherever - and he is being referred to a consultant in our country here where there may be superior services, I do not think that person will be prevented.  So, I do not think there will be any need - hon. Ongom should not be worried that that person will not be allowed to enter the country.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, the situation is this:  somebody is coming from Kenya and he thinks there is a "doctor Sserwadda" at Nsambya who can cure a disorder.  Definitely they do not have documents to send somebody to "doctor Sserwadda."  What happens to that person?  Can he not be allowed to come into the country?  That is the concern.

DR. BYARUHANGA:  As you know, Mr. Chairman,  we have got very absolute regulations on people who come for treatment,  and also on the type of people who practice treatment within the country.  If he is really coming in to see somebody who is not even licensed to practice medicine here, I do not think he could get the necessary clearance.  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  The majority of mental illnesses represent a gross disintegration of the personality, and therefore patients are not normally accountable for their behaviour,  judgement and decisions.  This piece of legislation contained in (b) is another manifestation of the stigma the public has towards mental illness,  and it would be absurd to pass it as it is.  

I would propose that this should be deleted, because mental illness,  by virtue of its nature, most patients, especially the psychotics, are not responsible for their behaviour. For instance, you may have a driver coming from Tanzania through Kenya, and as he is about to cross to Uganda, he breaks down due to severe mental illness.  Will you deny this person entry into Uganda in that state just because there is a provision here that bars him from entering Uganda, therefore hold him as a criminal?  I think this is a very unfair piece of legislation and we should delete it,  Mr. Chairman.  So,  I would like to move that clause 52, sub section (b) be deleted.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Motion is seconded.  The Motion is that this particular provision (b),  dealing with mental disorder and the mental defects,  be deleted.  Let us allow the hon. Member who has moved to speak on it.  

MR. MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, mental illness is just like any other illness.  It may come as a chest infection, or it may be precipitated by other intrinsic and extrinsic factors that may combine to cause the illness.

Mental illness tends to affect the mental faculties of an individual, thus the sense of reasoning, judgement and memory are functionally distorted.  Therefore, for us to perpetuate the already known stigma towards mental illness that is practised by people - especially as we enter the 21st century - is just unfortunate.  We need to recognise mental illnesses and also to be sympathetic to the sufferers of mental illnesses,  because all of us have got the potential to become mentally sick.  

The precipitating factors within the environment should show support to sufferers of such a break down.  You can imagine we have communities along our borders, from the north to the south, from one corner of the country to the other,  and these are big populations which also are vulnerable to breaking down mentally. For us to bar them from entering Uganda,  and to make it a crime for them to enter Uganda just because they are suffering from an ailment that affects their sense of reality,  we shall be making a very big legislative mistake. Thank you very much.

MR. WAPAKABULO: I am finding a lot of difficulty with this clause 52(b).  The case is that a person who is suffering from a mental disorder is a prohibited immigrant and so, if someone turns up at the border and he is found to be suffering from a mental disorder, that person may be denied entry into Uganda.  

But let us take the other scenario. Look at clause 54, sub clause 5(c).  "The Board,  subject to the right of appeal under this Act,  may cancel any entry permit upon the finding that (c) the person has become a prohibited immigrant under Section 52 of this Act."  Together, the two read as:  "The Board may cancel any entry permit upon finding that a person is suffering from a mental disorder".  

So if we have a situation of an expatriate Professor at Makerere with his children, and one of them who is probably the age of 12 and is develops a mental disorder;  under this arrangement, will the Minister and/or the Board cancel the entry permit of that child because the child will have become a prohibited immigrant?  Is that what we intended,  or those are likely consequences which we did not foresee?  Because how do you then cancel the child's permit,  deport the child, and the parent continues to work at Makerere;  when and he is actually the one who is actually qualified to look after this mental disordered person, and preferably take that person to Butabika?  

According to the look of things, the Board would be empowered to order the removal of that child from Uganda.  Is that what we intended to legislate?  I may be guided.  Thank you.

MAJ. BUTIME:  To address what hon. Wapakabulo is asking, that Professor at the University can appeal, because there is a provision where the person being deported has a right of appeal.  The Professor can still appeal to the Board for his son not to be deported,  because he is carrying our further investigations with Prof. Kiryabwire and others;  and that son will stay.

The second point is that, in the case of the Motion which has been raised by hon. Mayanja, I want him to appreciate that if anybody enters this country and for five hours after he has entered Uganda he is sobber,  then before he reaches Jinja, he suddenly runs mad - on assumption that he is coming from Tororo  - the problem we have there is that we have already received the patient.  Are you saying that somebody who is sick mentally we have really received a patient; somebody who is sick mentally should be allowed to enter,  or if he is at the border should he not be restrained from entering the country?  Reason being that once he enters the country and damages the first vehicle he is travelling in, who takes responsibility?  The first vehicle he sits in he damages, the second vehicle he damages, the third one he fights, are you really bringing in a person who is not responsible to his faculties and he is not responsible to what he is doing?  

I would like him to accept that a person suffering from mental disorder should not be unaccompanied.  There should at least be somebody to accompany him so that he can restrain him from breaking things as soon as he enters the country.  That one should at least assist so that we do not refuse him from entering,  but at least he should be accompanied by somebody who can restrain him from throwing stones.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BAGALANA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, it is quite long since I ever spoke in this House.  Last year I had a mental disorder.  The reason I am standing up to speak is the stigma which this country attaches to people who are mentally disturbed.  They even hunt you down when you are not sick to declare you sick. (Laughter).  

Recently, The New Vision newspaper carried an article about me, saying that I was sick, I was on the streets, I was in the hands of the Police, which was wrong.  Central Broadcasting Station followed suit.  When I went there, they told me, 'we got this information, we had to publish it.'  The issue I am bringing about is that unless somebody is diagnosed with a mental disorder, it will be unfair of this country - actually, we would all be sick  -(Laughter)- to deny a person who is a patient,  the natural right to be treated, because he is sick!  

Let us hold that only people who are diagnosed by the doctors to be mentally disturbed will be subjected to this legislation.  Because mental illness,  as hon. Mayanja Mohammed was saying, has a wide spectrum;  you cannot know.  When I was taken to hospital I did not know I was sick until after 4 months when they told me that, 'you accept that you are sick, then we shall tell you more.'  Then I said, 'let me try to accept.'  And it was in the process that I knew I had a mental disorder.  So, I think this would be  very unfair especially - if I can give more information - in old age, people at the age of hon. Lt. Col. Mudoola, very few retain their mental capacities -(Laughter).  Mr. Chairman, I am not abusing anybody but I am bringing a scenario for us to understand the situation properly.  Very many people are broken down in old age, although they are not taken to Butabika;  they walk with the problem.  So, if we actually pass it,  we shall find that we are disqualifying half this Parliament  - (Laughter).  Thank you very much. (Miss Babiguga rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member for Rukungiri; but before you proceed,  we had a motion by hon. Mayanja Mohammed to the effect that this particular portion of the clause be deleted.  And when the Minister was answering the clarification which the Member for the Mbale Municipality sought, he seems to have suggested that he would prefer that the original provision in the Bill be slightly amended by adding 'unaccompanied'.  But what we originally had was the deletion.  Why do we not start with voting on the proposed motion by hon. Mayanja Mohammed that 52(b) be deleted?

MR. MAYANJA:  I have listened very attentively to hon. Butime's  amendment of accompaniment,  and it augurs very well with the social linkages in the mental health provision. I support it.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  If I may differ with the mover,  the law is not only covering people who are entering.  It is also covering somebody who can be staying in Uganda alone.  Somebody who is not married, has no relatives, is normal,  and then breaks down.  According to the this, they will remove him or her.  

As for the right of appeal,  I do not know how you will exercise it when your are alone.  Maybe your guardians in Butabika would assist.  But the question of accompaniment applies to only one situation that could be internal.  How do we handle that in the amendment?

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  If you are already in Uganda, I do not agree with the hon. Member for Mbale that the rules -(Interjection)- yes, you can amend the subsequent clause but the clause in question is that which applies to a person who is in the process of entering the country.  And whether we like it or not,  we should not be unduly emotional about things.  A sick person is a sick person and there are rules that govern them.  If you are suspected to be carrying an infectious disease for example, you will not enter Uganda.  If you get to the airport and we discover that you are not immunized against the yellow fever, but we have got these diseases for which you need to be immunized, we will not let you in.   But not cholera, Mr. Chairman, for even if you are immunized,  you can still transmit it.  So it should not be a disease to bar you from travelling. (Interruption)  
Mr. Chairman, if I may be protected from hon. Pinto!  I have got a mouth of my own!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are protected.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  I am saying that there are certain diseases - infectious or otherwise - that will make it impossible for you to enter this country.  I do agree with hon. Mayanja Mohammed that there is a tendency for people in this country to stigmatize mentally sick people.  I have even seen people assault mad people,  which I can never do in my life.  I do agree that what they do they are not responsible for. And that is the very reason why I am very glad he has agreed that these mentally sick person ought to be accompanied before they are allowed into the country.  Someone somewhere has got to pay the bill if these people enter into the country.  We cannot just wish away things;  unless you tell us who is going to foot the bill obviously we are going to  -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, let us address ourselves to the Bill as it is.  Unless -(Interruption).

PROF. KAGONYERA:  What I was saying -(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I just want to guide you here because the way you are stating your case, you are assuming that this provision is for only the person who is entering the country.  But let me read the provision itself.  "The following persons are prohibited immigrants and their entry..." - that is persons trying to enter into or present within the country.  So it means that it even affects a person who was allowed to enter,  is present in Uganda,  and has mental disorder.  It is not restricted to only those people entering,  but any person who is immigrant and who is in Uganda.  You can proceed.                                                        
PROF. KAGONYERA:  I am glad the Chair is quite awake about these things,  and I thank you for guiding me.  I totally agree with anybody who thinks that it is not correct for someone who is already in this country falls mentally sick,  and is suddenly a prohibited immigrant.  That is wrong. I hope that the Minister and the Chairman do make the appropriate amendment.  

However, the hon. Member for Mbale was saying that if you fall sick in this country and you are a dependent then what happens to you?  This dependent is already taken care of by the proposed amendment.  But I would like to remind him that if you are a professor at Makerere and you break down,  the first thing we shall do is to cancel your appointment as a professor.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BAKOKO BAKORU:  I am a nurse in psychiatry and I have some compassion for mentally sick patients.  I do not know who is going to qualify these people who are entering into the country. (An hon. Member rose_).  Can you protect me, Mr. Chairman? Be it a nurse or a doctor,  you could be ill yourself and the saying goes that anyone of us can fall mentally sick any time.  So, there is no way we are going to say that we are going to stop people from coming into this country because they are mentally sick.  

And you cannot compare mental illness to communicable diseases, because a communicable disease can be transmitted to somebody else.  Someone who has a mental disease will not infect you with it.  I think we have to look this straight in the eye.  As some of the speakers have already said, if you are within Uganda and you fall sick are you going to be deported immediately because you have fallen sick?  Let me remind this House that until recently,  Butabika Hospital has been the only one treating most of the mentally sick people south of the Sahara.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister you have some solution to -(Interruption).

MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Mayanja for accepting my amendment to the effect that a person suffering from mental disorder or mental defect should not be unaccompanied.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Minister, as it appears,  hon. Mayanja is the one who brought the Motion to delete and when you decide that we add 'unaccompanied', for him he thought that he would solve the problem of all people concerned by this particular provision.  I do not know whether his acceptance was with full facts or it was -(Interruption). 

MR. PINTO: The point of procedure I rise upon is, you are addressing the House at the same time the hon. Minister is standing up, I thought that he would take his seat until you cleared the issue.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, he has taken his seat.  

MR. MAYANJA:  As a Mover of this Motion and in light of the explanation by hon. Wapakabulo James Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality,  and after consultations, I would like to withdraw my support to the Minister,  hon. Butime Tom.

MR. LWANGA TIM: Mr. Chairman, I seek guidance from those who understand the law better than most of us.  Would it help if we amended 52 in the heading by saying that "the following persons are prohibited immigrants and their entry into Uganda is unlawful" and leave out "presence within Uganda".

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the motion by hon. Mayanja Mohammed that this particular provision be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 52 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: I would like to clarify on what the hon. Member said that there are a few people who get to my age and are still sane.  For me, instead of being insane I just grew grey hair, that is all;  that was the difference.  

I am moving an amendment on 54 sub clause (4) to be deleted because when you look at sub clause (3),  we are covered under that.  So we did not see any special case why clause (g) should be given special preference.  I beg to move

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Chairperson, according to the sheet I have here,  you are saying we delete sub clause (5) and insert the following sub clause (3).  I did not understand what was -(Interruption).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: That is the original draft,  but unfortunately they made a mistake in drafting, so we are deleting it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You are deleting what?

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Sub clause (4).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is there any contribution to this Motion?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When deleted, sub clause (4) of clause 54,  simply means that even the provision under form G will not be there.  So, could the Chairman explain because yesterday we were given a copy of the form G.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I think the hon. Member is confusing two things, this is clause (g) and the other one is form G;  these are two different things. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 54 as amended,  agreed to.

Clause 55.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Clause 55 sub clause (3) paragraph (b), it was not included here in this amendment.  It was omitted.  But when I look at my draft, it was suggested that instead of five years, for someone to become a resident of this country, we should put it at ten years,  because when somebody becomes a resident, he has got all the privileges of a citizen.  So we feel that as we increased the citizenship period, we should increase this period to study this person.  I beg to move.
                
(Question put and agreed to).

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Again, clause 55, delete sub clause (8) because this part is provided for in clause 11 sub clause (4), so it is not necessary to be here.  We propose to delete it.                 
        
(Question put and agreed to).
       
Clause 55 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 56, we want to delete "national identity cards", because here national identity cards are not applicable to aliens and I think it was a misprint.  We must delete it.
               
(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 56 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  The Committee proposes that we delete sub clause and insert the following, "the board may,  for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, at least once a year call for an inspection of registers maintained under this Act." Mr. Chairman, we thought that we should not leave it to the Board - when to inspect these registers.  We thought that they should do it at least once a year.  I beg to move.
              
(Question put and agreed).

Clause 57 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Clause 65 (3) (a), the second line, there is a word missing.  We should add, "of which".

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Where?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Between "part" and "this";  second line.
                
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 65 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 66.
MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Clause 66 (2) as page 41,  second line, you delete the word "the" and replace it with "this" to read, "part of this Act."  
                    (Question put and agreed to).

Clause 66 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Under clause 72, the third line, the last word be replaced with "this' to read: "this part of this Act."
               
(Question put and agreed).

Clause 72 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: I am seeking clarification as to why under clause 79 we have wrote the interpretation of registration officer under the definition.  Could I get clarification as to why we do not have this under interpretation,  instead of having it here?

MAJ. BUTIME:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to clarify and therefore propose that the registration officer forms part of the definition - part of the Bill,  and that it be deleted here and be part of the definition section.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is it clarified?  

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  No, Mr. Chairman.  The Minister proceeded is that this should be in clause (3) which is part of the interpretation. That is how I understood the Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  We do not leave it there, do we?

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman, I would have preferred that it remains there, because when you are drafting a Bill, you only include in the interpretation a phrase which is commonly used across the entire Bill, but where it is of a local nature, you interpret it there.  In this case, this one is confined in this part and I think the Minister's original intention was in accordance with the practices of experienced legislative drafts people to which profession I belong.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I put the question that clause 79 do stand part of the Bill.
              
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Clause 85, we number the entire clause as sub clause 85 (1) and insert immediately after the clause (1), the following - however, Mr. Chairman, you will find that there will be a difference between what we got originally and the new amendment which we agreed on with the Minister.  The purpose of this sub clause was intended to protect the employees who are in that department.  It will read,  "For the avoidance of doubt, the current Immigration department immediately existing before the commencement of this Act shall,  in line with the Government restructuring policy,  continue serving the board notwithstanding the repeal of any of the enactments repealed by section 84 of this Act, but subject to the Constitution."  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LWANGA:  I would like the Chairman of the Committee to clarify on the use of, "in line with the Government restructuring policy", in view of what he has told us that he is trying to protect the employees.  Because the way I read this, it means that this restructuring means people are going to lose their jobs.  I would like you to clarify, please?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  But this restructuring, is it a permanent feature,  because this is a law which is going to operate for so many years?

MISS. BABIHUGA:  I am seeking clarification from the Chairman,  and from the line Minister.  In view of the information that has been going around that officers within this department are corrupt, I am even surprised that the Minister endorses that we shift the burden into this new Act.  I am seeking clarification on why the Committee and the Minister did not clearly come out to iron out the corrupt immigration officials?

MR. KYEMBA:  I understand that this amendment which was proposed by the Committee was intended to protect the employees of the department, but the amendment which has been circulated seems to be going away from that particular aspect.  Certainly, I do not subscribe to the suggestion that the employees should be given security of tenure.  But we have rules, we have regulations. People who are not performing do not have to wait for restructuring for them to loose their jobs.  I think if they are still there, the Minister should have got rid of them a long time ago.  In my view, Mr. Chairman, the first amendment by the Committee is more appealing to those who want to protect the jobs of the good employees of the department.  Thank you.

MR. WAMBEDE:  I stand to support the Motion by the Committee,  or by the Chairman.  Reason:  currently there is a lot of anxiety and apathy in the Immigration department.  They do not know what their fate.  What is going around is that this Act is going to make Immigration department a kind of autonomous body,  and it is that the employees there are going re-apply.  That is the fear which is there and it is upon this House to try and protect the employees there.  We do not refuse restructuring,  but let it come at the proper time.  It is our duty to protect those holding those posts.  

Let me add this.  If there is a perception that the Immigration officers are corrupt, nobody has come up to bring out the corrupt officials from there.  We keep crying here, 'immigration officers are corrupt',  but nobody has brought up even a single name of a particular officer who is corrupt.  Let me put this scenario: out there they say Parliamentarians are corrupt.  Which Parliamentarian here is corrupt?  But that is the assumption.  It is the same assumption that we are transposing onto the officers there.  So,  let us not have that in mind, but let us seek to protect those officers.  

I do agree and I support that amendment provided it is seeking to protect and eliminate the anxiety that is currently eating up the department.  In fact I would even request that he should come up clearly to say whether the Immigration department is going to be made a Commission or an autonomous body as it is being said.  That is not clear yet.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, but that amendment was along that line.  Thank you, very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members,  in my view if you look at the original version of 85,  the policy behind this clause was to save things that had been done wrongly in an old law which is being repealed.  It could be that a number of passports were fraudulently procured or issued.  We do not want to cancel them, they are being saved.  In the same way, I think the intention of this amendment is to retain people who have been appointed under the old law so that instead of seeking new appointments, they continue to serve under the new arrangement.  That is the policy.

MR. PINTO:  First I wish to thank you, Mr. Chairman for your clarification.  Quite clearly, the amendment as brought by the Chairman intends to operationalize this new Bill in accordance with the Constitution.  Earlier on, there was an amendment which apart from the words "shall in line with Government restructuring policy,"  remained the same.  We know that the restructuring exercise does not have to become a permanent feature,  as you advised.  I would therefore like to request the Chairman to amend his present amendment and return to his previous Committee amendment so that it reads as this one reads except for the words, "shall in line with Government restructuring policy," Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Since we have a professional draftsman here, we would like the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality to clarify on this matter.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Sir, it is a question of policy.  I can see here they are saying "it is the department which shall continue serving the board."  The original one was more direct, it was talking about the officers of the Immigration Department to continue in office, notwithstanding the repeal.  I do not know what the difference is?  So it is difficult to say it is a purely drafting matter;  it is a question of policy.  

It is normal that when you draft a Bill of this nature you provide what they call saving and transitional provisions.  What they are calling transitional here is saving what appears in 85.  You are saving those permits which have been given,  and other documents, passports and all, which would have otherwise ceased with the repealing of the laws.  You are saying that they nevertheless continue. 

The next thing is to say something about the staff.  The law does not proceed on the basis that the board is a body corporate, it will hire its own staff.  It does not say so.  It is saying there will be a board, but there will be officers of the public service who will be serving that board.  The compromise is that for the avoidance of doubt, the current Immigration department immediately existing before the commencement of this Act shall, in line with Government restructuring policy,  continue serving the board notwithstanding any of the enactments repealed by section 84 of this Act, but subject to the Constitution.  The Minister is retaining the department, but not necessarily the individuals in that department.  That is how I understand it.  I do not know whether that is what he really meant?  If that be the case, then it is a question of policy;  it is not a question of drafting.  The Minister can tell us what his policy is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Mr. Okumu-Ringa rose_).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Now clarification from who?  Let us hear the Minister, really!

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman,  looking at the amendment as it is, one would assume that Government restructuring policy would also remain in this Bill or act as a law.  I would be more comfortable if the aspect of "in line with Government restructuring policy" was deleted.  Because policies can change from time to time.  

The clarification I am seeking from the Minister as he winds up is whether or not restructuring should be as part of this policy, rather than leaving that as an administrative measure.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  Thank you very much.  I would like to inform the Members that, "in line with Government's restructuring policy",  should be deleted.  

And then to answer hon. Wapakabulo's query, we were in a dilemma.  We thought that if we put individual people in this Bill, they can even take Government to court if they are thrown out of job.  That is why a department can never exist without employees.  So if you are selling the department at that particular time, it means you are saving the people who are working in that particular department as well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No. Does it mean that if you save them, you save them by this law and they continue to work?  Does it mean that if eventually you find a fault with them, you cannot take disciplinary action?  It is being presupposed that there is nothing wrong against them,  they have been working,  and they are required in the new arrangement, so you take them.  But if as they work you find fault, you mean this law will prevent you from taking action?

MAJ. BUTIME:  No,  Mr. Chairman.  The purpose was to link the board with Immigration department.  In the course of their work, if  Immigration officers are found to be corrupt and so on, this proposal of ours does not send them away at all.  This has been going on, it will continue,  and it is really part of the public service Commission because people working there are public officers;  so it does not save them at all.  That is why we wanted to distance ourselves from using the phrase "immigration officers" or "officer serving,"  and we thought it would do better by talking about the Immigration department.  It should be even more distant from that folly,  and just create a linkage and stop there.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. PAJOBO:  I think that by doing so we are not going to protect the employees and the staff in that department.  I would like to propose that, "for the avoidance of doubt, the current Immigration department and the staff immediately existing before the commencement of this Act shall continue serving the board notwithstanding the repeal of any of the enactments repealed by section 84 of this Act."  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Is it seconded?  

MR. WAMBEDE:  Mr. Chairman, I wholly and totally support the Motion.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:    I now put the question on the Motion as proposed by hon. Pajobo.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the Motion by the Chairperson of the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 85 as amended,  agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members as you remember, there are some clauses which we stood over as we proceeded,  namely clause 3(2) and 4. Can I hear submissions to clause 3?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  On clause 3, I raised the aspect of interpretation whereby the word "Commissioner" was to be interpreted to mean "Deputy Commissioner",  for the immigration established under section 9 of this Act.  Mr. Chairman, this proposal was made in light of the fact that administratively the Minister or the board could create a position of a Deputy Commissioner who would perform the functions of a Commissioner in the latter's absence.  So I would like to propose that this interpretation be included.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  That, "Commissioner means Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner of Immigration,"  where there is that proposal.  But without this,  would you not know - if they create Deputy Commissioner - that Deputy Commissioner would remain deputy to the Commissioner?

MR. TOSKIN:  Mr. Chairman, I think this is just unnecessary detail.  Because if in the absence of the Commissioner the Deputy Commissioner takes charge,  in such a case the Deputy Commissioner will be referred to as a Commissioner.  I do not think it was necessary for it to be included in the law.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA:  I want just to inform the Member that Deputy Commissioner,  according to the restructuring programme,  has been abolished.  So I do not see why we should define the position which is non-existent.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  In any case,  there was a Motion by the Committee that we create the post of Deputy Commissioner.  There was a debate here and this was rejected.  So you are defining somebody who does not exist in the Act; why?  

He has made a proposal, apparently it is not supported, I mean can we really not proceed with another -(Interruption).

MR. WAMBEDE:  Mr. Chairman,  let me say this.  I support his Motion.  Why am I supporting it?  If I may beg your indulgence, it is true the amendment of creating Deputy Commissioner was defeated.  But perhaps to handle both at a go, I have intentions of putting forward a Motion to that effect of having a Deputy Commissioner.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  You are anticipating.  You see, what happened is that this matter was debated.  I was not here,  but I followed it.  This matter was debated,  and it was rejected.  This office of a Deputy Commissioner was rejected;  so what are you now legislating for?

MR. WAMBEDE:  Mr. Chairman, I thought we are to propose some amendments on it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  If there is a recommittal, then we shall come to this matter.  And once we think it is necessary to revisit this matter,  we shall do so.  But not before we have dealt with this matter of Deputy Commissioner which was rejected.  We are proposing that we shall recommit this matter for purposes of creating this office.  So when we do and we succeed, then we shall revisit it.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4.

MR. RWAKOOJO:  I would like to propose the following amendment to clause 4(2) that "each member of the Board shall be a person who must be of high moral character and proven integrity, must not have been declared bankrupt, must not be below the age of 30, must be of sound mind and must be qualified to be a Member of Parliament".  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Well the Motion is seconded.  Can you speak to the Motion,  please?

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Mr. Chairman, the way clause (4) is worded here  "that each member of the Board shall be a person with high moral character and proven integrity",  leaves it open.  It means that a child of even 13 years who might be known to the Appointing Authority and might not be educated is likely to be appointed to this board.  This board is an important one, it is a national board.  It is a board that is going to be taking care of our systems and of the Immigration law.  It needs people who are not only morally upright, but who know something about the law, people who are mature and with proven experience,  Mr. Chairman.  That is why I am proposing the above.

MAJ. BUTIME:  I support the proposal,  but there is a contradiction.  If somebody is 30 years, then at the same time he is qualified to be a Member of Parliament, you are forgetting that there are Members of Parliament who are not yet 30 years,  like the youth.  What will happen to them in this particular case?

MR. RWAKOOJO:  Mr. Chairman I said, above 30 years.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Could you please read the amendment again so that people are clear with it?

MR. RWAKOOJO: The amendment reads, "Each Member of the Board shall be a person who shall be of high moral character and proven integrity, (b) must have not been declared bankrupt".  For (c) I had not below 30 years,  but maybe we can say, "not below 20 years", if this is acceptable to the Minister; and (d) Must be of sound mind and must be qualified as a Member of Parliament", Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean you are introducing educational qualifications?

MR. RWAKOOJO: Yes.

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: While I would like to support the amendment, if it goes as it is, then we are cancelling the amendment of the Committee which says:  "Each Member of the Board shall be a citizen of Uganda" and then you add this qualification on it.  If that goes with that, I have no objection.  But we should have, "Each Member of the Board shall be a citizen of Uganda".

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I do not have anything serious against the proposed amendment except that it is not necessary to say that he must be of sound mind,  because that is presumed.  Otherwise, we would not have what is in 3(a) saying:  "A person will be removed for inability" which we could have also said, "for incapacity", that is, physical or mental incapacity".  I do not think we need that.  

In (h), I think the Member gave a very extreme case - of 13 years.  But if you look at the appointment, "shall be by the President with the approval of Parliament",  if a Committee of Parliament can approve a 13 year old, then so be it.  But I doubt that we are likely to have a person who is below the age of majority, which is 18 years, go through.   Mr. Chairman, this question of age was argued at great length in the CA.   In fact people said Members of Parliament must not be less than 30.  Then they discovered they had a provision for youth.  Then they said, 'what should the youth be?   They said, '25 years'.  Eventually, it was agreed that any Uganda who can exercise the right to vote should be free to run for the office of a Member of Parliament.

Here we are saying that on this board, because of the importance of the responsibility, we should have an age limit.  But hon. Okorimoi there wanted to stand up and oppose the Mover, but she hesitated.  I do not know whether she is 30 or 31 years of age, but she has been a very responsible Member of the House.  Otherwise, that was the question of age.

The other one is one of drafting where we said we do not have to repeat the question of mental incapacity or capacity.  Thank you.  

DR. AJEANI: Mr. Chairman, I oppose this amendment and would like the clause (2) to be as it is,  because the persons who are going to be appointed are going to be appointed by the President.  The President is not going to appoint people of ten years of age.  The sub section says: "Each Member of the Board shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity".  So, I oppose this and let (2) remain as it is.  We are going into unnecessary superfluous details.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 4 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Before we go to the First Schedule, there was an indication that there were new clauses which Members wanted to put in this Bill.  Are there such new clauses to this Bill?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA:  Mr. Chairman, having completed part one of the Bill,  without having received the explanation from the Minister responsible and the Chairperson of the Committee, after due consultations with the Colleagues in the House, I propose an amendment subject to the clear explanation that will be given by the Minister as to why a new clause should not be introduced. This new clause would have merged very well with clause 5.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, do you have any written proposed new clause?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Yes, Mr. Chairman, the new clause has been circulated to all Members.  It is supposed to be clause 13 which reads as follows:  "The National Citizenship and Immigration Board shall be a body corporate, with perpetual succession and powers to honour assets and may sue and be sued in its own corporate name."  This is in light of the fact that even though the board is being created by a provision in the Constitution, that provision in Article 16 simply states that there shall be a National Citizenship and Immigration Board.  

Since this board is going to have a seal and will have to handle all matters pertaining to the affairs of the citizenship and the normal tasks, it would only be fair that it is given a corporate identity with which to operate so that it can function optimumly.  For it to operate as a department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs will actually suffocate and not make it able to perform the functions for which it is established.

Otherwise, if the Minister convinces me and those who believe that it should have a corporate identity, then I shall withdraw this proposal.  Otherwise, this is my proposed amendment.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So you have withdrawn?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. Chairman, mine was just a general introduction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Motion is not seconded apparently.  So, it has aborted.  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, in clause 40, insert the following new clause:  "Ugandans entitled to passport.  Every Ugandan citizen shall have a right to a passport or other travel document"

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I suppose this has been supported by the Members of the Committee.  And according to our rules, rule 104 (16),  we should comply with them.  

This is a new clause, because it was not part of the Bill's Second Reading.  We have to go through the process of having the Second Reading, then we debate it and see what happens.  Because this rule says:  "Upon the title of any new clause being read by the Clerk, the clause shall be deemed to have been read the First Time".  The questions are being proposed that the clause be read for the Second Time, and if it is agreed to, amendments may then be proposed to the new clause.  We should go through this process and then deal with this matter.  So, you read the text of the clause.

"Clause 40.Every Ugandan shall be entitled to a passport"

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the clause be read the Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, every Ugandan shall be entitled to a passport.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 40.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 40 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

The First Schedule:

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: Mr. chairman, I have three amendments to Schedule Two.  The first one is on 1.1, which says that, "The Board shall for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act meet at least two times in a month."  I would like to propose that instead of two times, they meet at least once a month.  When we say, at least once a month,  it means they can even meet two times, three times, or four times depending on the kind of work they may have.  That is the first proposal, Mr. Chairman.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it seconded?  Then it has aborted.

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: The second one is in 2.2(ii).  It is a typographical error, first line, second last word should be "be half", not "behalf" and also to add the word, "of" to read: "be half of the Members".  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is the Motion seconded?  Honestly, I think whoever prepared this one meant 'be half', not 'behalf'.  I think it is noted.  There is no need to pronounce ourselves on it, especially as it is not seconded.  Any further amendment?

MR. OKUMU-RINGA: The last amendment, Mr. Chairman, I am proposing that 2.4 be deleted because it is repetitive, it is provided for substantively under residual power of the board to regulate its proceedings.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What you are saying is that what you find in 2.4 is repeated in 4?  Is it supported?  I think it is aborted.  

The Second Schedule:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Second Schedule stands Schedule to the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Third Schedule:

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: In Third Schedule, we should add Form G, that is an application form for a Uganda travel document, and I think Members have got it in their possession.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Third Schedule as amended, agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule:

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: This Fourth Schedule should be deleted,  because we have transferred this Schedule to be a substantive clause in the Act.  I beg to move.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Fifth Schedule:

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Mr. Chairman, since we have cancelled the Fourth Schedule,  the Fifth Schedule becomes the Fourth Schedule.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Title:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, The Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE


THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled 'The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill,  1998' and passed it with amendments.  I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM
 THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS 
THIRD READING

The Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill, 1998

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Butime Tom):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill be read the Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Bill, 1998, be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).


 THE UGANDA CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL ACT, 1998

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is passed. I thank you very for expediting the process.  I think some good work has been done and Members must be feeling tired.  I think this is the appropriate time to adjourn the House to resume tomorrow at 2:30 pm.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose and adjourned to Thursday February 25, 1999 at 2.30 p.m).
