Thursday, 21 February 2008

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome the minority of you who are here and I wonder where the rest are. It is true that the issue of quorum was dealt with and we can proceed. But in view of the numbers, I propose that we suspend for ten minutes in all fairness.

(The House was suspended at 2.27 p.m.)
 
(On resumption at 2.38 p.m. the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1

2.39
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you Rt Hon. Speaker for the opportunity you have given me to raise this matter of utmost national importance. The people of Buganda are very concerned about The Daily Monitor’s big story of 19th February and today 21st February. The 19th February story said, “Buganda’s 9000 square miles up for grabs” and today’s lead story says, “Land titles on 9000 square miles go for Shs 22,000” respectively. 

In summary, these two stories say that anybody is free to apply and get part of the 9000 square miles of land. As we all know, this is part of the assets that the Kabakaship has been seeking to repossess under the 1993 Traditional Rulers and Restitution of Assets and Properties Act. 
Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, these stories have sent shivers in Buganda, particularly at this point in time -(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I am seeking clarification from you for my own education and others who may be like me. Where are these 9000 square miles? Where do they start and end? Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, those are some of the questions that we need sorted out before the land is dished out. While the government is trying to quell fears in the country that the Land (Amendment) Bill is not about grabbing people’s land, this House needs to be sure that this land Bill is not intended to forcefully give away people‘s land under dubious circumstances and to disenfranchise the people of Buganda. 

Since the news of the Land Bill leaked to the press, there has been deep suspicion in the entire country, particularly about the spirit of hurriedly bringing the Bill to Parliament without consultation and that suspicion was dubbed Ettaka ligenda. Government has taken pains to quell the fears that indeed ettaka is not going and that the Bill is intended to stop rampant unlawful eviction of land. 

Mr Speaker, the 9000 square miles is Buganda’s communal land. It is our heritage and that of the majority of the people that did not benefit from the allocation of land. It is the heritage that is supposed to be passed on to future generations. Each community in Uganda has got land and have admirably protected and expressed their opinions of this land as we heard from the caucuses’ of Acholi, Lango, Karamoja, Teso and others. 

Territory is a heritage; so, when the people are very nervous, it is because of the rampant give away of this land. What is going on looks dubious and it is done in a manner that pre-empts the current Bill before this house. People are very nervous, suspicious and they are finding it extremely provocative. 

THE SPEAKER: Your submission is very long. I thought you stood because of the newspaper reports.

MS KAMYA: I am finishing, Mr Speaker. What the people of Buganda are asking is, “What will the children of Buganda inherit when all the land is given away”? This is a valid question because we need to sort out the land ownership. The Government of Uganda is claiming this land before we sort out the ownership question. However, it is extremely important that we sort this out before giving out- 

Mr. Tumwebaze: Point of Order!

THE SPEAKER: I think we should let her finish so that we can get a reply. We shall then deal with any other issues.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise counsel. I need Government to clarify several things. What is the status of the 9000 square miles as hon. Frank Tumwebaze asked? How much of it has already been given away or leased? To whom has it been leased? Why are land allocations continuing when a Bill before Parliament to sort out land wrangles is pending? Is Buganda not right to fear that the Bill is about grabbing her land; that is the 9000 square miles, the 8000 square miles of mailo land and the over 300 square miles of county and sub county land, not to mention the 1000 square miles of forest and wetland? Why is Government dragging its feet on the 1993 Restitution Act? Why is Government being so provocative? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.46
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, I don’t know whether this is a matter of national importance but since you have ruled, I will endeavour-

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think as you have heard from her, on two occasions this week there has been something on this subject in the newspapers.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, it is true that there have been two alarmist reports in The Monitor newspaper, one with the headline: “9000 square miles in Buganda up for grabs”. Following that, as if it was a planned journalistic and systematic approach to incite the people of Buganda and mislead the people of Uganda, they came up with another headline: “9000 square miles for a mere Shs 22,000”. 

Mr Speaker, the 9000 square miles, which is popularly referred to in Buganda as Mailo akenda is not for grabs and will never be for grabs. There is a law in this country, which governs the administration of land, both the Constitution and the Land Act. Anybody or institution that is dealing with the issue of land including the 9000 square miles must follow the Constitution of Uganda and the Land Act. 

Mr Speaker and colleagues, when it comes to today’s headlines, it is really very unfortunate because when you read that headline and the actual text of the story, they don’t tally. 

The Minister of State for Lands, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, was being interviewed by The Monitor journalist on the issue of systematic demarcation: Systematic demarcation is a form of survey in which you take a village, parish or gombolola and survey it in a way that will reduce costs. This is because a simple survey for any plot of land in the rural areas goes up to Shs 2 million. But with systematic demarcation, which is actually collective demarcation of a village or parish, after they have agreed on the cost, it comes down to as little as Shs 22,000. The idea is to encourage the people of Uganda who don’t have land titles to have them cheaply. 

At the moment, we are at the pilot stage, which is in the districts of Wakiso and Iganga. It was somehow interrupted in Soroti because people were not sensitised and it caused a bit of killing three years ago but now it is being revived. 

Mr Speaker, the headline on the Shs 22,000 is totally misleading and we have already telephoned The Monitor newspaper and the responsible minister, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, is going to correct this- [Mr Sebuliba Mutumba rose_]

THE SPEAKER: Please let him make his statement.

MR OMARA ATUBO: The other is the question of the Land Bill. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the land-

THE SPEAKER: The House is presided over by the Speaker not the Prime Minister.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Rt hon. Speaker, you are definitely higher than the Prime Minister in protocol. The Land Bill is not intended to grab anybody’s land. If anything, it is intended to protect peasants from rampant evictions. The law is in place, consultations were made before and they are going on. This law is not going to be made in a hurry and already the Buganda caucus has been consulted. Hon. Kamya was one of them and was very conciliatory in State House. I hope that you have maintained that attitude. Thank you very much. 

The question of deep suspicion is really a question of perception and feeling and therefore, I urge that as political leaders, it is our responsibility to reduce this tension and suspicion. Let us be in touch with one another and explain to each other what this is all about. 

Furthermore, the 9000 square miles, as it is known in name, may not be the exact number because the 9000 square miles came in the 1900 Buganda Agreement but when the land surface of Buganda was surveyed finally in 1936, from 9000 square miles, the British found that it was actually 8307 square miles. So, accurately, it is not even 9000 square miles. This land, which is popularly known as mailo akenda, is here in Buganda. Nobody has carried it anywhere abroad or to any other tribe and the District Land Board in Buganda is managing it in accordance with the current existing law. If you want this 9000 square miles- [Mr Tumwebaze rose]

THE SPEAKER: I think you should get the statement first and then raise clarification.

MR ATUBO: If you want the 9000 square miles to go to another institution like Mengo, the appropriate law has to be put in place. May I also add that the historical or legal sequence, which I am aware of, is that the 9000 square miles was administered at the time of independence by the federal Buganda government and not by the Institution of the Kabaka? Therefore, what is important now is to have a legal institution in Buganda, which can administer the 9000 square miles over and above the District Land Boards. 

There is, however, a gross misunderstanding. At the time when independence was negotiated in London, the 9000 square miles, which was part of the Crown Land, was being administered by the British. It was then given to the federal government of Buganda but due to the events of the 1966 and 1967 Constitution, this became public land. It went to the Uganda Land Commission but with effect from the 1995 Constitution, it was reverted to Buganda through the District Land Boards. 

May I finally add that there is a lot of talk about tribal land: Lango land, Buganda land, Acholi land, Lugbara land, and Teso land. May I educate my colleagues and really urge you to look closely at your Constitution. What we have in the Constitution of Uganda is the sovereign State of Uganda not the sovereign state of tribes and tribal lands. Thank you.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of clarification. I have listened attentively to the statement by the minister but there are a few questions, which need to be clarified upon. The minister has said the 9000 square miles are here in Buganda, have not been tampered with and that they are not going anywhere. 

May I know from the minister whether it is true or not that this land is being parcelled out and that leases are being given to particular individuals by the ministry; and more importantly, Mr Speaker, that different individuals are acquiring interest in fee-simple - that is freehold - on this particular piece of land; and that there is a recognition according to him under the law that this land belongs to Buganda and that at sometime probably we do not know when this land will revert back to Buganda. So, if people have acquired interest in fee-simple that is freehold, how will this land revert to Buganda? (Interjection)- No, he is saying that this land does exist and it was surveyed and it is known to be communal land for Buganda.

Another issue is that he is saying that Uganda is a sovereign state; that is true. That there is nothing like tribal lands. 

Mr Speaker, may I know from the minister whether we do not have a concept of communal land under our laws; and that these communal lands do not belong to tribes? Hon. Mukitale is here, people were evicted from Buliisa on the sole ground that they are not Abagungu and that they are not entitled to own land there. I even have documents here - (Interjection) - It is not a lie and as we talk right now, Mr Speaker, if I can give you this information, there are people who resisted this eviction, the so-called Balaalo are now under detention since 13 January. They have been in detention and court issued habeas corpus order for these people to be produced on the 14th of this month and government refused. Up to now, they are still in detention under the Violent Crime Crack Unit. So, I want to know from the minister whether the question of communal land does not exist in the Constitution.

Finally, I wanted to raise –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is a point of order or of information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not abuse our procedure. You cannot stand on a point of information and then within a second, it becomes a point of order. Let us not do that.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you very much for that ruling, Mr Speaker. The final question I wanted to raise on this particular matter is about this notion of the state owning land. Honourable minister, you know for sure that Article 237 is very clear; Government can own land for only ecological reasons. And government can acquire land for a particular purpose if it is not for ecological reasons. 

You can acquire land under Article 26 compulsorily, for a specific purpose and following a certain procedure, which is laid down under the law, but not to own land for purposes of giving out leases, for purposes of giving out freehold to particular individuals. 

Article 246 specifically talks about cultural institutions owning land in trust for its own people. So, are you saying in essence that cultural institutions as of now do not have powers to own land in trust for their own people? Particularly as I conclude –(Interjection)- allow me finish my submission. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not my duty to give assignments to ministers. But this matter is coming up and I have heard submissions on it and I think that there are constitutional provisions dealing with this subject. The 9,000 miles is public land in Buganda. When they use 9,000 square miles, they are talking about the public land in Buganda, which was in 1900 vested in the Crown. 

I will ask the Attorney-General to give us a statement on how this land has moved to the present, so that we know the position and be in position to talk about it. A lot has been said and I know that our laws have a way they deal with this matter. I am asking the Attorney-General to give us a statement on this subject next week on Tuesday or Wednesday.

3.01
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I think your guidance will assist us, but more still this question of land is going to be talked about for ever and ever until or unless Government comes up with a land policy. When shall we have a land policy? The Constitution requires us to have a land use policy. When is this policy coming? That will also assist in settling this matter. I hope the policy will come after wide consultations, so that this whole talk and fears are put to rest. I thank you.

MR ATUBO: Let me start with the remarks by hon. John Kawanga. It is true that consultations are going on now, we will soon come up with a National Land Policy; this has been going on for the last five years. You know when you are regulating a policy, you must consult technically from within. The draft, which is now for public consumption is called Draft No.3, which has been circulated and consultations are going on nationally. We have made a number of consultations and we are about to finish the last four consultations in Buganda and the West mainly. So, the draft National Land Policy is in place. 

The Land Use Policy is completed; Cabinet has approved it and the President will officially launch it on the 27th March this year, and you will get your invitation accordingly.

On the other issue of the freehold being allocated, I am not aware but, hon. Elias Lukwago, you are welcome to supply me with information that there is freehold being allocated, and if it is being allocated, it is being done so by the District Land Board. 

THE SPEAKER: The position is, the Constitution of 1995 has a provision to the effect that any person having a lease on public land can apply to convert a lease into a freehold; It is there. 

MR ATUBO: The District land boards within Buganda do that. Most of them are Baganda themselves. On the issue of –(Interruption) 

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I have been prompted to call the minister to order for two pieces of statements that he has referred to here. Earlier on, he made that very statement to the effect that there are issues of tribe when it comes to land. I am saying this because I know that he is a cultural leader in Lango and he is also a clan leader. I also know that in the structures, there is a unit in his clan that deals with land in Lango. Why is he talking about that, after denying that land does not belong to tribes in the districts? 

He has not stopped at that, he has also made reference to land in Buganda, which is owned by the Baganda. Can the minister be honest and consistent? So, I would like to know whether he is in order to issue these contradictory statements. Where exactly does he stand? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Odit is saying that in Lango, land belongs to people of Lango –(Laughter)- a Muganda cannot get land in Lango, but how about in Buganda?

MR ATUBO: It is very sad that you can have a national leader stand up and say that land in Lango only belongs to the people of Lango and nobody else. Well, I am talking constitutionally; I am not talking through tribal emotions –(Interjection)- and the sooner we are honest to the people of Uganda the better. I challenge you to bring any provision in the Constitution with a demarcation of tribal boundaries. If you can, please bring that and I see it; but it is a very emotive issue. What we have –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You know I am not a lawyer, so, I always –(Interjection)- I know he is a very good lawyer; that is why I am seeking clarification from him. The schedule of our Constitution talks about Pader, Kitgum and Gulu of Acholi. What is that Acholi? 

MR ATUBO: It talks about districts, which are supposed to constitute regional governments – (Interjection)- Yes, and you know that. Please, we are moving ahead. Do you know that at one time there was what we called Lango district and there was what we called Acholi district? We moved away from that and what do we have now? We have Lira district, we have Apac, and we have Gulu districts, but I do not want to enter –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it seems the statement that was made by hon. Kamya is generating a general debate, yet I have asked the Attorney-General, by next week, to give us a statement on this particular subject of the 9,000 square miles. When the minister makes that statement, we shall be able to debate it because it will be a statement from the minister. I think the point has been raised and I think we can end there in as far as this subject is concerned. 

3.09
MR AKBAR GODI (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker; may I be protected from the noisy House?

THE SPEAKER: You are very much protected. 

MR GODI: Mr Speaker, I rise on an issue concerning Arua Referral Hospital, which is the only referral hospital in the whole of the West Nile Region. The female patients have been admitted since then in the children’s ward and the children’s ward has been partitioned to accommodate the two categories of patients. As a result of that, there have been many efforts that the female ward be rebuilt. 

Many proposals have been forwarded to the government that they should erect a flat instead of that fire-store, and which could not accommodate the number of patients as it would do. 

To date, it has now become very dangerous when diseases break out, because there is too much congestion in those two wards. As you read in the newspapers of today, there is an outbreak of Cholera because there is too much congestion in those two wards: 26 cases have been reported and they attributed congestion, among others, to the shortage of water because the National Sewerage Corporation has not been able to pump enough water due to lack of power. 

We consulted with the district executives on whether there have been proposals or whether government has made efforts to divert water from the River Nile to Rhino Camp, which is just 38 Kilometres from Arua town, because River Enyau, the only river in Arua town that has been the source of clean water is too little to accommodate the demands. With the opening of Sudan and Congo, there has been a population explosion in that town. We wanted to know what efforts Government has made, especially the Ministry of Health, on the issue of the ward that had been condemned long time ago. Minister Mallinga is now feeling bad, but that is the issue I am directing at, and the issue of water. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.12
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg the honourable members, before they stand in this august House, to do research. As we speak now, the medical ward in Arua Hospital has been broken down and a new ward is being constructed – a double storeyed building is being constructed. I have been in touch with the RDC, Mr Ibrahim Abiliga. So, you should research before you come and stand here and make statements. 

The other day, you made a statement about Gen. Mustafa. Gen. Mustafa has been sick, on and off. I cannot mention whatever he is suffering from for obvious reasons, because I came to learn that it is privileged information. I went to Arua and I assigned a doctor to look after Gen. Mustafa and he goes there twice a week to look after him. Gen. Mustafa fell sick recently. I talked to hon. Kiyonga; he gave us an ambulance –(Interruption)

MR GODI: Procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But I thought you wanted a response from the minister. He is giving it to you. 

DR MALLINGA: Gen. Mustafa was collected by a helicopter ambulance and he is now in Mulago hospital. I am supposed to go and see him this afternoon. He has been discharged and he is just waiting for transport to go back to Arua. So, I would beg that before hon. Members come here, they should do research. Thank you, very much. 

THE SPEAKER: But there was a report of Cholera in the area and you have not said anything about it. 

DR MALLINGA: Cholera in that area is not unusual. (Laughter)- Every time it rains, we have a problem of clean water. The outbreak of Cholera in the area has been contained. We had plague in Nebbi and it has been contained by now. We had Cholera and Meningitis in Arua area, it has also been contained as I speak. Almost every year, we have an outbreak of cholera in the area. It is like in Kampala where every time we have rain, there is an outbreak of cholera. However, we have been able to contain it every time it comes up. Thank you very much. (Applause)  

STATEMENT OF BUSINESS BY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, in accordance with Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I wish to mention Government business from 26th to 28th February 2008. First, there is the report of the Committee on National Economy on Government’s request to borrow an additional $ 12 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance phase 11 of agricultural research and training. I have noted that this matter is on the Order paper but there is a possibility that we may not cover it.  In which case if we do not cover it today, we shall cover it next week.  

Secondly, there is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorize Government to borrow an additional $ 12 million from the International Development Association to finance phase 11 of the agricultural research and training by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Thirdly, there is the Law Revision; Fines and other Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2006. The Attorney General will handle that matter. 

Four is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on debt equity swap Phoenix Logistics Limited (UDBL) loan of Shs 5 billion including interest. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will handle that. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS 

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish to start by apologising for coming late. I was with the Budget Committee until very late this afternoon. I would like to lay on Table the supplementary expenditure for financial year 2007/08, Supplementary Schedule No.1.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Article 156(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, allow me to make the following highlights on Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the first three quarters of the financial year 2007/08, which has been distributed to all hon. Members of this august House. 

Parliament approved the budget of Shs 5,471,188,913,000 trillion for financial year 2007/08 of which Shs 4.610 trillion is the appropriated budget and Shs 861.1 billion is statutory. According to the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the recurrent and development expenditure for financial year 2007/08, the total supplementary budget is Shs 135,692,624,770. This is in addition to Shs 57,245,000,000 which was approved and passed by Parliament under a resolution dated 28 August 2007 and used to fund CHOGM 2007. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the appropriate committee take up these documents, study them and then subsequently report to the House for debate.

3.20
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Please take note of the annex and details of the supplementary statutory expenditure on vote 104; the Parliamentary Commission. I would like the honourable Minister of Finance to help this House. Is this not the very expenditure we appropriated when we passed the budget this financial year? And if it is, is this not an attempt to mess up the reputation of this House because there are already reports in newspapers that Parliament is going to pass more money for itself? 

It appears to me that this is the money that we passed last time and as such, we are getting misrepresented when Ministry of Finance brings the same thing for a supplementary approval. I would like Ministry of Finance to clarify this even before we get it sorted out in the committee.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, you have already ruled that this goes to the committee, so the committee will handle this.

THE SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member is alerting the committee that what is claimed as supplementary expenditure is actually part of the current budget, which is still operating. I think the committee will examine it and give us an answer. For the time being, let us accept the document; they will examine it and if this is true, it will come out. I think her fear was to give an impression that Parliament is requesting for a supplementary when it is not a supplementary because this was appropriated.

MS ALASO: Yes, Mr Speaker, you are very right and I am glad you have clarified it. It actually appears as if we are passing money the second time for the same issue. Secondly, is it procedurally okay for any Parliament to pass money twice on the same issue?  

THE SPEAKER: I think this will come out and we may reject passing it should it be found that the position is as you have stated.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO DECLARE A NATIONAL TREE PLANTING MONTH AND TO PROMOTE TREE PLANTING ACTIVITIES

3.23
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Masindi): I thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I am moving under Rules 43, 47 and 50 of our Rules of Procedure to present a motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to declare a tree planting month and promote tree planting activities. You will bear with me, I am told some copies are still in the printery but a few are available. Allow me to proceed as more copies are being availed.

“WHEREAS the entire world and Uganda in particular is threatened by the phenomena of climate change and global warming…” –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to thank my honourable colleague for the spirit in which he is bringing this particular motion, but my ministry has already initiated legislation on this, and as it is a requirement under the Budget Act to seek financial clearance from the Ministry of Finance - we did submit it to the Ministry of Finance. They made comments, which my ministry is addressing, before submitting this particular legislation to Cabinet and Parliament. 

I did interact with my colleague and I even informed him of the progress. I am surprised that he is coming up with the same resolution when he even knows that this particular activity requires funding. So, I want to be guided on whether he is procedurally right to come up with this. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Okay –(Laughter)

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I think the minister is helping me to justify why Parliament should move this resolution. This motion was actually conceived by the committee last year in March, and we did share this information with our minister. This motion is not in any way –

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the minister is telling you that what you are asking for is already in place, and she is saying that Parliament has very little time and a lot of work. Why do you duplicate something, which is already –(Interjection)- yes; that is what he is saying. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, on Tuesday after consulting you, I consulted the Minister of Water and Environment, hon. Mutagamba, and she actually told me how they are stuck with clearance from the Ministry of Finance and possibly this motion will help to move this matter forward. So, I was cleared on Tuesday by the minister. 

I do not really see why the honourable minister now says that there is a problem, because it was on Tuesday after your own advice that I met hon. Mutagamba and I thought that Parliament also has a role and for us as a Committee on Natural Resources; after the minister told us that the ministry is having a threat of having no timber for five years, and wood for eight years -

THE SPEAKER: Okay, there is a point of procedure. Let us hear it. 

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to be corrected by lawyers but I have Article 93 of the Constitution, which I would like to quote and see whether the honourable member will proceed to move his motion. Article 93 of the Constitution talks about restriction on financial matters: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government…”

I would like to go on and read Article 93(b), that: “Parliament shall not proceed on a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes testified in paragraph (a) of this Article.” 

Paragraph (a) of Article 93 reads as follows: “Parliament shall not, unless a Bill or a motion is introduced on behalf of Government, proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment to the Bill, that makes provision for any of the following…”  I do not want to take the time of Parliament and I want to assume that Members have the Constitution. You can guide me, Mr Speaker, on whether the Article I am quoting is relevant. 

THE SPEAKER: My advice to the mover is this: since the minister has also given us information, let me give you more time to make consultations with the minister over this matter. Should you insist on this, then next week we may have to proceed with your motion. I will definitely accord you space on the Order Paper, should you not reach an agreement with her, so that we can deal with other pressing matters. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance and I am most obliged, but I want to state here that this motion is only urging government. It is only urging Government to operationalise the Tree Planting Act, which was passed by this Parliament after the minister told us last year in March that they had failed to proceed because of the delays in the Ministry of Finance, and I thought that this is an issue of national importance given that the minister herself told us last month that we will not have timber or wood for the next eight years. 

I thought that as Parliament and as a Committee on Natural Resources, we are only doing what we are supposed to do and then this will help the sector of environment, for the Ministry of Finance to consider the issue of tree planting and for the operationalisation of the Tree Planting Act as a national priority. 

THE SPEAKER: I am giving you a week to make consultations and report back. 

MR MUKITALE: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 42/08 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY

3.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): “What is the status of the national oil/fuel reserves in the country?”

What measures are in place to avert any fuel crisis now and in the future?”

3.31 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Okupa Elijah, for this question for oral answer. The question is in two parts.

The first part is the current status of the national oil reserve in the country, to which I would like to respond as follows: 

The government, through my ministry, is responsible for the national fuel reserves, the government-owned Jinja storage tanks. This reserve is on top of the available capacity in the country, managed by the private sector. The principle objective of the facility is to provide national, strategic fuel reserves and the purpose for the reserves is as follows:

1.	To provide the country with fuel buffer stocks and to stabilise the petroleum products market whenever serious disruptions occur in the petroleum supply chain. 
2.	To guarantee supply of petroleum products for essential services during shortage of fuel; and  
3.	Finally, to provide hospitality storage as a promotion to new and smaller entrepreneurs into this heavy investment industry. 

The Jinja storage tanks facility is of limited capacity compared to the needs of the country, which currently stands at approximately 2 million litres per day. The equipment is also old and requires regular maintenance. 

In the year 2002, new fire fighting equipment was installed at a total cost of US $3,719,530. This was financed by selling 11.5 million litres of fuel, which was sold through competitive bidding to licensed oil companies and fetched US $3,486,000. The Treasury then provided the shortfall of US $233,530. The sale was necessary because installation of the new fire fighting equipment involved welding works on the tanks and hence they had to be emptied of their products. The transactions have been audited by the Auditor-General and the report has been submitted to the Parliament’s Public Accounts Committee. 

Currently the metering and the loading facilities are being replaced at the Jinja storage tanks. The pumping facilities also require rehabilitation and upgrading and this is also being attended to. The government is reviewing the management of the Jinja storage tanks in order to make the facility compliant with emerging pressure in the country and international standards.  

To keep the fuel under correct specifications, it is necessary to recycle the products from time to time. This is achieved through issuing out the product on short-term basis to companies, which later return fresh products back to the depot. In addition, some products are released to the market from time to time in order to stabilise the market.

Since 2002, Mr Speaker, Uganda has been experiencing less than optimal supply of fuel through Kenya. This was caused by the limited capacity and constant breakdown of the Kenya refinery, and the pipeline. I am referring to the refinery at Mombasa and the pipeline between Mombasa and Nairobi. Consumption of the petroleum products in the region has also grown more than the projected demand. This was compounded by the closure of the Tanzanian refinery. The situation has been worsening over the years as supply could not fully meet demand. 

Between February and June last year, the country faced serious fuel shortages. Members may recall that in April 2007, my ministry informed Parliament on three separate occasions of the then worrying fuel supply situation in the country. Although supply later improved, the country was not able to build up adequate reserves for the distribution network, and the government. 

From October 2007, the country again faced supply difficulties as we started to build up stocks for the CHOGM period. Seasonal movements, which normally increase with the end of year festivities, did not help matters either. However, as of 23rd December 2007, when supplies from Kenya stopped, we had sufficient stocks of diesel and kerosene in the reserve tanks. Reserves of petrol had practically run out. Throughout this period, the country has relied on the national fuel reserves to sustain the market and cushion consumers. 

I wish to emphasise that if it were not for the stocks of diesel in the reserves, production of thermal power could have been seriously affected and that would have negatively impacted on the economy. 

The challenge that my ministry faces is to maintain the existing national fuel reserve facility in good operating condition and stock it with products. As I speak, the process of restocking the national reserves is on-going. This is elaborated in the following paragraph.  

The other part of the question concerns the measures to avert fuel crisis now and in the near future. Government has been concerned about security of fuel supply and consequently government has developed short, medium and long-term plans.  

In the short term, we have worked with the authorities in Kenya to ensure security for fuel convoys to and from Kenya. This has helped to ensure a certain level of supply of products. Throughout this period, the public has been advised to use products sparingly.

At the same time, the government is restocking the reserves and developing the Tanzania supply route. Government has ordered for supply of 30 million litres of fuel and of these, 20 million litres will be diesel and 10 million litres will be petrol. Government has also taken the decision that 30 to 50 percent of our fuel requirements should be through Tanzania. 

Members may be informed that a team led by hon. John Nasasira, the Minister of Works and Transport and comprising the Minister for Tourism, Trade and Industry and the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, has been in Tanzania to discuss with the Tanzanian Government and other agencies ways to implement this decision. The delegation was assured of Tanzania’s cooperation to make the central corridor route more viable. The railway system is critical to the operation of the Tanzania route. Locomotives, wagons and other equipment for the railway are being provided to ensure cost effective delivery of petroleum products. 

On our part, Government has initiated action to rehabilitate the two wagon ferries and bring them back into operation. Rift Valley Railways and other companies are providing vessels to carry cargo on Lake Victoria.  

In the medium term, Jinja storage tanks will be refurbished and upgraded. Our government, in partnership with the Kenya Government and a private investment partner, is engaged in a project to extend the Kenya oil pipeline to Uganda. This pipeline will have a branch into the Jinja storage tanks, which are to be expanded to serve the demand in Eastern Uganda. 

A large terminal depot will be built in Kampala at the head of the pipeline, which will be accessible to all oil companies from where they can leave their fuel requirements. The depot is being designed with an initial storage capacity of 100 million litres to be expanded to 150.5 million litres within 10 years. Of this, petrol will consist of 50.1 million litres, diesel 68.7 million, jet fuel 14.3 million and kerosene 17.4 million litres. The terminal depot in Kampala will hold at least 20 days’ consumption requirements. It is expected that the construction of the pipeline will start this May and be completed within one year. 

Irrespective of how long the Kenya problems will take, the pipeline project will go on as scheduled. The Kenya pipeline has also started work on the rehabilitation of its pipeline facilities. This work is progressing and government, in conjunction with the Government of Rwanda, plans to extend the oil pipeline to Kigali. During that phase, another big depot will be built in Mbarara to supply the products for the western region.  

Mr Speaker, the oil exploration activities in the country have advanced with the discovery of oil in Hoima, as Members are probably aware. Government has decided to fast-track early production plans. A mini refinery will be built near the production site. Initially, production will be limited for local consumption, and the pipeline will deliver the shortfall in supply which domestic production cannot meet.

For the long term, my ministry has plans to develop four, new reserve storage facilities. With the growth of the economy as a whole and consumption of petroleum production in particular, it is imperative that additional reserve facilities are built. The four depots will be built in Nakasongola, Gulu, Kasese and Mbale, and they will have a combined storage capacity of 150 million litres. This will bring the total national reserve to over 310 million litres, enough to cover the country for 90 days. 

The reserve depots at Nakasongola, Mbale, Gulu and Kasese will be connected to the well refinery with a system of product pipelines. The oil pipeline currently designed to deliver fuel into the country will in future be considered for exports if production grows beyond national demand.

I wish to end by saying that we have been monitoring the fuel supply situation regularly with the oil companies. Based on this, we have managed the stocks in the optimum manner possible and apprised the public of the supply situation. I want to thank the Members of Parliament for the support and co-operation they have given us during the period when we have had disruption in supply of petroleum products. I want to also assure you that government is not only going to expand the strategic reserves but will also handle the matter with urgency. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before supplementary questions are asked, you remember last week I drew our attention to the rule concerning answering questions. I appeal to especially ministers who are the ones answering questions, to answer – our Rules of Procedure expect us to give an answer in three minutes. I realise this was intended to be a statement but it is being used to answer this. 

Questions and answers should be given within three minutes. Otherwise, somebody would stand and say, “Isn’t he out of order for going on for five minutes?”  So, be precise and in three minutes, let the answer be completed and then we get supplementary questions. I have visited the Scottish Parliament in Edinburgh and I saw within 30 minutes, 10 questions were answered. We should also try to be very brief but clear in answering the questions.

3.45
MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must thank the minister for attempting to answer the questions but the way in which he has answered us has led me to raise a number of supplementary questions given the nature of the answer. 

The minister has talked about the Jinja national fuel reserve, but at least from the records, we know there are other fuel reserves. I would like to know why he left the others out and he is only talking of Gulu, Nakasongola, Kasese, Mbale to be new ones but from the records, according to the Auditor-General’s report as of 30th June 2006, he talks of those other reserves, which were built in 1978. May I know from you the status of those other national fuel reserves? 

I find a bit of contradiction: of course from the record of the Auditor-General the capacity of the Jinja national fuel reserve is 30 million litres but then, looking at your statement, you are saying in part two, the third paragraph that: “At the same time, government is restocking the reserves and developing the Tanzania supply route. Government has ordered for supply of 30 million litres of fuel. Of these 20 million litres will be diesel and ten million for petrol.” But from the records, 30 million litres are distributed uniformly – ten million for kerosene, 10 million for diesel, 10 million for petrol; where is the additional reserve for the 10 million because you are having 20 million for the petrol? I will need a clarification.

I will also want to know – you have referred to the Auditor-General that they have audited but from the Auditor-General’s report of 30th June 2006, other companies have owed the government money to the tune of Shs 12.2 billion from the sale of fuel. Why have you donated this to these private companies? Why has this money not been paid? 

From the hospitality fees, there is a debt of Shs 605.9 million, which is not paid, yet we lack money to rehabilitate these reserves. I also find a contradiction in your statement because you are saying these reserves are being refurbished, upgraded and rehabilitated. How were we able to have reserves at a time when we had a crisis? Where were these reserves? 

The report shows that the metering, the loading and pumping facilities require rehabilitation. I would like to know from you how this is being done because it is also reported that the metre readings do not work; the dipsticks do not work and we end up using the ones from the private sectors all of which lead to fraud. 

There is the issue of staffing – the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 provides for the staffing but to date, we only have eight staff.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. OKupa, I expect you to raise supplementary questions not submissions.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, most obliged. Why were these national reserves not insured? These are very strategic facilities; why are they not insured? You have told us that you had reserves but on Tuesday, we were in Soroti Flying School; they have not had fuel since the Kenyan crisis, yet you have just told us you had reserves. Thank you.

3.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know by our Rules of Procedure we are supposed to ask supplementary questions, but I have a big problem with the answer because it does not answer the question which is: “What is the status of the national oil fuel reserves in the country?” When I read this, I do not know what the status is because your answer is supposed to help me know. I do not see any reserve here, I do not see any status – status could be mechanical condition, but what we are asking is: how much fuel is there? What was the capacity of those reserves? How much fuel is there? How regularly do you change the fuel? 

You very conveniently avoided answering the question, so I would beg that the minister goes back to answer substantively the question, which was raised to him. This is not a supplementary.

3.51
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My first supplementary question to the minister is on page 1, under the third paragraph. He talks of the principle objectives of the facilities. Under (b) it is stated that: “To guarantee supply of petroleum products for essential services during shortage of fuel.” 

My question is: what mechanisms does the ministry have for managing the price control during these times of shortage? It is now a well known fact that from experience, even though we know that there is fuel shortage, the oil dealers would have ferried in some fuel but they now choose to charge whatever price they would like to charge. Is there a way that price control would also be associated with objective (b)? What mechanism does the ministry have in place to guarantee that even with fuel shortage we should get fuel at the same fuel pump price like, we were told, it happened in Rwanda?

The second supplementary question relates to an issue on page 3 under sub-section (2), which talks about measures to avert fuel prices now and in the future. The minister states that the government is now fast-tracking the process of an early production scheme. He has avoided mentioning whether what has been known to Ugandans is still standing. I am talking about the early production scheme being able to deliver fuel by early 2009. Does that still stand? Thank you.

3.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to know from the minister why the Tanzania refinery was closed to begin with -(Interjection)– Yes! I am asking this question because at page 1, in the very second last sentence, the minister says: “This was compounded by the closure of Tanzania refinery and therefore the route.” I know the route is also non-functional. Why?

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, Tanzania is a sovereign state. It has its policies. Would you really expect a minister operating on the Uganda territory to be in position to give you that answer? He may know, but would it be right for him to give you that answer?

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, let me put my question this way: what did the Government of Uganda do to persuade the Tanzanian Government to revive the operation of the refinery in Tanzania? I am asking this question because I believe that that refinery was of strategic importance to the Government of Uganda and the citizens of this country.

Secondly, according to the minister’s statement, arrangements are underway to rehabilitate two wagon ferries to enable government transport fuel via Lake Victoria. As far as I know, nothing is going on in respect to this. I would like the minister to clarify to this Parliament what specific actions are taking place with regard to rehabilitation of these two wagons. I thank you.

3.56
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember I was on the Natural Resources Committee in 2002. Since 2002, government has been talking about being engaged in the oil pipeline project. This is 2008 and they are still talking about the same project, although it has not taken off in the last six years. I want to find out the level of government’s engagement in this project, which is never taking off. I am asking this question because it is now turning out to be a story. 

Secondly, in the long-term plan, the minister states that other depots will be built in Nakasongola, Gulu, Kasese and Mbale. Just in case the long talked of oil pipeline project took off, would you consider extending - after all it is a short distance – to Mbale as one way of boosting the reserves for the Eastern region? Thank you. 

3.58
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to ask a supplementary question basing on page 1 where the minister says: “It is necessary to recycle products from time to time. This is achieved through issuing out products on short term basis to companies, which later refresh products back to the depot.” Is the honourable minister aware that this system has been abused, repeatedly, by unscrupulous dealers who have borrowed this fuel when prices were much lower and up to-date have not repaid, and it is now being converted into shillings whereas that fuel was then taken duty free?

On page 2, there is a regulation in the Fuel Petroleum Act: when the oil companies register in Uganda, it is a pre-requisite that every oil company holds a minimum of ten days’ trading stock. The oil companies in this country have taken the country and all of us for a ride for so long. Whenever there is a crisis in Kenya say on Sunday, on Monday we have no fuel in Uganda. That means that that provision has been flouted, most especially by the mergers and acquisitions that have taken place. 

For example, Shell Uganda bought out UPET, which was Uganda Petroleum and they closed down its depots. They went ahead and bought AGIP and closed down its depots too. Shell Uganda and Caltex went ahead and closed all regional depots in Mbale, Soroti and many others in Western Uganda. Is the honourable minister aware that shortage in supply of the private sector, which he has referred to on page 2, aggravates the issue of our exposure to these failures in supply?

In paragraph 4 of page 2 he goes ahead and says that Uganda, and like my honourable colleague has said, has a new pipeline coming. You will recall that we have been talking about this pipeline and all of us are very expectant. The pipeline is rolling out from Eldoret to Kampala. This pipeline is joining an old and dilapidated pipeline on the Kenya side. Their pumps are 20 years old; they fail to function most of the time; that is the root cause of the failure to have fuel both at the Kisumu and Eldoret depots. They have power shortages as well and nothing is being done. 

It is very important to note that the diameter of the pipeline that they are putting from Eldoret to Kampala is bigger. The honourable minister and the team in the ministry that is planning on how they are going to work out the hydrology aspect of how fuel will flow from a smaller pipe to a bigger one - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, no, there is a time limit for questions but with all those questions and others asked, we may spend hours here. I think we should stop here with supplementary questions. 

4.01
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. While the minister tried very hard, with a lot of difficulties, to explain what happened to the facility at Jinja, he failed completely to explain what happened to the facilities in Kasese, Nakasongola and Gulu. When you read his statement the closest he comes to explaining what is happening is that he is going to build. But there is a facility in Kasese. What happened to that facility? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, would you mind if we asked the minister to go and write down these answers for us instead of orally answering them now so that we get his question and a few others and then he comes back with written answers to the supplementary? Would that be better for you? There are many questions! 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (MR Simon D’Ujanga): Rt Hon. Speaker, I could handle all these now if time permits because I am ready - (Interjections) - I am ready.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you put them in writing for our record?

MR D’UJANGA: But either way, if the Speaker has ruled that I put them in writing, I will reply -

THE SPEAKER: I am concerned about the time you are going to take. 

MR D’UJANGA: Most obliged.

4.03
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the minister: who takes the decision to sell off fuel reserves to the private sector and under what circumstances?

Two, in some up-country towns, there is still fuel rationing. Can the minister tell the House when the situation will return to normal throughout the country? I thank you.

4.04
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for trying to answer the question. But I also want to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that the first question, the minister tried but he didn’t answer it. Because when you see the purpose of the reserves -

THE SPEAKER: Please, ask a question.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I actually want to ask a question; to build it up. I realise that the question was -(Interjections)- because I have to justify it before I put up the question.

THE SPEAKER: Ask a question.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, the question I want to ask is that the minister has told us that the fuel was sold in order to buy fire-fighting equipment and to date they are still renovating. When you go to page 2, the minister was telling us that by 23 December we had fuel reserves. I want the minister to relate the two and to qualify his answer because he was telling us that he was selling and he is now telling us that -

THE SPEAKER: What is your question? (Laughter) Leave it then. You can abandon it.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: No. I do not want to abandon it because the issue is -(Interjection)- yes, the minister was justifying -

THE SPEAKER: I think let us move on to hon. Okecho. (Laughter)

4.06
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. On page 3 of the minister’s answer or statement, he talks about oil exploration activities in the country being at very advanced stages. We have been at pains, as the Budget Committee, even this morning, to find out exactly when we should factor into our budget the resources that we shall be able to obtain from this oil exploration. 

I would like the minister, if he is going to make an answer to all these questions, to give us some kind of assurance as to whether in the 2009/2010 budget year, we will be in a position to actually factor in some amount of resources. And will he actually be able to give us how much we should be considering? Because everybody is wondering how we are going to benefit from this oil exploration or this oil discovery. Thank you very much.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek your indulgence. It is my observation that Members have a lot of issues that they would like to raise about the statement of the minister. First of all, I believe this is a ministerial statement - (Interjections)- yes, it is an answer to the question for oral answer, but he presented it for over three minutes and the issues that he has put across here have attracted debate. And you can appreciate the difficulty of the Member of Parliament from Buvuma and the Leader of the Opposition, trying to pick out the issues here and ending up in a debate, which is going against the Rules of Procedure. 

So, I would like to procedurally seek your indulgence that since the minister is going to write down answers to these supplementary questions, Members again will end up in the same dilemma of wanting to seek clarification and end up almost debating those answers. I request that the minister should be given an opportunity to go back and write a comprehensive ministerial statement, which is debatable by Members, without flouting the rules, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it possible for the honourable minister perhaps next week to come with these answers so that it also covers the questions, which have been asked of you? Ok? I think let us do that; but again, honourable minister, I am reminding you of rule 62 that you must answer a question within three minutes. The rules allow me to extend by two minutes and not more than five minutes in total. So, you should always be clear and brief. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought your ruling, and what the minister undertook to do, was in light of all the questions that have been raised to make a ministerial statement on the issue comprehensive and enough to cover all the questions raised as well as to give an opportunity to Members to debate it, rather than having a question for oral answer.

THE SPEAKER: No. He is going to make a statement then we shall debate it. But please, rule 62.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 43/2/08 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

4.11
MR OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “Is the minister aware that only 168 out of 207 employees of former District Farm Institutes (DFIs), then under National Agriculture Research Organisation (NARO), have since been paid; even then only up to 2002?

What has happened to their payment for the subsequent years and for the payments to the rest of the employees who did not receive any payment at all?

What plans does the minister have to address the fate of these employees?”

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Maj. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the answer next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, this question was filed in November last year. It was forwarded to the minister in November last year and since that time it has been pending. Well, the minister may have been sick but the ministry does not fall sick -(Laughter)- It has been pending, Mr Speaker.

I believe that this question appears today on the Order Paper with the consent of the minister concerned. It does not do good to the image of this Parliament for the minister who has consented that an item be put on the Order Paper, only to come here and say “next week”. To me, this is a clear indication of a very high level of inefficiency. I think we should look for sanctions. Mr Speaker, is there any sanction?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one thing we must know is that the minister has said that he is not ready; that is a fact, he cannot answer the questions. But at the same time we must take judicial notice of what has been happening in the ministry of Agriculture. Hon. Hilary Onek had a problem and the hon. Member here also had a problem. The hon. Minister is away; I think he is on leave. So, you can appreciate the circumstances. I am inclined to allow him to answer this question next week. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness in the Office of the Prime Minister, to give a report on Government intervention in the flood affected areas and the post-flood activities in the North and North-Eastern Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, honourable ministers and honourable Members of Parliament –

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to read all of it, or is there a summary?

MR ECWERU: No, Mr Speaker. What I am going to give you is a summary of a big report already issued to you on Government Intervention in Flood Affected Areas and Post-Flood Activities. The report before you, Mr Speaker, is 28 pages but what I have done is to capture a summary, and I have also circulated a copy of that summary to all the members. –(Interruption) 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report that the minister is about to present is very voluminous. He intends to present a summary of his report and we are expected to debate this ministerial statement after he has presented a summarised version of it. I do not know whether it would not be prudent for the minister to present the entire report, members be allowed some time to go and digest the report, and then we return here to this House on an agreed day for the debate to be carried out. 

I am making this request with a view of the fact that the summary, by itself alone, will not furnish us with adequate information that would help us to exhaustively debate this matter, which is a very important matter, Mr Speaker. So, I beg your indulgence and I pray that you consider my plea that we go and read this report and return here to debate it later. 

THE SPEAKER: What I think can be done, since copies have been given to members, is for the minister to lay the report on Table and members go and read the report in detail so that next time when he comes, he simply gives a summary and then you are able to start the debate. 

MR OKUPA: I just need to be guided, Mr Speaker. I remember two weeks ago, you did make a ruling or a reminder in this House to the members of the Executive that these reports, since we need to read them, must be submitted either early in the morning or a day to – I remember two weeks ago you made that ruling and you had expected the Executive to adhere to that. So, I do not know whether that position still holds, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what I do not know is when he completed writing the report, especially taking into consideration the size of the report. But that would be a good practice that it is brought early but this has not been the case. So, let us handle this case as it has come; let the minister Table the report, you take it home and read it over the weekend. We will give him the opportunity to summarise his report whose contents we would have already internalised, and then we can debate. 

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the guidance. I beg to lay this report, a report on Government Intervention in the Flood Affected Areas and Post-Flood Activities in the North and north-Eastern Uganda. I beg to lay it on the Table for members to go and scrutinise and promise that probably on Tuesday next week, I will come and answer the issues that might arise from the report. I beg to lay.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS BILL, 2006

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General - He is not here

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, the Deputy Attorney-General is absolutely ready but he is just around. So, I have asked one of my ministers to go and get him. Meanwhile,I can give a lecture on institutionalisation of multi-partyism. (Laughter) 

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. Please proceed.

MR RUHINDI: Honourable members, you may recall that this august House recently, actually last year, enacted the Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2007 and the Magistrates Courts (Amendment) Act, 2007. Together with those Acts, the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006 is the last of the three related Bills that were introduced in Parliament to rationalise provisions relating to bail, offences under the Firearms Act, and to expunge provisions relating to corporal punishment from the statute book. Actually this Bill is a consequential amendment.

The Bill is intended to amend the Trial on Indictments Act, which is Cap. 23 of our laws of Uganda as follows:

As far as bail is concerned, clause 1 of the Bill seeks to amend section 15 (2) (b) (c) of the Act to rationalise their reference to offences under the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002, and the Firearms Act, Cap 299 relating to offences which the High Court may refuse to grant bail unless exceptional circumstances exist or where there is proof that the accused will not abscond. 

Under the offence of abusive of office, clause 1 further seeks to repeal section 15 (2)(d) of the Act relating to abuse of office contrary to section 87 of the Penal Code Act Cap 120 punishable by imprisonment not exceeding seven years. Therefore, that offence when the Bill is passed, will no longer be bailable only by the High Court but will also be bailable by a Magistrates Court. I think that one has been long awaited.

Under the offence of defilement, according to the Penal Code (Amendment) Act, 2007, the offence of defilement is now punishable by life imprisonment and is therefore now triable by a Chief Magistrate. The offence is, therefore, now bailable also by a Magistrate’s court. Clause 1 therefore amends section 15 (2) (e) of the Trial on Indictments Act to remove defilement from the offences which are bailable only by the High Court.

And in respect of trial in the absence of the accused, clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54, which relates to trial of accused in his or her absence to bring the section in line with Article 28 (5) of the Constitution relating to trial of an accused person in his or her absence.

According to Article 28 (5) of the Constitution, a person may be tried in his or her absence only with his or her consent or if the person conducts himself or herself in such a way as to make it necessary for the Court to make an order for him or her to be removed and for the proceedings to be conducted in his or her absence.

For corporal punishment, clause 3 seeks to repeal section 109 of the Principal Act relating to that punishment. As you are aware, there is a popular constitutional case court ruling in the case of Kyamanywa Simon vs Uganda, which is constitutional reference No. 10 of 2000 where it was ruled that corporal punishment is cruel, inhuman and degrading and is contrary to Article 24 of the Constitution. 

We have interacted with the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with whom we have shared comments from interested parties and given our own responses. The committee also raised issues on the Bill to which we responded. Through out this exercise we have harmonised the positions of the different parties.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be now read the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee_

HON. MEMBERS: He is not here.

THE SPEAKER: Well, what do we do? 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I guess we have the committee members. I remember last time when the Members of the Committee of Trade – the chairman was not here, just as the deputy; you asked a member of the committee, hon. Kawanga to read the report. May I propose that if any member of the committee is here who has signed, he could go ahead and read the committee report?

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Odonga Otto? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: But I see he has not signed.

THE SPEAKER: It does not matter.

MR OKUPA: Hon. Asuman Kiyingi is around; possibly he can help us.

4.28
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not get a specific mandate from my chairman or vice chairman to present this report, but if it is the decision of the House, through your ruling Mr speaker-

THE SPEAKER: No, the Rules allow us to do so. What we have done is permissible under the Rules. Proceed.

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006. The Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was tabled in Parliament on 5 December 2006. The committee considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rule of Procedure of Parliament. 

The committee held a retreat from 19th – 21st December at which the Bill was one of those discussed with the Uganda Land Law Reform Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The committee also met and received views from the following: the Uganda Law Society, the Uganda Judicial Officers Association and the Director of Public Prosecutions. The committee made reference to the principal law and other relevant law and also curried out extensive excursion and deliberations on the Bill.

As highlighted by the Deputy Attorney-General, the object of the Bill is to amend section 14(2)(c) of the Trial on Indictments Act, Cap 23, to include all offences under the Firearms Act,Cap 299 punishable by more than ten years imprisonment among the offences which are under section 14(A) of that Act, the High Court may refuse to grant bail to an accused person if he does not prove to the satisfaction of court that:

a) exceptional circumstances exist justifying his or her release on bail
b) he or she will not abscond when released on bail.

At present, paragraph (c) applies to offences under the Firearms Act, punishable by imprisonment not less than ten years. The change to more than ten years imprisonment is to make the provision cover more serious offences. 

The Bill further seeks to amend the trial on Indictments Act as follows:

a)	to make the offence of defilement bailable by the chief magistrates in order to decongest the High Court;
b)	to amend further section 14 which relate to release on bail to be in line with the Anti-Terrorism Act 2002;
c)	to amend section 54 of the Act, which relates to the presence of the accused during trial. This is to bring into line with Aarticle 28(5) of the Constitution concerning the trial of an accused person in his or her absence; and 
d)	to repeal section 109 of the Act, which relates to corporal punishment. This is to be in conformity with Article 24 of the Constitution by virtue of which the Constitutional Court has declared corporal punishment to be inhuman treatment and unconstitutional.

Finally, references in the Bill to Acts and sections of Acts in existence before the year 2001, which are now contained in the revised edition of the Laws of Uganda 2000, are now adapted to read as references to the corresponding sections and chapters as contained in the revised edition.

Observations

Mr Speaker, the committee did observe the following. Given the backlog of cases in the High court, the amendment will help to decongest the High Court by making defilement bailable by the chief magistrates.

The Constitutional Court, in the case of Kyamanywa Simon v Uganda, Constitutional reference No. 10 of 2000 in its ruling on reference from the Supreme Court decided that corporal punishment was inconsistent with Article 24 of the Constitution as being cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment.

The amendment of section 109 of the Trial on Indictment Act harmonises it with Article 28(5) of the Constitution concerning the trial of an accused person in his or her absence. This allows the trial to go no without disturbances if the trial judge deems it necessary.

Mr Speaker, the committee supports the amendment of the Trial on Indictments Act to bring some of its sections into conformity with the constitution, provide clearly for the granting of bail to serious offenders and remove corporal punishment from out statute books.

Subject to the proposed amendment, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and the committee for the report. Any contributions from Members?

4.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman and the committee for their report. I would like to start with the question of the Chief Magistrate’s Courts granting bail to people who have been arraigned on the charge of defilement. This question of defilement as provided for in the law has caused real headache to the Ugandan society. The original intension of that law was good. But the actual administration of that law has caused a very difficult situation.

Mr Speaker, we have heard cases where there was even premeditated defilement; where arrangements are made for a lady to engage a man – in fact there is even a song in our place on that –[Hon. Members: “Sing it.”]- it will be difficult to record it in the Hansard. But the musician was cautioning society that even when you take the boy, remember that some of the girls have become wild cats. They pursue the boy – it is arranged to get the boy arrested.

But the most important thing is that since magistrate courts are available and sit regularly throughout Uganda - the fact that somebody knows that he is, for example innocent and the only thing that would force that person to talk with the family of the girl is the prospect of spending such a long time in jail; if the person now knows that they can go to court and the court will grant bail, which will give him time to prove that he was actually innocent, then it is very good and I fully support that provision.

Mr Speaker, the question of cattle raiders in Karamoja is a very difficult question. I am not so sure whether in trying to enact this provision; Government is not turning its back to a fundamental challenge, which is related to cattle raids.  It will be very important that even when we provide for the cattle rustlers to be put off in jail, the fundamental cultural and social element that manifests itself as cattle raids should be addressed. Because how many of these cattle raiders will have access to this law to know that you can actually be put off?  It will mean that so many of the Karimojong would be put off yet the problem of cattle raiding would persist. 

I think we have a fundamental challenge. We have talked to government, for instance, for us we are neighbouring Karamoja, their argument, which is very simplistic, is that well, we come to Acholi because when it rains in Karamoja, the water flows into Acholi so we follow our water. You can almost get angry with the argument but in their simple mind, they probably believe that. 

We have had this problem, hon. Speaker. Recently, when hon. Ben Wacha made reference to the question of Karimojong having no grass and wanting to come to the neighbouring districts, it was agreed because in the past they would not come with guns.   

But as we speak now, in my constituency two days ago they had crossed; their cattle were detained; and then when they were arranging to formally hand over the cattle to the administrators, another group organised and came and actually stole from another part of my constituency the equivalent number of cattle. Now, these are the people we are dealing with in Karamoja.  

I ask Government not to make it look like the solution is very simple. Enacting a law – I will support the law but I will appeal to government to put the necessary infrastructure we have talked about. The road networks that will allow the military to move to strategic areas which are not accessible now; it will complement the law. 

So, I wish to ask the learned Attorney-General, when we support this- convey this message and it seems the Rt hon. Prime Minister is hearing- convey the message to government that this law alone will not solve the problem of cattle raiding in Karamoja. 

Now, the last bit, which I would like to make reference to, is this question of the terrorism offences because at some stage we would want – since the law was enacted for a very specific purpose - to ask government to review as our situation comes down; we do not need again to look at the terrorism law. This is because we have had difficult incidences where many of us, members of the opposition, just get charged on that offence and government fails to bring evidence and these people lie in jail for so many years and they are mishandled. 

This brings me to the last item. The Attorney-General makes reference to Article 24 of the Constitution that bans inhuman treatment and yet we heard last week, hon. Lukwago reporting his case. It has not even been proven that the member committed a crime but the Police ran after the hon. minster with sticks.  They carried him and dumped him like he was a common thief. I think while we remove this as punishment, we should provide for those who actually cause corporal punishment outside the law to account for their actions. 

We should also ban the situation where we have seen the “kiboko squad” –(Laughter)- streaming out of Central Police station like bats with sticks and just arriving on anybody with sticks. Obviously they are in serious contravention of this Article 24 that you have now invoked to make amendments to your law.

It will be in our great interest that while we remove corporal punishment from our statute books as punishment for conviction, we must provide in our statute books punishment for those who actually abuse the Constitution recklessly in the name of doing their work. Attorney- General should put a provision that makes them think twice. Because some of these things when you know you are innocent, it goes in your system very badly. 

I was asking, hon. Lukwago, about the meeting between the President and the Buganda Parliamentary Group. He said, “My conscious could not take me to State House.” Why? Simply because of the way he was, in his own view, so badly mishandled- (Interjection)- Yes, by Police. Yes, it is by Police but the Police -(Laughter)- is part of the state and if you cannot get it from the Police, you will get it from somebody else. I am just telling you what he said because I was asking him. He said, “It is okay for Members of the Buganda Parliamentary Group to go there”. But sometimes it arises from something that the President or a minister would have done. Something that an agent of the state being reckless with the authority vested in him or her does something that really hurts a national of this country.  

So, Mr Minister, I agree that we remove this corporal punishment as a form of punishment on conviction but look for a way of making sure that we have a restraining law just like you are putting this other law for the Karimojong.  Let us make a provision that restrains individuals in the Police and maybe other security agencies from doing the things that have soiled the name of our country. I thank you.  

4.48
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to very closely associate myself with the report of this committee most especially with their observations and recommendations. 

I want to restrict my submission to issue No.1 where it is stated that the Bill is for the amendment of the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Act to make the offence of defilement bailable by the chief magistrates in order to decongest the High Court. 

Mr Speaker, this is a welcome idea. I remember last year when we were debating the Magistrates Court (Amendment) Act, this particular subject matter came up and after that, I did pay a visit to about three prisons in Northern Uganda. I went to Lira in Lango sub region as a sample, to Gulu for Acholi and Arua fro West Nile. Mr Speaker, what did I find in prisons? Many, many young people are rotting in prisons without being tried because the judges were so few on the offence of defilement. 

Lira Prison alone was constructed to take charge of about 250 inmates but we found over 500 inmates on remand. Out of 500, about 400 were on defilement charges and these were people who were suspects. Our law is very clear, I am presumed innocent until I plead guilty or until I am proved guilty. 

So, in this case, we even found people who had taken about four years on remand without being committed to the High Court for trial. And by that time, the High Court circuit that takes charge of the mid-North had stayed for about two to three years without a resident judge. But cases of defilement could be reported, according to reports by Police, almost on a daily basis. 

So, you can see how our prisons could be congested. So, when we really accept the idea of allowing the offence of defilement to be tried and even bail granted by the Chief Magistrates Court, I feel this is a very good way forward that will for once decongest prisons and even reduce on the back-log of cases that are now pending in the High Court.

Mr Speaker, recently we were reading reports about new judges that were appointed but before that, we had basically about 25 judges and you could see the magnitude of how cases of this nature were compiling.So -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI:  Mr Speaker, I know I have time to respond to some of these issues being raised but it may help to guide the debate because hon. Hamson Obua may wish to make a distinction. 

The laws that we passed, the Penal Code (Amendment) Act and the Magistrates (Amendment) Act, last year made a distinction between defilement and aggravated defilement.  Now, aggravated defilement will still be triable and bailable in the High Court. Defilement will be referred to chief magistrates and the terms and conditions and the specifics of which are embodied in those two Acts, which I am very well aware were circulated to all of us, they were put in our pigeonholes and we all have copies of those Acts now. 

MR OBUA:  Thank you so much, Attorney-General. I think your information has enriched and thrown more light on my submission.  Mr Speaker, I was saying that giving the chief magistrates an opportunity to grant bail because when we amended the law, there were two demarcations. We introduce aggravated defilement and defilement itself. So, when we grant that opportunity that will go a long way, first of all, in decongesting our prisons and that will also make the Chief Magistrates Court empowered and we shall be in a position – because, Mr Speaker, the law is very clear – mandatorily there are supposed to be on remand for one year but there are people who have exceeded that. So that means justice delayed is definitely justice denied. I do believe that when this law is finally passed, we shall be in a position to really see that justice is administered timely to suspects. I thank you.

4.53
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, hon. Speaker for the opportunity to make a contribution on this report. I thank the minister and the committee for the amendments proposed in here.  I am drawing the attention of members on page 2 part A, which the contributor has just quoted: “To make offence of defilement bailable by the Chief Magistrates Court in order to decongest the High Court.” To me this is a good principle and especially when we look at the Magistrates Court Act - the amendments that we passed, which increased the power and the jurisdiction of magistrates in handling cases- 30 for Grade I magistrates and 50 for chief magistrates. 

But Mr Speaker, it points out one observation, which is very critical. These magistrates- yes can handle- to me even the Chief Magistrate in my opinion can handle effectively all those categories of defilement. But one concern that the minister should perhaps think about is the remuneration gaps. Magistrate Grade I, what he or she earns; Chief Magistrate, what he or she earns and yet all these people are governed by the same code of conduct; are expected to live in the same life style, not to be in company of many other people; not to be on boda-boda; it is something that makes people more worried.  

We are giving them more powers but they earn not as well as they are expected to be living.  This is something that we must think about especially as we increase and give them more powers. But the idea and the principle of decongesting the courts is very wise. I thank you.

4.55
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make reference to the offence of defilement bailable by the chief magistrate in order to decongest the High Court. I am sure so far the House is very concerned about this and that is why almost everybody has a response about this defilement. 

While I support the amendment, I would like to ask the Attorney-General to put extra strings on what we have just read. It is true the prisons are very congested, that is true, but I would also like to say that the cases of defilement are gravely mishandled at various levels. 

One of the hon. Members quoted a case where somebody was very innocent but then there are also cases where the defiler is beyond reasonable doubt guilty because the doctor has carried out the tests on the child but within a few days, even less than six months, the suspect is out. I do not know whether you call that bail or what would you call it! Because I know normally it should be a year but even when everybody knows there is evidence, you meet the defiler on the streets ready to defile other children in the vicinity. 

In my opinion, this is gravely mishandled. I have very many cases where the defilers have been released within less than the six months and to make matters worse, we even have cases where parents settle the cases out of court. I thought that defilement was a case that was not supposed to be settled between the defiler and the parents. 

What happens to that parent who comes to Police on a Monday to report a defilement case and then the doctor carries out the tests and proves that the child has been defiled then within three days the same mother comes to Police and says, “I have withdrawn the case.”? I thought the state should be acting more seriously than that. That mother who reports the case should also be held responsible for telling lies because if the child was not defiled, then why did she have to come to court?

THE SPEAKER: You see, defilement is confined to age and, therefore, you must have evidence that the person falls in that category. And the right person to help you to put the victim in that category is the parent. If the parent realises or for one reason or another is compromised and says, “This is 19 or 20”, definitely you have no alternative other than giving in. I think this is what happens. 

MRS BOONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the information but the cases I am referring to are obvious cases where children are nine, ten, or eight and cannot overnight become 19 or 17.

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague that a case of defilement is such a grave offence that, like any other criminal case, the state is the party which is more interested. In which case, therefore, it is not the mother of the victim that withdraws the case. Even if the mother of the victim came up and said, “I do not want this case to be pursued” and the state is convinced that a crime has been committed, the state can still continue to prosecute. 

In any case, what evidence is the mother going to give? While the child was being defiled, the mother was not there. The evidence that has been successfully adduced is through the medical examination and as long as the doctor is ready to testify, even if the mother says, “I want to withdraw the case” and the state is still interested in that case, it can go ahead and prosecute.

MRS BOONA: That is what I am exactly saying. Thank you for supporting me. I am saying the cases are mishandled. What right does a mother have to come to Police and say, “I have withdrawn the case?” I think once a case is with the Police, it should be the duty of the state to ensure that the case is drawn to a conclusion.

As I talk now, in Mbarara we have a case of incest. A father defiled his Primary seven. The case is very open. I followed it up until I could not follow it up anymore. The regional police commander told me that they have not been able to interview the child and, therefore, they cannot arrest the father. And the father is available and at large. 

Those are the examples where I say that we are talking of these magistrates managing the cases but we need to be more careful than what we are doing because defilement cases are very much mishandled and no matter what we have in the books, there is so much to be done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.01
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister and the committee for the report. I want to make my contribution in reference to the point made on page 2. This is the second paragraph where the committee recommends that it wishes amendment 6 to achieve the objective of especially dealing with my neighbours from Karamoja who do raid. This is a matter that is touched by this paragraph where the change to more than 10 years’ imprisonment is to make provision to cover more serious offences. 

Earlier on, when the Leader of the Opposition was contributing, he appealed to government that this should not be a matter that should be looked at as a way to resolving the problem. 

I want to make a distinction here. I think the mere fact that there is use of firearms for raiding your neighbours is a very serious matter and so there should be, in the best way possible, a sentence of such a deterrent nature put in place. When the Leader of the Opposition was contributing, he –(Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, my colleague. The information I want to give you - maybe you were not paying attention – is that I fully supported the provision. All I said was that to think that it is sufficient to address the question of cattle rustling is insufficient. Actually, I asked the Prime Minister to convey an appeal so that those additional things like road infrastructure, et cetera, are put in place to facilitate supervision of security in the area. I did not say that it should not be there.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much for the information. I think it has made a point, but it still does not make me deviate from my concern because it is not, at this point, very necessary for us as a House to legislate while paying attention to excuses that have been given. It could as well be that we can listen to defilers; this House can choose to listen to defilers because a particular defiler will say, “I did not know the age of the girl.” Just like the same explanation has always been given by my neighbours - the Karimojong - that they have a reason to raid Teso because all the water flows to Teso! 

So the point I would like to make is that we should not, at this point – I agree the information is very useful but it does not totally - we should also not allow excuses to be given by those who offend others. That is the point I want to make, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

5.06
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to discuss this very important Bill, and I wish to thank the minister too and the committee, for the work they have done. I wish to also associate myself with the spirit with which this Bill is brought. I think it is an excellent opportunity to discuss this Bill because it is very important at this particular point in the history of our country.  

The spirit of bail assumes innocence until proven guilty or until convicted, and also faith in the accused’s respect for the judicial process. For that matter I would like to be guided on how we can concern ourselves with the free jurisdiction of the magistrate or the judge in setting bail terms. I am thinking specifically of the recent incident where the PRA suspects were required to pay Shs 2 million as bail term plus their sureties depositing, with court, land title deeds and all the others.  

Mr Speaker, these are suspects who had been recorded as unemployed peasants. Surely, in Uganda to ask an unemployed peasant who has been in jail for four years to pay a bail of Shs 2 million defeats the spirit of -(Interjections)- I am trying to help your case –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. I am very uncomfortable with the way the hon. Beti Kamya is proceeding. She is fully aware that this matter is before court. This House cannot discuss how judges are presiding over cases and taking decisions, particularly in view of the fact the matter has not been concluded. Is she, therefore, in order to continue advising and criticizing judges on the Floor of the House?

THE SPEAKER: Let us avoid such incidents. I think you can proceed without doing that.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your guidance. I will re-phrase it to say -

THE SPEAKER: Well, the point has been made.

MS KAMYA: I am not rephrasing it, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You can leave it; the point has been made.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, we have been informed that the spirit of this Bill is one: to decongest prisons and two: to make it possible for bail applicants to obtain bail. In the case where bail is made impossible, does that support the spirit of decongesting prisons and also making the right to bail -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you can find two people being charged with the same offence but conditions given to the two may be different depending on the circumstances of each one of them and depending on the discretion - because the judge will take into account many things. So, you cannot say, “For me they asked me to pay Shs 10,000 and this one was asked to pay Shs 1 million.” It depends on the individual circumstances of a person.

MR RUHINDI: I wish to supplement what the Speaker has said by referring to the actual text of the law. If you look at Article 23(6)(a), it says thus: “Where a person is arrested in respect of a criminal offence, the person is entitled to apply to the court to be released on bail and the court may grant that person bail on such conditions as the court considers reasonable.” Assuming the offended or the aggrieved party is not satisfied with what the court has decided, there is always an appeal process and that is very important in our court process. There is always a chance to appeal; there is always a chance for revision to ensure that whatever the judge has decided does not prejudice a person without recourse to anything else. 

MS KAMYA: I thank the hon. Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs for that guidance and you, Mr Speaker, too. I am sure the point is made and I hope that in the spirit of making justice available to everybody, all these matters can be considered. 

But on decongesting prisons, I am concerned that police arrests people before making adequate investigations. You find that many people in prisons - it has already been said. Even if you go and say, “Somebody slapped me”, there are so many people on assault there and when you go to find out, they release them on police bond and the cases are withdrawn and in many cases, the victims are members of the Opposition. When a person is seen as a member of the Opposition, police just arrests them and then investigates later. Most cases - I am not sitting on this side and discussing as a Member of this side, but I am hoping that this House will take occasion to really sort out these loose ends so that all are equal before the law. 

I would like guidance on whether it is also the right forum to discuss officers of court who flout court decisions. For example, the people who sought and received amnesty but are still held in Luzira; I do not know who is responsible -

THE SPEAKER: I think that is a different subject not covered by this one. (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: Anyway, Mr Speaker, I really wish that we would use this occasion to tie up all the loose ends. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Ok. I give you two minutes to make your point because I want to wind up. You can make a point; bear with him.

5.14
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okollo County, Arua): Rt Hon. Speaker, Ugandans are going to breathe a sigh of relief after we have passed this amendment. This is because a big backlog is going to be moved from the High Courts to the lower courts. 

But my bone of contention is this: there are many Ugandans who are being held incommunicado; in unknown places and in what are called “safe houses”. They have never seen the inside of courts. Now there is going to be enough space in the courts and in the prisons -(Laughter)- I am urging Government, please, this democracy of ours is still fragile and we need to nurse it and people should be brought to court -(Mr Ruhindi rose_)- I was given two minutes, Rt Hon. Speaker. I have finished. (Laughter)

5.15
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will deal with two issues. I am supporting the provision on firearms because when sometime ago the Minister of Defence came to this House to update us on disarmament, he told us that in a span of a few months, they had burnt 10,000 guns. 

But I also speak in the context of a person coming from an area that is emerging out of conflict, that is, Northern Uganda, where we have and we had auxiliary forces. Some of these forces went back home with guns, of course without the notice of the ministry, and some still have these guns. And because of the proliferation of small arms and light weapons in this country, there are also many arms in circulation. Most of the robberies are done using small arms and light weapons. 

I think this provision is important in the control of small arms and light weapons and as a deterrent measure. This is because when you say 10 years, somebody will think twice whether he should use the gun to go and rob or even to possess it unlicensed. So, this is the context within which I support the provision on firearms. 

The second issue is on corporal punishment. Mr Speaker, many of us would have seen when Saddam was being hanged how painful it could be. It was being seen all over the world. I think it is something that should not be entertained. But also punishment should be geared towards reform. In many developed countries, most punishment is -(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: I am seeking clarification from hon. Betty Amongi on whether the hanging of Saddam was a form of corporal punishment. Was it corporal punishment?

MS AMONGI: I thought it was something else. Now it becomes difficult to clarify on that one. Mr Speaker, my point was that we should entertain punishment that reforms society. In the developed world, people are punished through community work and some people are punished in the form of inducing you to testify and then your term of punishment is reduced if you corporate with the state in the investigation process. I think this provision on corporal punishment should also be in tandem with reforms. In other forms of punishment, we should try to reform society and try to make punishment more tangible to community. 

So, I welcome this and I support it, not only because it contradicts the Constitution but also because we are a signatory to so many other international, legal instruments that would make Uganda abide by what we have signed internationally. 

I want to conclude by saying that I agree with all the sentiments related to defilement and the fact that this particular provision will lead to so many other innocent people - there are many innocent people who are in jail for defilement when actually they have not defiled. They are so many and I am sorry to say this; I am a woman but there are so many women, girls and parents who have used the provision on defilement as a money-making venture. So, I think this is a good provision to –(Interruption)

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, colleague for giving way. The information I want to give you is on defilement. I want the committee to define what defilement is because nowadays people use their girls to get wealth in terms of defilement. You can see one lady make more than five men go to prison because of defilement. Today there is defilement and before they even solve it in the courts, here she has got wealth and the next day there is another defilement case. Then the parents use these ladies to get wealth in terms of defilement. So, let them define defilement in a specific way so that it does not act as a wealth-making venture for the people. 

And in corporal punishment -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issue of defilement is an issue of the Penal Code. There may be a difference between rape and defilement because defilement is restricted to the age of the victim. If she is of a certain age and you have raped her, there is inclusion of rape but this is defilement. So, it depends on the age. As I told you, a parent who wants to abort, you say, “This person is 21”, when this person is 15. Once that is said, then the charge of defilement will not hold. So it is a question of age; it is in the Penal Code.

MS OLERU: And on corporal punishment –(Interjection)- that is information that I also want to give her because she has supported it fully that it should not be there and that we should get other methods of punishment. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, it is the judge to say that someone should be caned; that is corporal punishment.

MS OLERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker but now what I want to say is, what if a man just rapes a baby of three months, what kind of punishment should we give him? I think that one deserves to be killed. 

THE SPEAKER: The kind of punishment will depend on the circumstances of the case, maybe the one of three months may be different from one of say, 16 years but these are matters that are really not subject to this particular Bill. 

I think we have sufficiently received contributions and I want to put the question to the motion that the Bill entitled the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Chairman, on clause 1 paragraph (b), we are proposing that we add the following new paragraph (f): “Defilement contrary to section 129 sub-section (3) and (4) of the Penal Code Act”. The Justification: the offence of defilement is a very serious offence.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I agree with the amendment except that I propose to add the word “aggravated” before the word “defilement” because we are talking about offences to be tried in the High Court. And for purposes of logical sequencing, to fit in the text of the principal act, we should insert the amendment as paragraph (a).

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee as improved on by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSRITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006" and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report of the committee of the whole House on the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006”, be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled the Trial on Indictments (Amendment) Bill, 2006 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 
“THE TRIAL ON INDICTMENTS (AMENDMENT) ACT 2006”

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is passed; congratulations. (Applause)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE GOVERNMENT REQUEST TO BORROW AN ADDITIONAL US$12 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP, TO FINANCE PHASE II OF THE AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING

THE SPEAKER: The minister is there, but the chairperson is not here. I think this is a convenient time to adjourn. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)









