Thursday, 25 February 2010

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I have a small but what I think is an important matter to communicate. 

The taking of oaths of a Member of Parliament is a solemn function that should be clothed in dignity. However, if you look at the front page of the newspapers today, especially The Daily Monitor, where they expected to see hon. Wamanga’s picture taking the oaths, the world has been treated to a crowd of demonstrators. 

It is unfortunate that hon. Wamanga’s arrival here will be associated with the demonstration. I know that he had no plan to bring demonstrators here or in executing that plan. It was a project of other Members who I think should apologise to hon. Wamanga and the people of Mbale Municipality for disorganising what should have been a very important occasion for him.

I want to reiterate that as parliamentary leadership, we have no objection to organised demonstrations provided the Speaker has been given notice both of the date and the time of arrival to enable the Sergeant-at-Arms arrange for an assembly point and delivery of a message or a petition as the case may be. So, I do hope that this is the last time this is going to happen. Thank you. The organisers are here? (Laughter)

2.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, if any Member in this House did participate in organising such a demonstration, as the Opposition, we do not support such indisciplined behaviour and such a Member should be taken to the disciplinary committee. 

2.43
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, I would like to say that it is extremely gratifying that you have reminded us of the manner and order in which such functions of swearing in are supposed to be conducted.

I have been prompted to stand up so that I could say something. All I can say, and hon. Alaso is very aware of this, is that on the Government side, we lack the expertise to organise such demonstrations. I thank you. (Laughter)  

2.44
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate your concerns as the leader of this institution. 

I also want to bring it out that I am very associated with those women because they are the women of the Inter Party Co-operation. I know them. I actually did not know that they were going to demonstrate here yesterday but I think we should also reflect on how hard it has become to express ourselves as a country. 

All our rights and freedoms as provided for in our Constitution, the freedom to express yourself or to deliver a petition to whoever, has been completely curtailed by the Executive. About a month ago, the same Inter Party Co-operation women of this country had tried to deliver a petition to your office and the Electoral Commission. They even tried to seek permission from the police but unfortunately they were locked up, brutalised and kept in CPS and Jinja Road Police Station and even undressed. They had babies; seven of them were breastfeeding mothers. The children were not feed the whole night. They were granted bail the following day and they are still reporting to court.

So, I think that to help the process, my colleague, hon. Daudi Migereko and the Government of Uganda could actually help Ugandans who want to exercise their rights. For women to sneak in here and first of all have to look for where to change into their T-shirts to catch the attention of the Speaker is because they are denied the opportunity. They cannot come openly and deliver their petitions. You can have petitions on sickle cells, petitions on whatever, but our rights to petition on political matters have been greatly curtailed. 

I know that your Office is very concerned; we do take note of that but it is also our serious prayer to the Executive and to the police force that they stop harassing everybody who tries even to seek their support to guide a peaceful demonstration. They should stop harassing and denying us that opportunity. By so doing, these things will become easier; they will become transparent; I do not need to go into a toilet and change into a T-shirt and then come and seat on the steps and ambush the Speaker. 

If I am guided, I will gladly petition the way the institution of Parliament would like things to be done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On behalf of Parliament, let me say that I was very surprised to hear on radio, while I was at my house, that there were people coming to deliver a petition to me. They had not written to me. They had not informed me and I was not even in Office that day. 

So, you do not just wake and go to Parliament. You write and say, “I propose to bring a, b, c, d”. Then I will say, “Okay, can you come on Tuesday at 9.00 O’clock.” I will invite the press; I will invite the Clerk; I will inform the Sergeant-at-Arms. I will ask how many you are, if 100, I will say, “Can you assemble on the upper side and send five of your leaders to my Office?” That is how we do things. That is how the albinos and sickle cell people came. But nobody had communicated to my Office or the Speaker’s Office. I want that to be clear for the whole country.

Also, the office of the Sergeant-at-Arms has issued guidelines. All the Members of Parliament have got these guidelines. If you read page 4, it explains how you can arrive at Parliament to do something. So, do not encourage people to just wake up and walk to Parliament because they are in Kampala. Nobody will be there to receive them.


MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, on a reassuring note, hon. Alaso and other secretaries general of political parties represented in Parliament have been engaged in serious discussions on how to ensure that there is observance of democracy and constitutionalism on the part of political parties in this country. 

Only the other day, hon. Alaso and others signed a Memorandum of Understanding and one of the issues was how to conduct our business, as political actors, without disrupting the peace and tranquillity of the country and others. 

I am sure that as we progress in our discussions, many of us will get on board and the need to carry out demonstrations that are not called for will be checked. It is very unfortunate that hon. Alaso had to change dresses several times yesterday but I did not imagine that was what was going on as she kept on getting out. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on a happy note, hon. Franca Akello of Pader delivered a baby boy. She delivered safely this time. (Applause)

2.50
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise this matter of national importance. This is about the shortage of blood in national hospitals and health centres. It is within Members knowledge that one of our colleagues lost a spouse and a number of us have lost relatives due to shortage of blood in hospitals. 

When I checked my local hospital, Itojo Hospital today morning, I was informed that the hospital has not had blood for two weeks. And when I inquired as to what they do to the patients that report, I was informed that they are not allowed to die in the hospital. They are referred to other health centres. I believe they die either on the way or at home due to shortage of blood.

I am a board member of the Uganda Red Cross Society, which compliments the Uganda Blood Transfusion Service in the collection of blood. The work of the Uganda Red Cross is well known to Members, especially those Members who come from areas that have been visited by disasters, for example, Teso, Bundibugyo and other areas. Madam Speaker, I pray that you permit me to refer to some notes in order to come up with accurate data.

The need for blood for transfusion in Uganda remains on the increase on an annual basis. According to the World Health Organisation standards, a country is supposed to collect blood units equivalent to two percent of the total population if all the transfusion demands are to be met. In our case, we would require about 600,000 units of blood per annum. 

With over 4,000 people dying of Malaria annually in Uganda, the majority of whom are children under the age of five years, and high fertility rates weakening mothers’ health, that is, the maternal depletion syndrome, predisposing them to pregnancy related anaemia, a combination of malnutrition, makes a need for safe blood a very important necessity. 

On average, 550 people in Uganda require blood transfusion on a daily basis. The information I have is that the minimum blood transfusion requirements in our hospitals and health centres is 200,000 units. That is the minimum amount of blood that we require but less than 160,000 units of blood are collected every year and that excludes about 10 percent of the blood that is infected and cannot be transfused. That leaves a gap of about 50,000 units of blood. 

The information I have is that it would cost about US $45 to collect a unit of blood. So, if we are to collect the 200,000 units, it would require approximately Shs 18 billion. 

When I was crosschecking with the Uganda Blood Transfusion Service, I was informed that only Shs 2.9 billion was sent to the Uganda Blood Transfusion Service and that includes the overhead costs. 

In the case of Uganda Red Cross, no single cent is got from Government. The Shs 1.2 billion they use per annum is funded by donors, particularly, Danida. 

In addition to the already bad situation, there are also reports of sale of blood in hospitals even when blood is donated free of charge. I am raising this matter because it is important for us, as Parliament and particularly now when we are considering the supplementary budget to come out and address this important demand that affects all of us. We cannot continue losing people, losing mothers because of lack of blood.

Three months ago, there were even people willing to donate blood but the Uganda Red Cross could not get the money for bleeding bags. The donors were available but we could not get the bags to collect the blood. 

So, as a way forward, I am seeking and praying to Parliament that as we consider the supplementary budget before this House, we seriously consider the shortage of Shs 12 billion to cater for the shortage in Uganda Blood Transfusion Service. 

That also since Uganda Red Cross Society is an auxiliary institution of Government, it should be supported. This is because it supplies 40 percent of the blood to Uganda Blood Transfusion Services.

That a sum of Shs 3.6 billion be provided to the Uganda Red Cross Society to help it undertake this important activity.

Lastly, as a sign of concern, as leaders, we Members of Parliament, in addition to sensitising our communities about the importance of blood donation, we take a lead by setting aside a day to donate blood for those who may be in need of it. I thank you.

2.57
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to say that yesterday I went to the National Medical Stores (NMS) in Entebbe to pick drugs for health units in Fort Portal Municipality, which the Minister of State for Primary Health Care, who is also here, had instructed NMS to release. They were anti-malarial drugs and meant to help us treat the Malaria that has been spread by a strange mosquito that hit our area.

When I got there, I met the General Manager of NMS called Moses Kamabale who also happened to take ME around the premises. During that tour, I got to notice there are actually thousands of boxes of medicine packed everywhere – in the basement, on the ground floor and upstairs. This prompted me to ask why that medicine was being kept there when hospitals and health centres are lacking drugs. His response was to the effect that people just do not requisition for those drugs. And that is not the first time I got information that drugs get expired at the NMS because districts are not requisitioning for them. This in formation has been on for sometime.

That response prompted me to also ask him to take me around the stores for ARVs – this is one of the problems I am facing in my constituency – to my surprise he said among other drugs, ARVs rarely run out of stock. He also said the stores rarely run out of anti-malarial drugs. He then showed me thousands of boxes of ARVs, Coartem and some other new drugs, which I actually picked for the health centres in my constituency. 

I don’t know why districts are not requisitioning for these drugs yet when you visit health centres, people are crying that drugs like ARVs are not available something that makes some patients take about a month without taking them yet they are supposed to take them on a daily basis.

As a legislator, my feeling is that we should get to our people and check with the various district authorities, if these drugs are there yet not being requisitioned for. One of the biggest challenges according to him was that some of the drugs are being stolen – I actually got so many Lorries loading some drugs. According to him, a dose for a drug like Coartem meant to serve all Ugandans costs Shs 20,000. That is why when it is sent to health centres, end users do not get it; they simply sell it away. I understand about five people from the same family will come pretending to be having Malaria and soon after they have been given Coartem, they go to sell it to get an income of Shs 100,000. Those are some of the challenges that the general manager said were emerging of recent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In her effort to supplement what hon. Tashobya has raised, hon. Margaret Muhanga has brought up a new issue that can be handled concurrently.

The problems we are facing in our respective constituencies relate to drug usage, distribution and requisition. In one constituency – I think that of hon. Okupa or in a neighbouring constituency – someone had to physically arrest some health workers in order to show people there was a problem. I do not know whether it would be enough to say the health delivery system in Uganda is sick – maybe it requires some sort of rearrangement for it to be able to deliver the services that are required.

May I, on the issue of drug delivery, propose that our Committee of Social Services, which undertook a study on the various health delivery facilities in Uganda and brought a report to this House, ensures we deliberate on that report? I believe we will be able to come up with recommendations. I would like to implore the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services to, at an appropriate time, tell us when that report will come up for debate. We should do that because it contains some salient issues on how best we can improve on the delivery of health services.

Back to the issue raised by hon. Tashobya, I would like to first of all pay my gratitude to Uganda Red Cross and those volunteers, most of whom are students with a very poor diet, for being able to sustain the lives of others in this country by donating blood. There are many people in Uganda who are fed well and have excess blood, but never think it opportune to donate blood to save the lives of others. This could be happening due to ignorance or because people are unaware that by so doing they could be saving their own next-of-kin who would die the next day from hospital for lack of blood.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I myself have had an experience at Mulago Hospital - a couple of weeks ago, I lost my sister who died from the Cancer Institute of Mulago Hospital. But one of the biggest problems you get there is that many of the patients require blood transfusion. So, it is very unfortunate to run to a health facility to save life and what the lifesaver can tell you is: “There is blood.” One would wonder why in the first instance they went to that health facility. 

There are so many patients at the Cancer Institute of Mulago Hospital who passed away due to lack of blood while I was there nursing my sister. The most recent example is that of hon. Bernard Mulengani’s wife who passed away from the apex health delivery centre – Mulago Private Wing - due to lack of blood. This morning, I had an opportunity to share this issue with the Prime Minister of Uganda by way of a joke that if he had fallen sick during that time and required blood transfusion, we would lose him as a Prime Minister because the apex place where he would have been taken did not have a single litre of blood. Why? Because the provision of resources is not adequate and that is why Uganda Red Cross is relying on donors.

What do you imagine when you listen to what goes on in the Pubic Accounts Committee meetings? The billions of shillings that people have just squandered and shared amongst themselves - how can we fail to provide say, Shs 3.0 billion yet some people are taking billions of shillings and dividing it amongst themselves with this House watching? If we approved the budget for CHOGM, how can we fail to approve money to enable Uganda Red Cross collect blood for people in this country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information from hon. Odonga Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for giving way. On the 29 December, I lost an old friend called Odoch. But as he nearly died, they called his friends to go and donate blood for him while at Lacor Hospital. However, by the time we got the person with same blood group, a one Komakech, life could not be saved. 

Anyway, the information I would like to give is that there is a general feeling among the ordinary people who donate blood that there is no transparency in the way blood that is collected is managed. There are allegations to the effect that Uganda Red Cross sells blood to the rich few individuals. There is general mistrust. We may have to start thinking of a way like, for example, if hon. Dombo  goes to hospital, they do a medical check up and map out several relatives with similar blood sample who can come and donate blood to him when need arises. Otherwise, this expensive mobilisation of people to donate blood is now meeting some kind of resistance. That is the little information I had to give.

MS MUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add to what hon. Dombo has just said about the lack of blood at Mulago that hon. Mulengani’s wife died because they actually used the wrong blood group on her. And two weeks prior to that, I had also lost my matron whose husband is a senior doctor at Mulago, but failed to get blood to save her life.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we do not have to look very far. Our Public Relations Department of Parliament is organizing a Health Awareness Day within the precincts of Parliament and among the activities will be blood donation. I would like to call upon Members to lead by example.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That will be a very good effort by Members of Parliament; they have done so in the past and I believe we can still do a lot more. 

However, going back to our basic responsibilities as Members of Parliament - somebody said that among our basic functions is to appropriate money. Shouldn’t we, during this time when the supplementary is coming, ensure the Ministry of Health prioritises provision of life by getting some money to help them collect blood? I am saying this because even when Members of Parliament are willing to donate blood, you might find that the bags for the collection of that blood are not available because the ministry has no money. So, can the Ministry of Health help us to do exactly that?

Finally, like hon. Odonga Otto said, the principle of volunteerism in this country is progressively diminishing. Partially, this could be happening because of loss of trust in public institutions including us Members of Parliament. If, for example, we can appropriate money for CHOGM and people just share it after we were put on pressure to even conduct sittings in the night to ensure we appropriate money for that purpose, then there is something wrong. Why can’t we scrutinise whatever comes before us to ensure health delivery is given what it deserves.

Before I sit down, the other issue that must be looked at relates to our villages. In those villages there are very many health people who are willing to donate blood, but they are ignorant about the exercise. Secondly, what are the incentives? I am asking this because much as people may want to donate blood, they might be in need of incentives like Red Cross T-shirts as members of the public. These T-shirts cost just Shs 5,000. Also while I was at school, I used to donate blood, but I will tell you that there used to be cards given to us with a promise that should any of us get involved in any accident that card would enable them access expeditious blood transfusion services. Anyway, these are challenges we have now, but which must be looked into. 

My appeal is that as Members of Parliament, the first thing we should look out for is to appropriate money to save the lives of the people of Uganda because much as today it can be an issue for this one, tomorrow it could be for you. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us first hear from the Chairperson of the Budget Committee after which we will hear from the Minister of Health. What, hon. Alaso? You have a request? Okay.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam, Speaker. My request to the House and which maybe received with mixed feelings is that sometimes when you loose a dear one, you require time for healing. I think we have referred so much to our colleague, hon. Mulengani’s condition that we maybe denying him the opportunity to heal. We have used that example enough; let us allow him to heal. Thank you.

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 10th February, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented Supplementary Schedule No. 1, which was referred to the Budget Committee. Yesterday, the same minister presented the addendum to that schedule, which was rejected by the House for a number of reasons.

I would like to say that when we received Supplementary Schedule No. 1, the Budget Committee held a meeting today with the chairpersons of sector committees. In that meeting, quite a number of issues came up, but as chairpersons, we resolved that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development revises the schedule to take into account the issues that were raised yesterday and those that came up in that meeting. For example, the Chairperson of the Committee of Social Services came up with a very substantial discrepancy that had been realised in their committee meeting with the Minister of Health and one of the commissioners. That discrepancy was to the effect that that commissioner had denied what had been presented as the requirement for Ministry of Health. Actually it turned out that there could be more of such discrepancies as was also evidenced by the chairpersons of the Foreign Affairs Committee and that of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

So, we have decided to refer the entire supplementary to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to reconsider those issues that came up in our meeting today and also the issues that came yesterday. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, this House did a good job for the country yesterday. 

3.16
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the hon. Members for raising those pertinent issues. 

It is true that there is a shortage of blood in the country and I want to warn that you should avoid falling sick to the extent of requiring blood because when we came from Busoga to bury the spouse of one of our colleagues, I had my mother-in-law at home; she was receiving treatment from home and she broke down ill. We rushed her to Nakasero Hospital where she required emergency transfusion but could not get it and had to die. We buried her last week. So, the situation is as serious as that.

I think one of the problems that the Ministry of Health also has is that it has not been prioritising the blood transfusion services every time they prepare their budgets and we have always had running battles with them in the committee. Therefore, we, as Parliament, must make sure that sufficient provisions are made to ensure that we have adequate blood supplies in our country.

Regarding the issue of the supplementary budget, as the Chairperson of the Budget Committee has stated, and I did say so yesterday, when we interacted with the Minister of Health - and luckily hon. Kakooza is here; he is the one who came together with his technical team. We found that what the Minister of Finance had presented to Parliament was not what the Ministry of Health required. They actually disowned what Ministry of Finance gave Parliament and tabled their own priorities, and there was evidence that the Ministry of Health had written to Finance last year indicating the priority areas where they would want supplementary funding. 

So, we thought there was a problem in terms of coordination at that level. That is why we did agree in the Budget Committee today that Ministry of Finance and Health should sit once again and agree on priorities. 

But unfortunately issues of blood services were not among the priority areas raised by Ministry of Health and also issues of maternal health because we know that many mothers are dying because of haemorrhage or severe bleeding. These days there are many road traffic accidents which claim lives and transfusion is one of the emergency services required. Episodes of Malaria are on the rise and so forth, so blood is needed urgently.

On the issue, which was raised by hon. Muhanga of the drugs, I am sure hon. Members recall that when we were considering the policy statements, the Social Services Committee came up with new measures with regard to  the budget for drugs and other supplies. This is because what we noted was that most of the funds were being sent to local governments to enable them procure drugs but most of the districts and local governments were spending money on other issues. So, we made a lot of changes but the significant one was that most of the resources will be given to National Medical Stores (NMS) so that they procure the drugs and other supplies and the local governments will only be requisitioning for these drugs.

What is happening is that when we made that suggestion, most of the local governments resisted. You recall even the Minister for Local Government was also resisting on the Floor here because it was a source of money for the local governments.

The reason why the drugs from NMS are not in the district is that some of the CAOs and the district health officers are actually refusing to requisition for these drugs. Therefore, I would want to call upon the Ministry of Health and that of Local Government to take action on the districts which are refusing to requisition for drugs when they are available in the National Medical Stores.

We have talked to National Medical Stores and they have improved their capacity and ability to provide services. They even now work 24 hours. They have a day shift and a night shift to ensure that they provide these drugs –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Baryomunsi. Madam Speaker, I think the proposal by Dr Chris Baryomunsi is what should be taken up and I call upon colleagues to follow up this matter. I have a case in point and hon. Kakooza was of help when I brought up the matter. I discovered in July 2008 that drugs had not been delivered to Kasilo district hospital for six months and I was wondering why. I found out from the health centre IV where there were no drugs and I was wondering why. 

I went to the district and was told that they had medical requisitions. I came here and wrote a strong letter to the general manager but I was embarrassed by the response which I got from the general manager. I was embarrassed in the sense that the fault was not with him because I was hard on them. I did find out from the information which was provided to me that the problem was with the districts as they had not made the requisitions for over six months. 

I went back to the CAOs office and that is where I found out that some accounts assistant was keeping the money for six months unutilised. When I informed the Police and investigations were instituted, we did find out that they were conniving with officials from the bank and they had taken Shs 500 million. I was here blaming Medical Stores and Ministry of Health when the problem was with the administrative structures at the lower levels. The accounts officer was arrested and he has just been released on bail from Luzira prison. 

I call upon Members to also follow up these matters. There is a big problem in those structures. Last month, National Medical Stores put a list of delivery dates, deadlines and the order deadlines. I have been trying to get information from the health centre IV whether they have made the requisitions or not but the people down on the ground have been dodging me. Hon. Kakooza went there and the guys hid from the minister. 

I have tried to ask the in charge and unfortunately this is one of the in charges who have been arrested in Soroti. On the 29th December, we mounted an operation because there were no drugs in the health centre IV and I was wondering where the drugs were. Someone tipped me off that we would call a whistleblower from the health centre that the in charge of that health centre is selling the drugs. 

He has a drug shop called Willis Drug Shop in Soroti town and that was the first target. When we stormed it, we were surprised with what we found there: drugs from the Government of Uganda written on “UG, Not for Sale, Property of the Government of Uganda.” The stamps for the health centre IV, the Coartem drugs had been removed from the packages and were as loose tablets in tins. The vouchers and drugs were from Worungatri Health Centre II from Amuria. Why were they there? That is where his wife was working. She is also the in charge of Worungatri Health Centre III. 

We went to nine drug shops and clinics in Soroti town and what we found was shocking. We found drugs stolen from the Government of Kenya being sold in these health centres. We also found 50 pairs of glasses, which are meant for Soroti Hospital, in one of the clinics headed by a person who is in charge; an optician from Soroti Hospital. We arrested nine people but it was surprising that some people were turning to politics to de-campaign me. I have told them, “I am ready to lose the elections so long as I am doing the right thing”.

What was also shocking is that in one of the clinics, we found used condoms with sperms in them. We were wondering what they were for because there have also been complaints that some women have been abused and girls defiled in the clinics. People thought it was a joke. No explanation was given why there were used condoms with sperms in the clinic.

So hon. Kakooza, you have a big problem and I think we all need to rise up. I have been writing and desiring my health centre IV to give me updates of requisitions but up to date, they have been dodging me. I think you need to write and ask them to give us their requisitions quarterly so that we are able to follow up when we get back there.

Madam Speaker, I felt I should give this testimony such that as we discuss this, the Government and Members of Parliament take up action. It is as bad as that. We found that in one of the health centres headed by another lady working with Uganda Cares, there was an S4 dropout employed to prescribe and administer medicine. These are all unqualified people. The health system is unhealthy if I may say so, and we need to clean it up. We must all come up and do so. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. Let me just wind up, Madam Speaker. You notice that there is a problem but this Parliament has done its part on the issue of drugs in terms of the management and administration of the service. For instance, in Soroti District, we have information that the district health officer collected drugs and kept them in the store for three months without sending them back to the lower level health units. We want the Ministry of Health to take strong measures on some of these officers and ensure that they are disciplined. Thank you.

3.27
MS BEATRICE LAGADA (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to the concern of Members that this House do give the Ministry of Health money towards blood donation. I was wondering whether there is a problem with the number of people who wish to donate blood. We have said that it is because Uganda Red Cross does not have the materials for collecting blood but I am wondering whether there are many Ugandans willing to donate blood. 

I am saying this because I know that there is a fear these days in donating blood. Not all those many people are willing to go and donate blood because in the process of doing so, blood is screened and I gather that when blood is screened, you the donor is supposed to get feedback, which makes you know your status. So it is possible that that fear may be inhibiting people from donating blood. 

I would wish to say that since this blood is so crucial to our survival as Ugandans, as leaders we ought to go together and have joint mobilisation with the Uganda Red Cross so that people can come out and donate blood because we can give money but there is the issue of the donors. If we took up this drive, as Parliament in conjunction with Uganda Red Cross, in our constituencies and really got involved in appealing to people to donate blood, I am sure we could come up with quite a bit of blood.

I had the misfortune of nursing my father in Mulago Hospital. The old man was so sick and needed a lot of blood but what happens? They gave him three units of blood. The nurse who was working around there pinched one unit so he ended up with two units. He was collapsing and they told us that he must be operated on. I had to take a fast decision. We decided to move him to Nairobi Hospital because we were sure he was going to die in Mulago. But guess what? When he got to Entebbe, he collapsed so we had to bring him back, this time to Kololo Hospital. 

Kololo gave my father seven units of blood whereas Mulago, where he had been for two weeks, had given him two units of blood and another which was stolen. I am glad to say that because of that decision that I made very painfully and expensively, my father is alive and well.

Unfortunately, many Ugandans are not able to have that capacity. Therefore, we have to do something to make sure that many Ugandans can be safe.

I wanted to comment on these drugs we are talking about –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am just seeking clarification. Are you trying to say that Kololo Hospital had blood and Mulago Hospital did not? What does it mean? Does Kololo Hospital just buy the blood from Uganda Red Cross? I wanted that point to come out clearly.

MS LAGADA: Thank you, honourable colleague. It would be very difficult for me to know why Kololo Hospital had blood to give my father seven pints whereas Mulago did not have. I don’t know; there must be an answer to that.

I wanted to talk about the drugs. I understand that in the past the National Medical Stores used to deliver drugs to the hospital and health centres and something they called pushing the drugs from National Medical Stores down to the districts. Now a decision was made and it was reversed. Now it is a business of pulling, that you must requisition for these drugs. 

From what is going on and the report we have heard today, it is being resisted. Perhaps the committee involved ought to have conversations or discussions with the different stakeholders such as the ministry, the people of National Medical Stores and the district people to find out what is workable because we must find an answer. We can’t have a situation where drugs are sitting in Entebbe while in my health centre in my village, there are definitely no drugs. 

I don’t know but there has to be a solution because at the end of the day, what is happening down at the grassroots? The people have lost faith in the health centres of government and they simply don’t go there. They say, “Even if you go, after all they will not give you any medicine so what is the point?” What is the alternative? It is these clinics we are talking about which have expired drugs and unqualified people prescribing and so you end up - somebody says, “Yes I was given medicine and the person died because the medicine was the wrong one and probably not enough”, and that sort of thing. So –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we have used up the time for the private Member’s business. Let the President of UWOPA speak, then hon. Mabikke and hon.  Anokbonggo, and then the minister will close this.

3.34 
MS JANE ALISEMERA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to say that blood is very essential and now that blood is not available in Uganda except where people can afford to pay just like hon. Lagada said, like in private hospitals like Kololo, that means that women who are pregnant and children under five years are the ones dying in large numbers now. For example, just recently we lost a staff of Parliament through maternal health and that was the cause. So, how about those women we represent who cannot come here to speak or who are not known? They are dying in great numbers because of blood. Really, the Ministry of Health must do something about this. 

If we were to have a health and demographic survey this year, I think the numbers of women dying now would be more than what we are talking about because yesterday I heard the minister say, “We have done great and we are doing very well; the maternal mortality rate has reduced from 600 to 400.” How can you talk of 400 women dying and you say you are doing very well? I thought you would have said, “We are doing very well and now we have about 20 women dying in a year.” How can you talk of 400 and say you are doing very well? It is a shame! 

There is a problem which is worrying that is coming up; the Ministry of Health wants to lay off all nursing assistants in all the health centres and you know these are the people who were trained some six years ago by the Government of Uganda to try and bridge the gap because qualified workers have always refused to go to those areas, including even in some suburbs of Kampala. You will find that nursing assistants are the ones manning these health centres. Health centre IIs and health centre IIIs are being manned by nursing assistants and they were trained for six months and now the Ministry of Health is going to pass a policy that they should be laid off beginning July this year, and we do not know where they are going to get trained health workers from. I have pre-empted this because of what is going on in the country; they are going to cause unemployment. 

I want to comment on the health centre IVs. Recently, I visited Kalangala and the so-called health centre IV of Kalangala is not a health centre IV; it is supposed to be a health centre II because it does not have a health centre and most of the areas where you go which are supposed to be health centre IVs are not functional. So, more people are dying, more children are dying and I want to call upon the Ministry of Health to pull up their socks. If they need money - and I want to ask: what is the role of Parliament in allocation of monies? 

I know that we do the allocation but why shouldn’t we really start at the beginning of the budgeting process? Why should we be given budgets which are almost complete? For example, if they say that the Ministry of Health should use only Shs 500 million, then we should budget within those figures. Why don’t we start at the beginning of these budgets so that we are not given shillings since it is from those shillings that ministries like that of Health cannot allocate enough resources to different priorities?

The Ministry of Health has always told us they have priorities but I have been in Parliament for the last nine years and none of these priorities has ever been undertaken. So, which priorities are we talking about? We really need to set the priorities. If we are saying that we should equip hospitals this year, let it be that and we shouldn’t look at other issues except the emergencies. 

On this note, I want to thank hon. Kakooza. He is trying his best -(Applause)- when you call him about a problem in a certain area, he will get up and go to that area. He is always ready to help. I am really grateful for the work you are doing but there are those that you will call and they will never reply –(Interruption)

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I strongly support what hon. Alisemera is saying because hon. Kakooza was in my Fort Portal referral hospital. He stayed there for four hours. They did not know he was a minister because he is so simple; but he discovered a lot of problems in that hospital. I thank you, honourable minister. 

MS ALISEMERA: We pray that you continue and you do not also relax because sometimes when you stay there, you tend to close your mouth but please, maintain it. 

I want to tell you about the embossed drugs. Hon. Minister, as I speak, I have an embossed drug in the Office of UWOPA. Somebody went to buy drugs in a clinic and she was given an embossed drug but it is good that she was enlightened; she asked, “Can I pay money for this drug yet it says, ‘Uganda Government; Not for sale?’” Then they said, “We only had that; just take it.” So, the embossed drugs are already on the market and I do not know what you are going to do but hon. Kakooza, you have a lot of work and we pray for you –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, last week I was also touring my constituency and on this matter, I told them that if you see a drug written on “Uganda Government; Not for Sale” in a shop, mutintiimye engoma. You know in Busoga when you sound the drum in a particular way, you may be sounding war. So, I authorised them that if they found anybody selling such a drug, batintiimye engoma. That is what I have done. 

3.42
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, speaker after speaker has talked about the lack of blood in all hospitals including the national referral hospitals and to some, the proposal is that we urge the Government to increase its budget in order to allow the Red Cross and the Ministry of Health to mobilise blood. I would like to agree, but partially. Blood is donated by citizens and while we attach importance to resources to mobilise it, we should know that the general condition points to one thing; the living conditions of our people. A hungry person cannot donate blood. The majority of people in Uganda today are living under abject poverty and under abject conditions - very poor living conditions. In fact in my constituency -(Interjections)– no, I will not give you a chance; you have had your opportunity. 

In my constituency, in the areas that I visit, I find young people who are supposed to be energetic and who would be helping us with donating blood, but cannot afford a meal a day. They are eating something called kikomando – something near to a chapati [HON. MEMBERS: “Rolex”.] Yes, it is called “rolex”. A man who feeds on “rolex” and “kikomando” cannot have excess blood to donate. So, while we urge Government to increase its budget to mobilise funds, we should also urge Government to ensure that we improve the living conditions of our people. And it is also a pointer that these programmes that we are talking about such as Bonna Bagaggawale are all failing. (Interruption) 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is hon. Mabikke in order to be pessimistic when we are saying that Ugandans who can afford should voluntarily go and donate blood? Is he really in order to derail us and say that it is not possible for people to donate blood when Members here are ready to donate blood? Is he in order to mix up the two issues? We are talking of blood and yet he is taking us to the macro issue of food. Shouldn’t he be optimistic?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, do not discourage Ugandans from being patriotic. (Laughter)

MR MABIKKE: Madam Speaker, it is true that donating blood is voluntary, but why do we have fewer volunteers now than we previously had? Let us just be logical. Why do we have less voluntarism today? 

Finally, I was touched when I heard the submission of a whole honourable Member of Parliament saying that she had to go outside her expected roles to move up to the National Medical Stores to collect drugs for her district. I am concerned because we have got district medical officers; we have got district medical teams; and they are all lying idle out there. The question is: what is bringing about this kind of attitude among our workers? 

And in connection to the ministerial evaluation which was in Munyonyo, many civil servants are losing faith in their jobs; and not just faith in their jobs, but also in the way in which Government works. We need to do so much to ensure that we re-energise civil servants - our medical teams, to perform their responsibilities. That also calls for change of attitude of the Executive; change of attitude of Parliament; and perhaps also a change in Government. I want to thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have information from hon. Anokbonggo and then the minister, briefly. Hon. Members, when I was in secondary school we used to donate blood and after that we would just drink soda and go back to the class. (Laughter)

3.48 
PROF. WILLY ANOKBONGGO (UPC, Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity for me to give this information. The information I would like to give to honourable members concerns drugs and drug shortages. About four or five years ago, a research was carried out in selected districts of Uganda on money allocated for primary health care. Seventy percent of that money was meant for daily use by the district and 30 percent was meant for drugs. The study which was carried out showed that of the 30 percent of money for drugs, only 10 to 15 percent was actually used for drugs. 

On the basis of these findings, I think Parliament, in its wisdom, decided to reverse the allocation of money for primary health care; 70 percent for drugs and 30 percent for general use at the district level. The core of my information is that it seems there is a deliberate attempt at the district level and health centre IVs at district level, to frustrate the decision of Parliament on the allocation of money for drugs. The submission of hon. Okupa is a classical example. Why is money being retained at the district or sub-district level and drugs are not being ordered?  

Let me add this; in the past, drugs were taken to health facilities, but it was found that some of these drugs which were taken were not useful at certain health facilities because the conditions for them were not there. For example, drugs for Kalagar – this is a parasitic disease – were sent to Kigezi and yet this disease is common in the Karamoja region. The drug would expire in Kigezi without being used and, therefore, the Ministry of Health rightly thought that drugs should be ordered by the health facilities in accordance with the requirements of that hierarchy and that is why at this material time, drugs are being ordered. But it may be necessary, hon. Minister, to push the drugs to health facilities rather than being ordered because it seems that at the district level, there is a deliberate attempt to frustrate the decision of Parliament.

3.52
MR JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to make a very important proposal. Whereas there may be problems in the collection, storage and distribution of blood, the most important thing to address as a country is a disease called Malaria, because most of this blood is actually required for treatment of Malaria. 

Malaria kills an equivalent of about six Boeing planes full of 300 people each, everyday in Africa. It causes anaemia; it kills pregnant women and children mainly; yet Malaria can be eradicated almost free of charge using DDT. This is a fact. DDT can be manufactured in the laboratory at Makerere University. All these things have been negotiated with the Department of Chemistry at Makerere University.
 
I went to USA when I was Minister of Health and discussed with them. This is what they told me. They said, “We know that DDT is harmless; in fact when we send our troops where the area is Malaria infested, we use DDT but we cannot promote it because of the lobbying of environmentalists at home; since we do not have a problem of Malaria in our country; but we have no problem if you spray using DDT.” Now, I do not know why the government is being shy to save millions of people, because we would not have a problem of blood shortage. Eighty percent of illnesses and deaths are caused by malaria and so let us deal with it using DDT. Let us use DDT like they did in Southern Italy. In Kanungu where DDT was used in the 60s old men are still living there. They were using DDT to preserve beans and they are alive and well so why are we shy?

MS ALASO: I would like the honourable minister as he responds to the issues to respond to this one issue that I have. When this House took the decision to shift 70 percent of the money to National Medical Stores, I must admit that as a committee, we did not look into matters of procurement plans, distribution and all the detail associated with handling the bulk. I am now listening to hon. Muhanga and I think that we have lots of drugs for the first, second and third quarter and that there is going to be lots of money remaining unspent and NMS is going to have lots of money and drugs.

I would like that the minister comes here to tell us what plans he has to ensure that all the monies that were given in the second, third, and now the fourth quarter will actually be utilised for what was proposed by this House and apportioned.

I would also like to hear about the specialised drugs for the Heart and Cancer institutes. At the time, there was a challenge and the committee made some concessions, but up to now, all money is going to NMS which does not seem to have the capacity to procure the specialised drugs for those institutions and there is information from the Heart Institute, they do not have the drugs but NMS has their money.

3.58
THE STATE MINISTER FOR PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members, for raising those concerns. First of all, blood is very necessary and the budget has been small, but I would like to say that we have gone a step ahead because you remember we had a shortage of blood in the whole country. When we had rainy seasons of November and December, there was rampant malaria outbreak and the blood bank in Nakasero was overwhelmed. The major source of donating blood is schools and by then they were on holiday.

What we have done is to start a programme countrywide for sensitising the public on donating blood voluntarily. We are using radios and TVs –(Interruption)

MRS KAVUMA: The government policy on feeding students is that parents should be looking for the food. Schools used to feed students and they would be able to donate blood, but now that has been blocked by the coming of USE. I started donating blood when I was in S.2. So, what is going to happen now? We will have no blood in senior secondary schools.

MR KAKOOZA: What is important is the willingness of people to donate blood. What I want to appeal to the public is that the ministry has now started a strategy because blood is a necessity and we have a shortage and the resources that were allocated in the last budget - I remember as they have stated, the cost is only Shs 1 billion which Parliament needs to increase. However, what is important is the sensitisation of the public to make it donate blood willingly.

Secondly, I want to set the record straight about the case of hon. Bernard Mulengani’s wife in Mulago that the Member has mentioned. Her death was not as a result of lack of blood but a mismatch of blood. The ministry has taken an initiative – we are going to get the report after because the one they gave to us was unsatisfactory because we knew that both Nakasero and Mulago had blood. We are still investigating and we shall come up with a comprehensive report. It was not lack of blood but a mismatch of blood that was got from another health centre – it was proved in Mulago.

On the issue of the sale of blood; as you know, blood is free. But we are dealing with people in our societies who have morally decayed. There is no way you can go to the hospital and you are sold blood because we get it freely and supply it freely - this is a policy of Government. The people selling blood are doing it at their own peril and once caught, will be held accountable. 

On the issue of drugs, I want to thank this Parliament and state that I have no regrets over taking the policy of changing over 70 percent of the PHC funds because people could be dying a lot and we could not have drugs. This is clear and we can even check on the Auditor-Generals’ report which shows that the money was misused. There are plenty of drugs in the National Medical Stores because people are resisting change - we are taking serious action because we have data on the common diseases in each district. We are also going to use the forced supply system to supply those drugs. We have put a strategy in place to supply those drugs every 30 days even if we have not got an order from any district. We shall be supplying those drugs every 30 days, whether they want them or not and at any cost. It is true people are resisting change because they were the beneficiaries of this money. And I want to assure you because of the initiative of Parliament and the ministry, we found out that some health centres were non-existent because we were taking drugs in kind and which had a cost implication of human resource and the drugs being misused. I want to assure Parliament and the public that within a few days, we shall have enough drugs and stock for our citizenry. 

Responding to the comment from hon. Babiiha about the laying off of nursing assistants; I do not think it is a policy of the ministry and I am not aware of that. We are not even ready to do it because we know that we need these people. We are instead promoting health workers at the village level and even paying the hard-to-reach allowances for the health workers to help us. We cannot lay off the nursing assistants who are just going to help us to improve the system. 

Hon. Jim Muhwezi has said something important and which is a real focus in the ministry and we are going to take it up as a political decision. Prevention is better than cure because we have been romancing with these diseases we can prevent. For example, in the case of Malaria, if we allocate money for internal residue spraying, we can save a lot of money and we are going to use DDT at any cost. 

We have provided money in the budget and I want Parliament to support it. We have also experts studying another chemical that will kill the mosquito larvae in their breeding places, by May. If we combine internal residual spraying and preventive measures with tablets, I am sure that the prevalence of Malaria will go down. I am sure that the strategy of the ministry – you remember in the first quarter, the shift policy was in October last year. The first quarter of the money went to the district and that is why you find now that by the time they gave money to the National Medical Stores in November, we tendered in processes and we are now getting drugs and are ready to supply by action. 

We cannot compromise with people who are joking with the lives of people and I am sure that by June, all health centres will have drugs. In the first quarter of July, August and September, money went to the districts. We started in November, December, January and February - that is why we have supplies now and we are supplying the medicine in kind and not giving money, which I am sure will work out despite the resistance of the people who do not want to accept change.

Lastly, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament that as we are doing our oversight function, the Ministry of Health is awaiting your call - so call us. We are sure that we have the money, capacity and the supplies. If we make a combined effort, we can provide medicine, which is enough for our citizens. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you, Minister. Hon. Aol, you said that you have a very brief question. Please, use two minutes.

4.08
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I thank you. Although the Attorney-General is not in, I am sure that the Leader of Government Business is there to take note of this. I rise on the compensation of the Acholi war debt claimants – oh, he has come back. Everywhere I went over the Christmas break in Gulu, the issue of the compensation of our livestock came up very strongly and people are so poor – there are issues of education -(Interjections)- it is mostly the Acholi that lost their livestock -(Interjections)– please, let me first finish and then I will give you time to give your information. We had a case in court which was withdrawn on the advice of His Excellency, the President of Uganda, so as to be settled out of court. 

The President came out with six laid out points. One of the points was that a verification team should be sent within four months; this was way back in June 2008. There are some other points in this paper that I will lay on Table. We really need an explanation from the Attorney-General about this issue because he is completely quiet and people are grappling with the payment of fees for education.

In the olden times, people would slaughter their animals and pay their children’s school fees. But now, they cannot and we need this. This is the saving of the Acholi. Acholi make their saving –(Interruption)   

MS BEATRICE LAGADA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Betty Aol for giving way. I just want to inform hon. Aol that it is not only the Acholi who lost their animals; even the Langi and Iteso. I want to go a step further and say that at least for the Acholi, especially in Gulu - I am aware that people who lost animals including my family in Gulu -(Interjections)– at least it is there, I have seen it myself. There are three categories, which have been verified. 

One of the categories already had 20 percent of their money paid. A total of Shs 600 million was paid last financial year. This financial year – the last time I was in that office because I am busy following the one for my family – Shs 1.5 billion had been paid –(Interjections)- no, I am just giving information to hon. Aol.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think our procedures are very clear. The honourable member is asking the Attorney-General to respond, but before the Attorney-General comes, my colleague hon. Lagada has come up in the place of the Attorney-General to explain –(Interjections)- this case is not limited to the areas mentioned. This business of usurping the Attorney-General’s powers is not procedurally right. Let us leave it to the Attorney-General –(Interjections)- as the procedure provides, to answer. Otherwise, I will end up also getting up because I have information. Someone from Lango will also get up; from West Nile –(Interjections)- even Luwero, Bunyoro, they will all come up. So, can we please leave it to the Attorney-General to respond? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me help the Members. Can the Attorney-General tell us how far he has gone or when he can come and report? This matter will not end. I want the Attorney-General to address issues for all the Members. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Is it in order for the five honourable members; beginning from hon. Amuriat and others to continue speaking when you are holding the Floor? Are they really in order to assume the powers of the Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, they should not speak when I am talking because I am trying to assist this House. Could the Attorney-General - I think you have heard the enquiry. When will you be in position to address this House on that issue? –(Interjections)- no, hon. Member, please! I will also tell the Basoga to talk about their issues. 

4.14
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I am happy that this matter is being raised. However, it is more complicated than the picture being painted here. Some of the information is with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; some of the information is with the Ministry of Defence; some of the information is at our office here; some of it is in our office in Gulu. So, if you give me seven days, I will come up with a comprehensive statement.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS BY UGANDA ALBINOS ASSOCIATION

4.16
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure, I stand here to present a humble petition of members of the Uganda Albinos Association. 

The petition states that: 

“Your petitioners are members of Uganda Albinos Association. It is a registered association whose objective is to step up the status of Albinos in all dimensions and spheres of life.

Albinos are persons with disabilities within the definition provided for by the International Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 2006 though with unique problems and special needs.

The Constitution of Uganda recognises equality and freedom from discrimination. It also provides for affirmative action in favour of marginalised groups for the purpose of redressing the imbalances, which exist against such persons.

Albinos in Uganda, despite being persons with disabilities, are a minority group and not yet included in the mainstream organisations working on issues of disability; thus rendering them a marginalised group who need special protection by the law.

Presently, albinos are not participating actively in decision-making processes at all levels and this has left them marginalised and their well-being endangered.

Now, therefore, your petitioners pray that Parliament amend the Constitution to provide for special representation of albinos in Parliament. 

That Parliament provides for special representation of albinos in all decision-making points at all levels of Government. 

That all the existing laws on persons with disabilities be implemented and more so during the implementation of such laws albinos should be considered.

And now, your petitioners, as duly bound, will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures to this document.”

I, therefore, take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to lay the petition on the Table. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members; the petition is committed to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and they will report back to this House on how to proceed.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION BY THE ELDERLY CITIZENS OF UGANDA

4.21
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I am here to present a petition under rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda on behalf of the elderly persons of Uganda who have constituted themselves into an association called the 50 Plus Years Elderly Organisation Uganda Chapter. (Laughter) I must state at the onset that I am not a member of this organisation but I am representing them as a Member of Parliament. But I can see potential members behind me and in front of me. (Laughter)

The elderly persons observe that they are senior citizens of this country and they have made significant contribution to the building of our nation in various capacities. But they feel that since time immemorial nobody has been speaking on their behalf -(Interjections)- and that their interests are not very well articulated -(Interjections)- and, therefore, the subject matter of this petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, he is just conveying the message.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I did say that I am not a member of this association but I am conveying their message to this Parliament. They state that since time immemorial no one has been talking on behalf these marginalised groups on issues that touch their livelihood and their plight during old age when they become less capable of caring for themselves on a day-to-day basis.

“So, the subject matter of this petition is that the older persons demand for affirmative action to have representation of older persons as a special interest group in the Parliament of Uganda. Wherefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolve that:

1) Older persons be granted special representation in Parliament to cater for their interests;
2) That a national council for older persons be established to champion the interests of older persons and provide for electoral colleges.

And your petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray.” 

Hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. Their petition is signed by 96 eminent old persons and their petition is copied to their patron, Rt. Hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja. (Laughter)

I, therefore, Madam Speaker, wish to lay the petition on the Table. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The petition is committed to the Committee of Gender, Labour and Social Development for perusal and report back. They should call upon the resources of any other committee to assist them in these two petitions.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS’ PROTECTION BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we started this debate yesterday. Are there any further contributions on the whistleblowers? 

4.25
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for finally presenting this report to us. I think it is long overdue. We should have had a whistleblower protection law in place. So, it is true that we need the law but it is also important to challenge ourselves whether we are not making too many laws and not bothering to enforce them. 

I have recently read reports on integrity, and our government has been flouted on this matter, that we make so many laws, especially in the fight against corruption, and yet we are not bothering to ensure that there is adequate implementation and enforcement in place. So, I do not want to comfort Government that the whistleblower protection law in place is going to do the magic. What we require to fight corruption in this country is bigger than additional laws. 

But let us talk about the whistleblowers law. I believe that the whistleblowers law requires political and judicial goodwill. Somebody summarised it and said that being a whistleblower, you could be a hero for 15 minutes and suffer a lifetime of misery - 40 years of misery - if you are not adequately protected because you disclosed information. That is why I am arguing that unless the NRM Government endorses the whistle blowing and -(Interjections)- yes, unless you endorse it and give it your political support, you are going to endanger the lives of so many Ugandans who will dare to speak out against patronage, nepotism and corruption which has become so systemic; it is actually the hallmark of this Government. You go into every system of Government and you find the rot. So, if the NRM Government does not openly back the law, we are going to endanger those Ugandans who dare speak against it. They are going to speak up this morning and the following morning they will be fired from their offices and they will never have a future; they will be miserable people. I believe that we are running a broken system as a Government and it cannot simply be fixed by whistleblower protection. But let us get the excuse from you. We want to deny you the excuse; we will give you the whistleblower law and we will see the magic it is going to do if you do not give it the backing.

Secondly, I think that the law requires a processing point. I notice that as proposed in the Bill, the whistleblowers are going to run to the Police, blow the whistle to the IGG – there are so many points at which they are going to do the whistle blowing. There should be a secretariat somewhere, where this information is going to be processed and where we can follow up on matters of reprimand. 

If I whistle blow to the IGG and then the following day, I am followed up in my office, which particular group of secretariat or commission is going to ensure that I am not victimised, because I whistle blew? The law should provide for a one-stop point for processing and for follow-up.

Lastly, this country has an access to information law and the greatest culprits in denying us information are the government departments. I know that there are journalists who were pursuing this matter in court and they lost out. We do not have access to information. There are also organisations where we are sure – an organisation’s secrecy policy not to divulge anything, otherwise you land into trouble. Then there are also organisations where your own performance appraisal will be affected; they may not demote you or throw you out per se, but you can be sure you will never get a promotion because you whistle blew. All these things must be packaged together before one can open their mouth to whistle blow and have to pay with a lifetime of misery.

4.30
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to the debate on this Bill. I would like to thank the committee that has brought a good report to this House. Of course the intention of the Bill is fighting corruption - which has gone to the bone marrow of this country - abuse of office and other forms of injustices, which deserve to be taken serious. 

However, I am just wondering whether this is not going to be one other law that we pass in this House and it is put on the shelves of Government to gather dust. Many times, provisions are made in our laws, but Government is neither never committed to financing these laws nor even interested in the implementation of the law. 

I would like to point out a few areas that I think are key in this Bill that Parliament needs to pay attention to. One issue in the Bill is protection of the whistle blower. As we may appreciate, whistle blowing is such a risky venture. A whistle blower will have to take the risk that may cause danger to his or her life from thugs, and very powerful people, sometimes in Government, people in their neighbourhood – here in the Bill, there is a provision for Police protection. 

I was wondering: how many police personnel would you need to deploy to protect whistle blowers who may need their services? A number of times, the Police may be the source of the problem. I do not know if in the certificate of financial implications, there was consideration of the fact that at any one time, you might have to deal with Police of up to five hundred people. I do not know if you considered the fact that this kind of protection could take a very long time. When do you feel you are secure, having voluntarily provided information to the state in as far as wrongdoing is concerned?

I would like to decry the possibility of using Resident District Commissioners as points of reference for whistle blowers. I do not know whether these people are trained to do this and whether we can trust their impartiality. I do not know whether these people are apolitical and do not serve the interest of certain powerful people in the Government. I do not know whether they are above corruption. I do not know whether they do not have bad blood between them and other political leaders in their districts –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just this morning I was handling a case involving an RDC forcefully threatening a lady; a young girl with a pistol – I think they were in a relationship and it went bad. The case has been reported to the Police and they are even frustrating investigations because of the involvement of the RDC of that particular district. 

So, with the kind of perception in which we see the RDC, I do not know who much they can help in this good cause that the minister has brought before the House. 

MR AMURIAT: Thank you so much for that information. Madam Speaker, this tells it all. The first point of contact of a whistle blower should be a trusted point; it should be a point of integrity; somebody or an institution that cannot be intimidated or arm-twisted. 

I would like to buy the suggestion of my colleague hon. Alaso that we have a single point of call where whistle blowers can be able to pass information to –(Member timed out_)

4.37
MR JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for bringing this Bill to Parliament and I am sure it will, like many others in our statute books, help. However, I would like to say, we need to build institutions which can deal with corruption independently because we have enough laws in our statute books to deal with corruption.

I was happy yesterday when the Minister of Ethics and Integrity mentioned among others that when dealing with this problem, there must not be double standards. That is very important because people respect the law because the law deals with everyone uniformly not subjectively. It is very important that Government makes sure that the institutions are given opportunity to work without anyone prompting them or getting involved in what they are doing. 

That is when people will fear that the law will catch up with them. Otherwise, some people may think those in authority may not take interest or may actually feel that they should not be brought to book. That will undermine the law and people will not respect the law and even whistleblowers may not blow because they may feel that when they blow the whistle, no interest will be taken or an interest will be taken but there will be interference by those in authority. So, double standards; I agree with what the minister said; it is very important.

The other problem is abuse of office. Some of these bodies we create have a mandate sometimes entrenched in the Constitution - how they must work; and more often than not that is not how they work. Therefore, they are abusing their offices. Sometimes, their offices are interfered with. Again that is another kind of abuse of office. 

While we are addressing the whistleblowers, there are many other areas that need to be addressed; transparency. We have to be transparent in all Government institutions especially those of investigation.

Lastly, when we are protecting whistleblowers, we should also point out and recognise those who have resisted corruption. There should be a law that demands that those who have made a statement - not leaving it for someone to talk about when they wish - but anybody who has ever resisted corruption, let him or her be recognised. My view is that if we do not build independent institutions to deal with corruption, this whistleblowers law may be just like many other laws which are in our statute books but are not respected.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. You gave a very good point that those who have fought corruption should be recognised and you are challenging the Minister of Ethics to think of a law of recognising such kind of people. I would really support such a law because my contribution towards fighting corruption is at least public information. You know what happened to me during -(Laughter)- CHOGM. I would really support such a law so that some of us can also get recognised for what we have done. Thank you.

MR MUHWEZI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, it is very important that we should be consistent. There should be equality before the law and there should be predictability that X did this and, therefore, if Y does the same, he will get the same treatment like X. Thank you very much.

4.43
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is to inquire from the minister whether this law will quantify in percentages for the whistleblower. For instance, if somebody reported that there is somebody who has under declared goods worth Shs 1 billion, where is the take for this person? Can it be quantified in figures and say 10 percent is yours as long as the information you have given is true and has been investigated and the money is worth Shs 1 billion that was under declared? Is this law including reward in terms of quantity for the whistleblower?

Secondly, does this law put in regard malice because of unfair sharing of the loot that is intended? Somebody may decide to say, “Since I received nothing, I am reporting”. How is this malice going to be detected that they have been colluding and now that he has missed out on the loot, therefore, he should be regarded as a whistleblower? That is my submission. I thank you.

MR MENHYA: I wanted to refer the previous speaker to page 10, wording for whistle blowing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you read the information if it is there?

MR MENHYA: Madam Speaker, on page 10 of the committee report, there is a paragraph on rewarding for whistle blowing. “In countries like Brazil and the USA, once proceedings of corruption are recovered as a result of information provided by a whistle blower, the whistle blower is entitled to a pre-determined percentage of the money recovered by the State”. Our recommendation was that Uganda should adopt a system of percentage remunerations for persons who may disclose useful information leading to the arrest, prosecution and recovery of monies that would have otherwise been lost to the corruption vice. That is what I want to tell him and that this is what we are trying to propose as a committee. So, it is provided for in the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any other contributions? 

4.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate the comments made by honourable members. Let me from the outset implore my colleagues that in the interest of this country, which is our country because we have no other country, we must approach this national problem together. That means we must avoid politicising this matter which has potential to affect every home and life in this country. 

I submit that we are in this thing together; we are facing this problem together. When it affects a soul, it is essential that we, together, resolutely look for what works and what will help us overcome the problem. Therefore, anyone who seeks to politicise and to point fingers needs to remember that the other fingers are pointing at that person.   

My experience of corruption in this country is that it has no political party, no religion and no tribe. I want to caution that those who have become experts at pointing fingers need to look at what we said yesterday namely, that the challenge we are facing as a country is citizens who have chosen to professionalise this. As people, you would easily describe them as hypocrites or men and women of double standards who offer lip service - publicly proclaiming this but privately causing a lot of harm to this society. That is where we are today. 

I want to appeal to members to remember that we are facing this thing together and therefore we must choose to swim together, work together and make an effort to find a solution that works for all of us. That is one, Madam Speaker. 

The other issue, which is a mistake, is the notion that the National Resistance Movement Government will single-handedly deliver the victory that we all need. That is not true. What is true is that all sections of our society must do what they are able to do. Those who have less should do what they can which corresponds with what they are able to do, and those who have more should do more. 

I will take up the point that Government should lead, that we should do more. However, I am also reminded that each one of us has something we can do. The truth is that some of our people have chosen to fold their arms and others have become experts in pointing fingers when privately they could be taken for some of the toughest enemies our society has ever had. 

We must know that it is not a matter that Government alone will deliver on. That is why I have consistently appealed to civil society to come out and do more, to Government of course to do much more than we have been able to do, the media to do more and religious leaders to do more. It seems to me that all of us in our different ways have not been able to do as much and so the call is, let us do more than we have done. I caution my colleagues that we should move away from focusing at Government alone as if Government alone has the answer. The answer goes beyond Government, although I admit that Government should lead the way. 

The issue of one processing centre is not geographically feasible. I even do not know where this centre would be but I guess it would be somewhere in Kampala. The proposer did not give us the details of this, but it is not practically possible that you can have one centre or even ten. We need to have as many as possible that will make it easy for Ugandans, particularly those men and women in the countryside who may not have access to transport, to be able to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you did not understand what the members asked and it is also what I asked you yesterday. We were asking: who is the central authority where all this ends? That is what members were asking. Maybe hon. Okupa can elaborate on it.

MR OKUPA: I just wanted to give him information from the US experience, which we went to learn from. In the US, there is an apex body which is called the Office of Special Counsel. This body is headed by an officer, a Special Counsel. This office has principal counsels at regional level like we have the IGG here. So, that is the type of arrangement that we want. We do not want to have very many offices where you are going to report to. 

The other issue is when they did amend their whistleblowers Act, the other point to which the public would report is the Congress where in our case it would be like Parliament. So, those are the proposals that were made yesterday and the type of body we would want to have, other than having five to six bodies to report to. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the other reason we were asking for a co-ordination point is that at the end of the day, some of these people are going to suffer reprisal from their employers whether they are in public or the private sector. There should be some office that is responsible for following up. After somebody has blown the whistle and is being victimised for that, there should be some central person responsible or a team of officers going to follow up what is happening with that particular person. 

You cannot tell us here, hon. Minister, that today the police will decide on what to do with the whistleblower when they are being harassed in their place of work. Tomorrow the IGG will take another decision and another day the Minister of Ethics and Integrity will take another decision. I find it difficult and I really think that the minister should take this proposal in good faith and probably consider whether it is workable. 

The other thing is, while the minister strongly argues that we should all be involved in the fight against corruption, I think the minister being the responsible political head should help this country in instances like where you are classifying expenditure every other day. There is now more and more of what is described as “classified expenditure” and there are lots of agreements that we as the public cannot access. You sign oil agreements but we cannot access them, we cannot see them, we do not scrutinise them; how do you expect an ordinary Alaso who has never seen that agreement to know when things are going wrong and therefore blow the whistle?

If you want -(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, can you please tell hon. Daudi Migereko to keep quiet in the spirit of Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD) where we sit together, so that I can talk and he responds? You know that we signed a memorandum and even hon. Kabakumba has joined. The two ministers are attacking me –(Laughter)- but if they waited for me to say something, then they would respond because they are ministers of government and they should be able to respond to these matters.

What I was saying was that –(Mr Migereko rose_)- let me first say this and then you can clarify. You are a minister, honourable. What I was saying is that in an era where you have too much classified information, oil agreements that you have not been privileged to know, how do you whistle blow on things that are in a private domain? If you want to increase involvement of the public, the Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity should urge Government to become more transparent in its dealings so that we whistle blow on what we know. Now I can take the clarification. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate comments made, but my general response is that we are clearly here to decide on what will work for this country. Arising out of the debate, I guess that the House will indeed make that decision. So, I am amenable to anything that the House decides in the interest of our country. 

I understand what was meant by a one process centre. If the House thinks that this is a great idea and way to go, I certainly will not stand in the way of the House. 

I did request honourable members to read the Bill yesterday and I do hope that all of us have read the Bill. There are, in my view, adequate safeguards against victimisation in the Bill. If in the opinion of honourable members they are not enough, clearly I will again welcome proposals and decisions that the House will be making. However, there are safeguards; we all recognise the dangers that are associated with whistle blowing.

There are people who came to me whistle blowing and we are doing what we can, but the amount of pressure is enormous. I guess if it were for someone much different, I do not know what would happen to them. (Laughter) Pressure from those who do not want whistle blowing to succeed is something that we should expect. There are people who have entrenched interests in what is going on and do not want this country to prosper and will therefore do everything it takes. Let me say, you will find them everywhere; they have no political colour - (Laughter)- they have no tribal colour, they are everywhere I can tell you. So, we should indeed look at this issue of safeguards if we are going to make any progress. There are obligations being made on the receiver of information in the Bill. 

On the issue of Resident District Commissioners, my personal view, having been one before, is that the office of the RDC historically and practically is the closest to ordinary people. What I think is happening here from those who think differently is that they are looking at the office and thinking about the persons who occupy those offices. I know we have had cases of individuals who happen to be RDCs whose character is indeed questionable. We do have those cases but these are administrative problems. We need to know that the office itself has the kind of aura which no other office in the district has. So, we do believe that if we can improve on the posting and appointment of individuals with character beyond reproach, the office is the appropriate one. 

I beg honourable members to really look at this again so that we can continue to have this office. In my view, there is no other office in any district that has the kind of respect that the office of the RDC has, the occupant notwithstanding. So, I really do request members to look at this again but not the persons, because I know some of us here have actually had differences with some of the officers in the field. We should really go beyond that and think about what works and what does not work.   

I will take the point that we have laws, but my view is that what we are seeking to do in this whistleblower’s protection legislation is not addressed anywhere in the laws that we have to do with fighting corruption. The whistleblowers law, more than any other piece of legislation we have on our books, is doing something we have not seen before. This is an attempt - a bold one at that - to bring our people on board. 

What is happening in our country today is that in most cases, citizens or people are not sufficiently involved in some of the national programmes like fighting corruption. This is what whistle blowing does in a spectacular way, and I do not know any other legislation that does this. Therefore, the question of having enough laws does not arise when we are dealing with something that we have not provided for before. 

I want to take the point made by hon. Muhwezi – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, at the beginning of his submission, the honourable minister told us not to politicise this Bill. I was about to believe him but in the same breath he started defending RDCs, who are not professionals but political appointees. Is he therefore in order to politicise the Bill? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think he was talking about the title. If you look at the Constitution, they are defined although they are defined as senior civil servants; that one you know. That is what the Constitution tells me and it is what I have. (Applause)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I was recalling what hon. Muhwezi did say and I agree with him entirely that if the law is going to serve us all, it must certainly be seen that we are all equal before the law. I take that point and also take the point that it does not serve anyone of us if we practice double standards. If the law applies to so and so and it does not apply to others, clearly that is not the way we should serve our people. I am hoping that the whistleblowers Bill, once it is law, will qualify as a tool in the hands of all Ugandans and will be used to serve our interests. 

I would like to appeal to colleagues that what we are seeing in our country now requires all of us to perhaps think differently from what we are used to, and that is the search for what will really lead this country out of numerous challenges. I say so, so that we are able to leave something behind when our time to leave comes. 

I am inviting honourable members to look at this proposal we have before you as something we are really starting. We have got to do that since we believe the whistleblower is something new, something radical. We have not tried it before and the countries which tried it before say that it works. I agree that we have issues with implementation; we have issues there which we must again tackle together so that we finally succeed.  

The issue of rewarding is one which I think the House should pronounce itself on. In some cases I do believe that it is not practically feasible that everyone who whistle blows is rewarded. In any case, section 34 of the Inspectorate of Government Act provides for the protection of informers and witnesses. 

Section 34 (1) says, “A person who provides information to the Inspectorate shall be protected and his or her identity shall not be disclosed and may be rewarded for his or her information and paid an amount of five percent of the money recovered consequent upon his or her information to the Inspectorate.”

In other words, when it comes to issues to do with money, there is provision. However, some of the information that may be provided may not actually qualify or come under that category and so we need to be careful here. I implore honourable members that we distinguish between what clearly has a monetary dimension and information that may not have. That is for honourable members to make up their minds on. The issue of rewards must be looked at very carefully. Yes we have provided for this as far as the Inspector-General of Government is concerned but there may be cases where it is not possible that rewards may be given. 

Let me also say that the majority of Ugandans, for all I know, are not interested in rewards. What they are interested in is anything that works, improves and qualifies them to have services that have high quality. They are not interested in being rewarded but in having services, in making sure that service delivery is of high standard and that of course their secrecy is provided for. They are not particularly advancing the case of being rewarded for having provided information. So I think we should not over blow this issue of awarding.

Finally, hon. Alaso was trying to make a big issue of what we call classified expenditure. This is standard practice all over the world. It is not something unique to Uganda. What I agree with is that it should not be abused but frankly, and as much as possible, we should be transparent. There are cases where classified information is a legitimate way of governance. I also do pray that the Access to Information Act is allowed to work so that people are given the information they need.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Whistleblowers’ Protection Bill, 2008 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE WHISTLEBLOWERS’ PROTECTION BILL, 2008

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, we are now starting with clause 1; I thought it would come later as has been our practice that the definition - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, it is the title, which comes last. We always start with clause 1.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Madam Chairperson, this definition of disclosure in the interpretation section -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the committee have amendments in the interpretation section? Okay.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Grace Oburu): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 1, under interpretation we rephrase the provision to reads as follows: “Authorised officer means a police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police, an inspectorate officer of the Inspectorate of Government, a human rights officer with the Uganda Human Rights Commission, a senior ethics officer with the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, Resident District Commissioner or Deputy Resident District Commissioner.” 

The justification is to clearly state the officers authorised to take receipt of disclosures.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, if I heard the minister correctly, we were proposing to have a body that handles what they are specifically supposed to handle, like I was giving the example of the USA. If, as the minister had accepted, we went ahead and adopted that, what would it mean for this definition because this enumerates the four - the RDC, Human Rights Commission, Directorate of Public Prosecution and Directorate for Ethics and Integrity? So, what will happen because we were tending towards the agreement that we need a body that can handle this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think there would be no problem. You could move an amendment to create that office separately, which would then supervise all this.

MR OKUPA: Then we would still have mentioned that before we get to it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you can still introduce other amendments. This is the very first one.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Chairperson, the idea which is being mooted by hon. Okupa sounds to be a good one. I have been following the functioning of the Office of Independent Counsel in the US. Often times, the expenditure involved in the execution of their work is staggering. In my view, this appears to be a fundamental amendment, which really needs to be studied before we can take it on, for one simple reason. We have had too many offices that we have set up and are not functioning simply because they are not facilitated and their financial implications were not well thought through. 

I would be a little bit apprehensive to buy the idea of taking on that amendment without the government side taking off time to fully understand and comprehend the financial implications that are likely to be involved. 

MR LUKWAGO: I was discussing the body with my colleague here and it may be a bit difficult to operationalise but again, the amendment suggested by the committee that we should have RDCs as centres for receiving information –(Interjections)– there is a problem with RDCs. With other institutions it would be okay but RDCs are civil servants whose mandate is clearly defined in the Constitution to deal with security, to deal with matters assigned to them by the President and so on and so forth. There mandate is not to handle matters of this nature which can be handled by the Police and the IGG. 

In this particular case, an authority which receives information must have the capacity to deal with it or to take action. Once the RDC receives information, he or she cannot take action on that information. They do not have the capacity because their mandate is to head security in the area, mobilise people for development and so on. That is the constitutional mandate of the RDCs. However, the Police can get the information, investigate, take action and they can prosecute. With RDCs, it would be redundant. So basically, Madam Chairperson, it would be a bit difficult for the RDCs. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Lukwago, I want you to consider that we are making a law for the whole country. Supposing I am in Nakapiripirit where there is no office of the IGG, there is no office of the Human Rights Commission, there is no office of the DPP? 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, there is the Police.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, how will the ordinary person in Nakapiripirit handle that? Why are you trying to cut off my quickest channel of disclosure? 

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, what we can do is to reduce the rank of the Police officer because Assistant Inspector of Police might be a high rank. These are actually very many and they are all over the country. So, I think they can handle this.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: I am very happy that hon. Lukwago has said that Assistant Inspectors of Police are many. They are actually at sub-county level. Those are the OC stations. What is happening here is that by involving the RDC, you are being given more options and more chances of reporting. Since the RDC is the chairman of the district security committee, therefore the DPC commands everybody in his area. So he can call a CID officer and task him with that report. So, more chances are being created for reporting other than just excluding an RDC. That is all. It is just more opportunities. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Following hon. Butime’s submission, if we are interested in making it more accessible, that is all the more reason we should stick to people who are easily available – the Assistant Inspectors of Police; they are in every sub-county. 

Most importantly, I think the import of this provision here is the professionalism that is available in the Inspectorate of Government, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, the Uganda Human Rights Commission and the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity. While it is spelt out in the Constitution that our RDCs are senior civil servants, you know that this has been a matter we have debated in this House for a long time. Some of them have never even tested work in the civil service. All of them are political appointees. Some of them really lack the capacities that these other departments have. If we want to safeguard this exercise from possible political confusion, then we should keep these offices for disclosure as professional as possible. 

Madam Chairperson, my argument is that if we want to safeguard the integrity of the disclosure process, we should keep it as professional as possible. There isn’t anyone of us who will rise up and say “I do not like the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity because of political reasons”, but we can do that with an RDC who was your former competitor and who lost to you in an election and you came to Parliament. These are professionals we are talking about; and that is my argument. Let us delete the RDCs, let us expand it and keep it even to the AIP in the Police and we will have the disclosure done. 

MS KIRYAPAWO: Madam Chairperson, I think what we are trying to do is to give a wider choice. Here, the whistleblower who feels uncomfortable with the RDC can go to the Assistant Inspector of Police. They are not forcing the whistleblower to go to the RDC. We should give a wider choice for the whistleblower. Let the whistleblower make the choice on where to take that information. That is what we are trying to do in this amendment.

MR BADDA: Madam Chairperson, the reason I support that we retain the RDCs is to give the local person an option that is easily accessible. We are not saying that the RDC will take conclusive action. He is actually going to be a conduit for the complaint to be taken to a more professional person. For instance, if a whistleblower wants to raise an incident concerning an Assistant Inspector of Police, where will he go?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to draw your attention to the Memorandum of the Bill: “An Act to provide for the procedures by which individuals in both the private and public sector may in the public interest disclose information that relates to irregular, illegal or corrupt practices; to provide for the protection against victimisation of persons who make disclosures; and provide for related matters.” That is the object of this Bill. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to take it up from the ruling you have made that they are just receiving information. That is where I get back to my earlier point of having an apex body. If the RDC is just receiving information, where do they take it? Is it to the IGG, to the DPP, to the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity?

Now I can amend my earlier proposal, given the issues raised by hon. Migereko. If this is an issue of funding, let us just have an apex body at the headquarters only for a start where all those who get information can report to for processing. That can help us if the issue is about funding because we still have a problem now; if the RDC receives, he does not have the structures to handle. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. It seems some members have issues with RDCs but I would rather that we focus on the mandate that is given to RDCs in our laws. It has been said that we should give an opportunity to Ugandans to have a range of options. 

I would like to inform you that the strength of the Uganda Police has improved but these Assistant Inspectors of Police are not in every sub-county. In my sub-county called Bwijanga, the head is a sergeant. That is why I am telling you that we do not have to exaggerate the issue of Assistant Inspectors of Police because in some areas they are not there. The areas that have been unstable have had affirmative action. So, many areas in eastern and northern Uganda have Assistant Inspectors of Police as OCs of sub-county stations.

The RDCs have their own networks and systems. It is very clear that once this information is received and it is not going to be processed even by the Assistant Inspector of Police, the IGG officer or any other, you receive this information and it will be forwarded to the respective relevant institution. The institutions are already in place. The RDCs do not work in isolation; they are the chairpersons of the security committee at the district level and they can direct any person, including the Police, to inspect and investigate these cases. I want to plead, Madam Chairperson, that the RDCs should be part of the authorised officers. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to go back to the mischief that we are trying to cure with this law. It is about identifying the bad people and reporting what they are doing against the interest of the community.

MR GAGAWALA: It is a pity that hon. Alaso is thinking that an RDC is such a bad thing. She knows that we vote for allocations of money to the districts and actually, the RDC is the only channel whom the President can actually use to cause an arrest instantly for embezzlement of say drugs as it happened in Moroto. The RDC monitors and reports back to the person who controls the Ministry of Finance who happens to be the President. Even if Otto is the next President, he must have a representative at that level and that person for the time being in the law is the RDC. You cannot run away from the RDC as a vehicle for reporting back. There has been Police at this level for a long time, why is embezzlement still so rampant?

MR ODONGA OTTO: If you look at clause 4(3), it may help to solve this debate which may never be resolved. Under external disclosures they list bodies in which you can disclose information. We will not have any problem retaining the RDCs for purposes of disclosing information too. However, when we talk of an authorised officer to investigate, then there will be a problem. I see a problem because even that person who receives must carry out preliminary investigations. The mischief we are trying to cure is not to report to someone who cannot do anything.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Again, I implore honourable members to think beyond some of the challenges that we are experiencing. First of all, my impression is that the work of the RDC is not well understood. It is not only political; it goes beyond that. The RDC receives every person who belongs or who lives in that district irrespective of party affiliation and so on. The impression that we must really get rid of is one that says that the RDC, on receiving information, will want to know which political affiliation you belong to and then decide whether to accept that information you are providing or not. That is not how it works in the real world really, and therefore I would ask members to be comfortable with the RDC.

There are two which have been mixed up; one is the proposal which came from hon. Okupa to do with one central body. The truth is it cannot work. It is not provided for. We already have institutions that are constitutionally mandated to deal with corruption like the Inspectorate of Government and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. There are constitutional implications if we are to create a new body. There are financial implications that have not been understood.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Prime Minister, I saw the Attorney-General, who is the advisor of the government, leaving without my permission. Can he be whipped back because this is important?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Well, I was still making a point that those who are proposing that we have one centre are not thinking about the constitutional implications –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, you have just made a ruling directing somebody from the other side to ask the Attorney-General to return to the Chamber. Is the honourable Minister of State for Ethics and Integrity in order to continue pursuing his points with disregard to your ruling and command? Is he in order to ignore the directive given and proceed as if business is as usual? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I have directed the Prime Minister to ask his troops to do the needful and return the Attorney-General here. (Laughter) 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I have also given the necessary directives. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: I do not agree that you can read section IV of this Bill in isolation from section V. The interpretation tells us who the authorised officers are and then we are detailing them in clause 4(3) and then when you go to clause 5, it tells you what these authorised officers are doing. If for any reason we are convinced, like I am - although hon. Gagawala Wambuzi thinks I just have a bias to the RDCs. He likes me so much and he is my friend - that the RDCs do not have the professional capacity that is detailed in clause 5, you will then agree with us. 

It is not just merely receiving but it includes the investigation, impartiality, good faith, goodwill and all those things. If you are convinced like I am, then you will agree with us and go for a deletion of the Resident District Commissioners. However, if the argument that we want to be able to report anywhere is what we want to pursue, let us then include the LC Is, the chairpersons of burial groups and everybody and report to anybody ignoring their ability to handle the information that has been given to them.

MR OKUPA: I think the definition in the Bill is good enough and we can do away with the proposal of the committee. When you look at the Bill, the authorised officer means a Police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector of Police, an inspectorate officer of the Inspectorate of Government or any other person authorised by this Act to take receipt of disclosures. So, that other last part takes care of this. The issue of the RDCs being included or not can be delayed until we reach clause 4 other than us getting bogged now. Let the definition remain the way it is proposed in the Bill otherwise we shall not move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the committee chair.

MR MENHYA: I thank you. I want to point out to my colleague, hon. Alaso, that on page 10 under clause 8 (3), it reads as follows: “Where the authorised person to whom the disclosure is made determines that he or she does not have the capability to undertake the investigation, the person shall, within seven working days, refer the disclosure to a competent authority provided for in clause 4 (3) or the Minister.” 

In other words, if the RDC in his wisdom thinks that he cannot undertake the investigation, there is a way for that disclosure to be investigated by a competent authority. 

Of course some of these disclosures are technical. Assuming a disclosure is about an audit report and the RDC cannot carry out a financial audit, he knows where to take this disclosure for competent investigation. In other words, the disclosure that any investigator cannot handle has been provided for, for further investigation.  

DR NSABA BUTURO: I do concur with hon. Menhya. It is really important that we have already provided for that in the Bill. Even if we were to accept that an Assistant Inspector of Police at a sub-county level is included in our list, the truth of the matter is they may not have investigative skills and therefore there may be need to refer –(Interjection)– in other words, it is not important. The issue is not whether the officer we designate has the skills or not, it is provided for that we have somebody who is within reach of our people and I recommend that.

MS KABAKUMBA: I think there was an oversight and I want to thank the committee for noticing this. When you look at clause 4(3), it clearly states where external disclosures can be made - Inspectorate of Government, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Directorate of Ethics and Integrity and Resident District Commissioners. 

In the original Bill in the interpretation, the other three officers were missed out. It talks about the Assistant Inspector of Police to cater for the Police, inspectorate officer which caters for Inspectorate of Government but does not talk about the human rights officer, the RDC or the deputy RDC. I think the committee is improving on the Bill by moving this amendment to include these officers to cater for these institutions which have been named in 4(3). I believe they are in order, Madam Chairperson, and the amendment should be accepted. 

MS KIRYAPAWO: I have an addition to what the honourable minister has said. We are naming officers rather than just taking an institution. If you take the institution, they can pick any person with less responsibility and that is why we are naming officers. You cannot take it to any other person who is below the level of that officer. 

MR OKUPA: I have just told you that if we take it the way it is in the Bill, it reads “… any other person authorised by this Act to take receipt of disclosure.” Clause 4 lists the person to whom or institutions to which disclosure can be made; it is not just any person. It is specified there, so it does not arise at this point.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I want to remind you that we are dealing with opening channels to reporting irregular, illegal or corrupt practises. 

MR KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at Article 203 of the Constitution, which reads:

“There shall be for each district a Resident District Commissioner who shall be appointed by the President. 

(2) For a person to be appointed a Resident District Commissioner he or she shall be a citizen of Uganda and qualified to be a Member of Parliament.” 

So, there is that qualification. This is a reaction to hon. Alaso. If for any reason the current RDCs do not qualify, let the Members of Parliament bring it up for their disqualification. However, the Constitution is very clear on the qualification of that person to fill that office. 

It says further in (3)(a), “The functions of Resident District Commissioner are (a) to monitor the implementation of central and local government services in the district.” 

Corruption is one of those ills that eat up services in the districts. If this person who is supposed to monitor cannot be accessed over issues of corruption, then what is the role of this office? If anybody has any complaint about the office, let the Constitution be amended and the office is removed. However, as long as it is there and the functions are clearly defined, please let us accept –(Interjections)- no, I am not accepting information.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, may I suggest that we defer clause 1 and proceed to the others? 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Chairperson, “any other authorised officer” who hon. Okupa is trying to enquire about is in clause 18 under the powers and regulations of the Minister when he makes a statutory instrument. In (2) it says: “Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), regulations may be made under the sub-section for all or any of the following matters ….” So, the Minister in (2) can add other persons to whom disclosure may be made. The Minister can add that by statutory instrument.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Please, hon. Members, we are dealing with corruption. We are saying we are opening up channels for the public to inform where the problem is. Please accept it. Why not? We can include a committee of Parliament.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, as the mover of the Bill, on page 3 we made reference to an Assistant Inspector of Police. I think it was an omission on our part. On page 8 we should include the Assistant Inspectors of Police alongside those other officers mentioned. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But we cannot do that now. We are still handling clause 1.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Yes we are on clause 1, Madam Chairperson. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have a further amendment 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On clause 1?

MS ALASO: Yes. I would like to propose that on the list of authorised officers, we add officers of the National Environmental Management Authority. We are dealing with matters of public safety and where there is a breach of environmental impact assessments, we can report to NEMA. I would also like to further propose that the Equal Opportunities Commission becomes one of the institutions where disclosure can be done.

MR AMURIAT: I think to avoid the long list that this debate is tending to drive us to we could adopt what is in the Bill in its present form so that even without mentioning, we can then under clause 4 specify institutions that could appoint officers under the Act. If not, we are going to have an endless list. I could also come up and propose sub-county chiefs or the Bishop or even the archdeacon or the clergy. So, where are we going to end with this? I think the authors of this Bill suspected that the list could be endless and so they just mentioned a few that they thought were important and said the Act would then disclose others who would be authorised. Really, we do not need to specify all the titles, otherwise we shall have a full page of officers in the Act that we think should be given the responsibility of receiving information from whistleblowers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the clause -(Interjections)- on the first one, the first amendment, I  put the question that clause - it is not 1(a) it is not 1(b)- but there are other areas of interpretation. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, even if we are to adopt the position of the committee, it is bad drafting because it says, “… an authorised officer means a police officer not below the rank of Inspector-General of Police, and Assistant ….” If it were good drafting the way we were taught -(Interjections)- you would say, “… an authorised officer means an officer ….” You do not tie the first one to the Police because you are listing several other institutions whose officers you want to target. So, it would be, “… an authorised officer means an officer ….” Then you could have Police, the Inspectorate et cetera. Now you are using authorised officer and then you are authorising institutions -(Interjections)- yes, it is badly drafted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the Attorney-General to help us on the formulation? 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I do not see anything wrong with the drafting because you can have a police officer not below the rank of Assistant Inspector-General of Police and you can have an Inspectorate Officer of the Inspectorate of Government, a human rights officer, etc.

I am sorry I do not see the mischief which we are trying to cure by dropping the specificity of police officer, inspectorate officer and these officers who are specified and you use the general term of officer. This is specific to these institutions. I do not see anything wrong with it.

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, in addition to what the Members have stated and to incorporate their views, I would add this at the end, “Deputy Resident District Commissioner or any such officer designated by the institution authorised to take receipt of these closures under this Act” -(Interjections)- We are incorporating the views that you have put here instead of enumerating the offices which should receive the disclosures. So, we are saying, “…or any such officer designated by the institution …” -(Interjections)– no, this is the authorised officer -(Interjections)- this is an amendment -(Interjections)- no, it cannot be a wrong amendment because it is to correct the amendment. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: What we are saying is that you have to be precise in the definition section. You cannot define the categories you want and then leave another opening. It ceases to be a definition section. So, I would rather encourage you to drop your amendment unless you want to add more people. For example if you are saying, “a man” you must say he is a man and not any other person who resembles a man -(Laughter)- so we need to be a little precise. 

MR LUKWAGO: In addition to that, Madam Chairperson, we should avoid ambiguity in legislative drafting. When you talk of any other officer designated by that institution, it is very ambiguous. And when I look at this proposed amendment, there is this proposal about a human rights officer with the Uganda Human Rights Commission. You see, if you are to be specific, you say, maybe a commissioner with Uganda Human Rights Commission. It should be specific. You cannot say a human rights officer because who are those officers in Uganda Human Rights Commission? The titles and designations in the Human Rights Commission are known and they are specific; we have the commissioners - so maybe we should say a commissioner with Uganda Human Rights Commission, so that it is specific. But you cannot simply say “any officer”. I think there are no officers there. So, we should be specific and clear when it comes to definitions of these -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can I propose that we stand over clause 1? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us go to clause 2.

Clause 2

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, on clause 2, there is 2(1)(b) that says that, “A person may make a disclosure of information where that person reasonably believes that the information tends to show that a public officer has failed, refused, or neglected to comply with any legal obligation to which that officer is subject.” This clause is too wide. If you say the public officer has failed to comply with any legal obligation, when we are dealing with corruption, there should be an element of fraud or evil mind, so it could be a minor breach and you take it in this category. Because they are saying, “Failure to comply with any legal obligation ….” It should be qualified. There should be an adjective here that if a public officer has deliberately - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, then you want to bring in elements of evidence at this stage. This afternoon hon. Okupa told us about the failure of the medical officers to order drugs, and they sat on the money; now you want hon. Okupa to say that it was deliberate – isn’t it enough to say that he has got the money and yet we have not got drugs for six months? We are dealing with criminals. Why shouldn’t I be able to tell a public officer what is happening?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, hon. Lukwago is on record for accusing Government of not doing enough about corruption. But now on the Floor of the House he seems to be defending people who have corrupt tendencies by saying that we have to prove before you talk about it. I think he should understand that we are trying to use every means possible. 

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to know whether the whole of clause 1 has been left out because we have got 1(a) up to 1(f).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have stood over the whole of clause 1; we shall come back to it. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, on 2(b), I am concerned that even the private employers – it provides that, “Where the information tends to show that a public officer has failed ….” I am thinking that even in the private sector there may be people who may fail to comply with their legal obligations, for example, with taxes and so on. So I am proposing that if it is okay, we would provide an amendment there to cover public officers and private employers so that we are able to disclose people who are not public officers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, do you have any objection, because the memorandum reads, “The object of the Bill is to create an enabling environment for both citizens and non-citizens to disclose freely the information of corrupt or improper conduct both in the public and private sectors.” 

MS OBURU: No objection, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, clause 3(3) reads, “A person who makes an anonymous disclosure shall not be entitled to protection conferred under this Act ….” I see that as redundant; it is not adding any value. It is like making an anonymous disclosure risky because it may be known eventually. So I do not see what value 3(3) is adding other than scaring those who may want to do anonymous disclosure. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if it is anonymous, it is like writing a letter and sending it to the RDC’s office, with no name.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Then it is redundant because it says, “A person”, which means the person has to be first known.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But how can you protect someone who is not known?

MR LUKWAGO: Madam Chairperson, the anonymous person is already protected. When you look at 3(2), it say, “Anything in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting the making of anonymous disclosures”. So, if it is allowed for one to make anonymous disclosures, why are you striping this anonymous person of this protection?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lukwago, supposing we write several letters with no names and then when the person is grabbed, I then turn up and say, “In fact, it was me who wrote that anonymous letter, and Prof. Kabwegyere also says, “It was me.”

MR AMURIAT: Instead, Madam Chairperson, I would like to plead that people making anonymous disclosure be protected under this Act – an anonymous disclosure may take the form of a telephone call. Today, in the world of ICT, it is possible to trace such a person. I may make the call thinking I cannot be traced, then some rich person involved in corruption may go to MTN or any other service provider and finds out that it is Oboi Amuriat who made the call. 

If we pass this Bill in this form, then we are endangering those people who may assume they are under cover and at a letter stage may be discovered. So, I would like to propose and amendment that we make a provision for such people to be protected when they are discovered. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, if the Member reads the Bill carefully, I know that in the first impression, one gets a sense that it is imbalances, because we make it very clear that the person processing the information has obligations and if he abuses the trust that the report places in them, there are penalties. 

But we must also say that the person who is the reporter must also exercise responsibility and that is why in clause 6, we talk about procedures for making a disclosure. We are trying to make it clear to the source that we want to guarantee your privacy but there has to be an element of responsibility. 

That is why we why we would go through what is meant in clause 6 – it is not possible for somebody who picks a phone and does not tell us who she is or the address – we think it is important. Even if we are promising privacy, you have responsibility. This will encourage those who are genuine to come forth and those who are not genuine to stay away. 

If you do believe that your case is genuine, and you have information; then come forward. That is why the person I interact with has the responsibility not to reveal my identity.

MR AMURIAT: I would like to bring this argument into context by using an example. In Teso today, there is an operation where the authorities are trying to seize illegal fire arms. When it is suspected that there are wrong elements in a village, the security personnel go to that village, but for reasons know to us, people fear to reveal the people holding fire arms illegally. 

So, that practice has been to invite the village members to a meeting and ask them to volunteer in writing to give the name of the person they think is terrorising the village. So they say, “It is Amuriat, Kabakumba or Otto.” Whereas that system seems effective, often, members of the community are followed by their handwritings. They tally the names, the more votes you get, the more of a suspect you are. It is a local way that exemplifies how the whistle blowing is going to be done. So, in my opinion, we need to protect people who may think they are anonymous yet they are not under any cover. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to run a Government – is it in order for the hon. Member to think that you can run a country on rumour – because you can have people sending in information and you have to protect all of them. So, is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, let us proceed with the Bill. What does the owner of the Bill say? 

MR MENHYA: Madam Chairperson, the procedure for making a disclosure is very clear. It may be made orally or in writing, but the most important of all is 2. All forms of information communication technology may be used to convey a disclosure; then 3:
    (a) The disclosure shall contain as far as practicable, the full name, address and occupation of the whistle blowers.
    (b) The name and particulars of the person alleged to have committed, who is committing or is about to commit the impropriety
    (c) The time and place where the alleged impropriety is taking place; took place or is likely to take place. 

So, everything is here. And for that matter, we need to know the person who is disclosing and the person who is alleged to have committed the offence. Therefore, I pray that we leave it as it.

MR ODONGA OTTO: So I raised the issue that 3(3) will be redundant. It seems the contradiction comes in where an anonymous person is discovered. You can be anonymous for two weeks, but my concern is, the section says, “The person who makes an anonymous disclosure shall not be entitled to protection.” Who is that person? I am proposing that we delete clause 3 so that if someone makes an anonymous disclosure and is eventually discovered, he can be given protection, we cannot just leave him to suffer.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, I listened to the field example from Teso on reporting on illegal arms. This is happening because at the moment, there is no legal framework for receiving whistle blower information and for protecting whistle blowers. This is a self help kind of effort and it is good as far as it goes.

But now this Bill is saying in the long title that this will be, “An Act to provide for the procedures by which individuals in both the private sector and the public sector may in the public interest disclose information”. You are now providing for the legal procedures and the legal procedure provided is in clause 6. This is what you will do if you want to make a disclosure.

You look at clause 14 and it says that, “If somebody has complied with that procedure in clause 6, then the receiving officer who discloses the identity of the whistleblower commits an offence. If you go back to clause 3(2) and (3), they actually tally with those provisions. Before, there was a law but now there is going to be a law which sets up a procedure and I think the law should be allowed to be tried out. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, clause 4(1) reads, “Disclosures of impropriety may be made internally to an employer of the whistleblower in cases where the whistleblower’s complaint pertains to his or her place of employment”. I think I find this vague. I am disclosing about my employer and you are asking me to whistle blow to the employer? I do not know whether this is what this means really.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether the minister has understood her problem.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, I thought it is very clear and we have provided for a range of institutions that one may report to. If you wish to report outside your own institution, presumably you have no confidence with those within your organisation, there is a choice and that is why we are talking about “may”, implying that really it is optional. You can choose to use the officer who may have been designated within your institution or you may use other institutions.

MR OKUPA: I am on clause 4. I am moving that we delete “Any Resident District Commissioner” and insert the “Parliamentary Accountability Committee” as (e) and (d) justices of peace [MS KABAKUMBA: “Which one?”] You are not aware? (Laughter) The Attorney-General will help you, hon. Kabakumba [MS KABAKUMBA: “What is an accountability committee?”] The one that wants you. (Laughter)

Those are the amendments I am  moving that we include because when I was reading these other documents which the committee was referring to; the Brazilian, the US, the Congress is one of those bodies where [MS KABAKUMBA: “Then it is Parliament”.] Then you make amendments. I think you need to bring hon. Kabakumba to order because that is not the way we communicate in the House. If you have something useful to add, you get up and say, “I give you information”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What does the chair or the minister say about that amendment?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, we did not think about Parliament. If we were to, perhaps Members may want to consider either the Speaker or Clerk; rather the institution of Parliament meaning those two officers. Otherwise, we would find it not quite clear how the parliamentary committees would be relevant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, what I can say is practically we have been receiving a certain amount of whistle blowing.

MR OKUPA: I am saying so because in this 4, it talks about institutions that is why I was saying Parliament. We could possibly leave it at that because this section talks of institutions. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Yes, Madam Chairperson, Parliament as an institution would be accepted.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I think it is at this point that I will move my earlier amendments that I had proposed that we include the National Environment Management Authority as an institution and the Equal Opportunities Commission. You know these are watch dogs in our Constitutional framework and I think it would do a good job if we also whistle blow to them.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, earlier on somebody had wondered whether we would be having an endless list. I do see NEMA coming in, I do see others coming in and I do believe that we need a reasonable number and I thought once we have - because we have already conceded on the issue of Parliament, I do believe that that is broad enough to give our people enough choice, Madam Chair.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am disturbed by the Minister who has just argued that we want to broaden avenues for disclosure and yet the Constitution provides for NEMA as a watchdog on environmental matters. Why would they call the Opportunities Commission on matters of employment and affirmative action and yet the same Minister comes to say that he does not want them when a few minutes ago he wanted us to broaden involvement. Is the minister really in order - it is a point of order hon. Minister, you wait for the ruling -(Laughter)    

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not really know whether I can rule because I have not yet got the context, can the Minister answer because I have not yet got the context and this is your Bill.   

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chair, I do understand the import of what hon. Members are making but the question is, how many of the institutions we know are available in this country that are in the category of NEMA are we going to accept should come on board? Because I do see if we say NEMA, a whole range of other similar regulatory bodies are going to come forward and say, “We too want to be included.” So, I do believe that what we have now is sufficient. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I would like that you put the question because I have moved a motion for an amendment and nobody else has proposed any other thing, I have just proposed those two. So if you would put the question as it is in line with our Rules of Procedure, if I lose it I lose, I have no problem. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: If the debate here is to help us get consensus, my thinking is that these bodies we have listed; IGG, DPP, Human Rights Commission, Directorate of Ethics and Integrity are some how related to Justice, Law and Order, that is my thinking – they are somehow related to Justice, Law and Order. So, they oversee all the other institutions including NEMA and Police.  So, I would see a little complication on my side - it is my personal view- of bringing other bodies which are not specialised in issues of justice, law and order to also start doing this particular work. So, I would personally lobby my good sister that the moment Parliament is brought in, virtually we as Parliament have all the actors on stage and all the powers to investigate NEMA, if any one reports that they are not doing their job diligently. So I was just seeing it that way. No, for the RDC Okupa has already moved for its deletion.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, these bodies are also constitutional bodies, would it harm your Bill if? For instance, when somebody was constructing on top of the sewer, supposing we had had a whistleblower to say, there is this problem, does it harm the Bill?

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chairperson, that case you are quoting should have attracted NEMA’s attention even before but there is internal disclosure. All these institutions including NEMA can be disclosed to internally. But for the external disclosure, I want to really plead with Members and my colleagues that there have been several amendments, formal and informal, that we maintain the list and add on an “I” to include the institution of Parliament. And we stop at that and encourage Members either to come to Parliament or go to these other institutions. I beg to move that –(Interjections)- for them they were deleting RDC, we are not going to allow it –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I doubt whether our Rules of Procedure allow you to move a motion on top of a motion, which has not been disposed of. Because I have moved a motion and I would like to hear the final verdict. I really believe that these are constitutional bodies, why would the Minister exhibit such phobia for provisions that are in the Constitution that help them do their work and do it better? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just one minute. You know like hon. Kabakumba was saying, “External disclosure may be made to the following institutions ….” The moment we insert for example NEMA and Equal Opportunities Commission, assuming we inserted it here, it means I, Odonga Otto can leave Pader, abandon all these other established bodies and head directly to NEMA to investigate an issue of abuse of office in Pader like stealing school facility grants -(Interjections)- no, that is my thinking. So the moment the body is listed, you are entitled to report to any of the bodies of your choice. [MS ALASO: “Yes”.] Yes. So, keeping the list restricted to those bodies, which are related to Justice, Law and Order would help. Otherwise tomorrow someone will report stealing school facilities grant to NEMA offices and they are already entitled under the Act to do something about it, which would be a problem.  

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I know that hon. Otto is a lawyer and he understands the word “may” and the word “may” opens options to the extent possible really. And I do not know whether this Bill we are working on is defined in the memorandum as just a thing about the Justice Law and Order Sector or it is about helping us get more involved in whistle blowing. And whistle blowing about any matter whether it is health, whether it is environment, I would not like to know; I should be able to whistle blow. I do not want to narrow the Bill down and make it a justice, law and order matter. 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: No. the matter, Madam Chairperson as the distinguished lady on the other side has said, the matter does not stop at the justice, law and order field; it doesn’t. it encompasses all other fields but the field of NEMA is so sensitive, it is so exclusive, it is so huge and so important t this country that including it here would definitely not be harmful; not at all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, can I draw your attention to page 14, you know the drafters of this Bill envisaged that there could be other institutions. If you look at 18(2)(b), “The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations for purposes of carrying out … without prejudice, regulations may be made under that section for all or any of the following matters … further disclosure procedures, other persons to whom disclosures may be made”. So it was anticipated. The minister envisaged that these are neither the only people nor institutions to whom disclosure can be made and left it open. So -

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, I think that is a very wise conclusion. Mind you this is something new and because it is new, I can envisage a situation where the minister may say, “Or by the way, we can add this or do this”. That is why section 18 provides for the minister to make regulations. Therefore I want to implore members to accept things as they are. If we do find that there is need of a radical nature that may require me or the minister to come back to the House, that may be the case but that is already provided for in these regulations that the minister may make.

PROF. ANOKBONGGO: With due respect to the Minister, when he comes back to this Parliament as far as environment is concerned, a lot of damage would have been made. If NEMA is mentioned specifically here concerning any pollution going on and being hidden, I think NEMA would take precautions. Environment is so important that it will actually modify our way of living in this country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, in the course of my work I have already been receiving whistle blowers. One of the members here is doing some research on industrial pollution already even here in Kampala so issues of environment are not small issues. Minister, this is not going to change the structure of your bill. Maybe it will help the country to know that we have another channel where we can report people who are polluting the environment, our roads or schools.

Supposing you put a factory near a hospital and then you cause death? I don’t know. It’s your Bill, Minister I am just trying to help you.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chairperson, your wise counsel is very well known and I am not going to disagree following that suggestion you have made. I concede on the issue of Parliament and NEMA.

MR BADDA: Madam Chairperson, before you put the question to this matter, when you look at this list, it is more or less listing institutions handling matters of a general nature but if we start importing institutions handling specific disciplines, there are so many specific disciplines like education, health and environment which are not here but the ones that are listed here are more or less those that are handling matters of a general nature. That is why we are saying that for these ones, the whistle blower will be doing external disclosure but when you do it within the specific discipline like NEMA; that will be internal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, supposing I am an employee in a factory where we pollute in the night, should I be allowed to go and inform NEMA quietly? I can’t tell my boss as I am working there. Then I go and tell NEMA, you know at night this is what we do. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, we are sitting on the same side with hon. Badda and the minister who is piloting the Bill has conceded to amendments. It looks to be irregular; I don’t know what happened to the Leader of Government Business. It looks to be irregular to me for a member on the same side to be opposing his minister, maybe he should cross over, I don’t know. I think it has been sorted out by the minister himself.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 as I had moved is talking of the institution. I just wanted to get the clarification as to whether the Resident District Commissioner is an institution because we are saying external disclosures of impropriety may be made to any of the following institutions. I just wanted that clarification because that was my justification for deleting as it is not an institution.

MS KABAKUMBA: It is an office and an institution so we can say any Resident District Commissioner office because the officer - this is an institution and it is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you say, “Office of the Resident District Commission”?

MS KABAKUMBA: Yes, we concede.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Kabakumba agrees with me that the way it is here - Resident District Commissioner is not an institution but if it is put the way she is saying; Office of the Resident District Commissioner, it is different from what is written here. That is what you should have said but not to say I am wrong.

MR ODONGA OTTO: For drafting, I would beg and insist that we include NEMA but the drafting should be NEMA in cases of environment. I can take this further because I don’t want someone to go and report someone stealing school chalk to NEMA. Let us tie the hands of NEMA to the activities that relate to them so that the other institutions can focus on the broader aspects. So it will just be NEMA in cases of environment. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I think that type of drafting really confines us. It is like saying that to the directorate of human rights, you strictly go on human rights issues. I think these institutions should in one way or another have the capacity to channel some of the matters that are not directly under their mandate. But we brought in the environmental issues knowing they are cross cutting. Today, it will be about a school that is built in a swamp; tomorrow it will be about a hospital that is badly disposing waste, but it could also be that they will be able to channel what is not appropriately theirs. If you begin qualifying, then we have to qualify what we are giving to everybody in these institutions. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member, we had made progress.

MS ALASO: I am making it better.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Imagine somebody going to NEMA and saying, “The cement which was brought yesterday has disappeared in Bujenje Primary School.” (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, from the way I perceive this, I think we don’t need to labour much on specifying matters related to this because we have listed the institutions. Definitely, if I went to report the issue of chalk to NEMA, NEMA would forward this to the IGG to handle because they know these are the bodies. So, we may not necessarily need to go ahead to specify matters relating to the environment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that two additions be made to clause 3, namely, the institution of Parliament, the National Environment Management Authority and the Office of the RDC. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that a new sub clause 5(7) be inserted to read as follows: “The minister may, upon receipt of a dismissed complaint presented by the whistle blower cause fresh investigations into the complaint or reject the complaint upon being satisfied that the complaint has no merit to be carried out and shall inform the whistle blower of the action taken and the outcome of such action.”

The justification is for clarity to a whistleblower as to the action or inaction taken with respect to an issue in which he or she was concerned. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have a problem with that, Mr Minister?

DR NSABA BUTURO: No, I have no problem.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended by the introduction of a new sub clause 7.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, clause 9(2), protection from victimisation. We propose to add in the opening statement the following: “A whistleblower shall be considered victimised on account of making a protected disclosure.” The justification is to ensure that actions listed under sub-section 2(a) are attributable to victimisation resulting from the disclosure. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I do not know what value the word “protected” will add if we would just leave it as “on account of making disclosure…” because there are two kinds of disclosures now; the one in which you are protected, and the one in which you are not. So, we could ignore the word “protected” from your amendment. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at page 5 of the Bill, there is a definition of protected disclosure. I am not sure whether hon. Odonga Otto is opposed to this definition. It is provided for; it is not like we are imagining it. 

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert in a new clause and re-number sub-sections: 
“(iv) Demoted;
(v) Harassed;
(vi) Intimidated;
(vii) Redundant;
(viii) Threatened with any of the matters set out in (i) to (v). 
(ix) Subjected to a discriminatory ….” 

Clause 9(3), insert “Inspectorate of Government or the Uganda Human Rights Commission for redress.”

Clause 9(6) insert the phrase “of victimisation” as directed. The justification is to make it clear that the complaint intended is that of victimisation and not the disclosure made.

DR NSABA BUTURO: I want to reject the committee’s proposal. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Oh, I am sorry, Madam Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

MS OBURU: I would like to replace the word “Police” where it appears in the provision with the word “state” so that we read it as, “may request state protection and the state shall provide the protection considered adequate.”

DR NSABA BUTURO: I am objecting to this because the state mandates the Police to protect the citizens. So, I think what is contained in the Bill would be sufficient.

MR ODANGA OTTO: I would agree with the committee chairperson because they can even give a solider to protect me. It does not necessarily have to be the Police. So, broadening it may help Otherwise, next time I will end up in court arguing that it should have been the Police, how come I have, say the prisons?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: You know, Madam Chairperson, it is the Police which represents the state in matters of life protection. The duty of the Police is to protect life and property. If they gave you the Army to protect you, that can be done through the Inspector General of Police. He is the one who will provide you with protection after measuring the threat under which you are in. He can even give you a battalion of the Army, but it is IGP who will decide what kind of protection you should be given.

There is no point really for mentioning the state because the state means you now even ring the President; you can even go to any minister. On matters of law and order; life and property; it is the Police. The state is implied through the Police. So, it should be left as it is. I agree with the minister even if I am a member of the committee.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Sometimes the Government side puzzles me because this report must have been previewed by the minister and there should have been some consensus between the minister and the committee, because there is a good reason why the committee is replacing Police with the state; because the state has more options than the Police. For me, unfortunately, I agree with the chairperson of the committee. The marginal note should read state protection rather than Police protection.

Police is too restricted, because you can approach other arms of the state. Supposing the Police is not there at that moment? I am sorry, as far as I am concerned, but I support the committee on this and I disagree with the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I think the state is bigger than the Police.

MR OKUPA: I agree with what the Attorney-General has said. Clause 11(2); I am moving that we delete it. It says that “family” for the purposes of this section means spouse, father - I think this definition should be removed. We cannot bring the definition now unless it is clarified. 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, there is nothing unusual about having a definition within a particular section of a law. That it is not being done for general purposes, but it is being done for a specific purpose, and for this one we are talking about the purpose of state protection. We are not abolishing other definitions of “family” in other legal frameworks, but for purposes of according protection here; this is the meaning of the family and I think that is proper.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I thank you for those honours. I had a new amendment to be inserted between clause 13 and clause 14 in line with what hon. Kibirige Kasule was saying on the issues of motivating. I am seeing a situation where if people can report and they get a percentage of what they have reported, people will be more motivated than hiding. 

I was bringing an amendment to insert a new clause 14 – the marginal note would be, “Remuneration and Rewards” which I have just imported from the IGG Act that the minister read earlier. So, it will read, “Where information leads to recovery of proceeds in liquidated terms, the whistleblower shall be entitled to a reward of the sum of 10 percent so recovered.” I can repeat it. “Where information leads to recovery of proceeds in liquidated terms, the whistleblower shall be entitled to a reward of the sum of 10 percent so recovered.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Member, I would want you to look at the head title, Part VI – Offences and Penalties. I do not know whether it really fits here, or you may want to create Part VII – Rewards. We are dealing with offences and penalties in Part VI.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: No, I was inserting – oh, you mean to say that clause 14 will come in Part VII? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Unless you create a Part VII.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Okay. We shall create a Part VII, but at least I have given notice that there is something I have on “Rewards” or I wait for the “Offences and Penalties” because these are the last things. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because you brought it as clause 14 which is under “Offences and Penalties”, I do not know whether you want to create a Part VII to deal with “Rewards”.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I accept that I create a Part VII on the issue of rewards.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, after clause 17, should we create a Part VII before miscellaneous?  

MR OKUPA: Perhaps “Offences and Penalties” should be Part VII and then “Rewards” comes in Part VI. 

MR MENHYA: I want to agree in principle with hon. Odonga Otto for creating a clause for rewarding those individuals who whistle blow. However, I want to add that it is important that we only remunerate those people who may disclose useful information leading to recovery of monies and not any other disclosures.

MR ODONGA OTTO: That is why we are saying, “in liquidated terms”; that is the legal term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think let us first deal with Part VI. I now put the question that clause 14 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable chair.

MS OBURU: I propose to put an amendment that, “A person who purports to make a disclosure containing information,” because it was saying that, “A person who knowingly makes”. Instead we should say, “purports to make”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Why? 

MS OBURU: The justification is that the falsity of the information comes out clearly from the beginning of the clause as false information cannot be a disclosure.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But if you read the head title, it says, “Making false disclosures,” the “purport” cannot come because you do it deliberately. You cannot purport to make a disclosure because you either make it or do not make it. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: I reject this proposal by the committee and the justification is that the offence will be distorted since the person is required to have knowingly made disclosure containing false information. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now Part VII. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I thank you for the opportunity. I move that a new Part VII be inserted in the marginal note to read, “Remuneration and Rewards”. It is just two clauses and one of them would read, “Where information leads to recovery of proceeds in liquidated terms, the whistleblower shall be entitled to an equivalent of 10 percent of the sum so recovered.” –(Interjections)- yes; it would motivate. Part B, “Where the entitlement delays for a period of six months from the date of the recovery of the liquidated sum, the whistleblower shall be at liberty to enforce the same in the court of law.” –(Interjections)– 

My justification is this: you know the moment people know that if you report someone who has stolen Shs 100 million and you get Shs 10 million, these bodies are going to be overwhelmed getting people who think that they are going to go home with something and, therefore, it will cease to be a risky business. It becomes like a kind of employment - if 10 percent is so much, we can always debate on it and the exact provision exists in the IGG Act although the only problem with the IGG Act is that it does not have the second clause which I have inserted. 

For example, if we have recovered Shs 10 billion like from hon. Kabakumba Masiko –(Laughter)- I am entitled to 10 percent. I can go to court and say, “I led to the recovery of this sum and Government is delaying to pay me.” This way, the court can enforce it, and it cannot have the same impact like the clause in the IGG Act. If we could try to motivate our Ugandans to see reporting as a job for the many unemployed youth, probably this law may succeed. I beg to move and pray for Members’ support, including my colleague who brought that brilliant idea. 

MS OBURU: I have no problem with rewarding those that have helped Government recover money. However, this should be the net of the costs involved in recovering this money. Remember that we are providing security and investigating and the 10 percent could be too much although we can give a 1 percent –(Interjections)- in section 2, six months may be too short because if you are going to calculate the costs involved, then I think we can leave out section 2 and reduce the percentage to 1 percent. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, I oppose the proposal moved by hon. Oburu of 1 percent, but I agree with her saying 10 percent of the net. Let me give an example. In Uganda Revenue Authority when this was brought up, later, it was abused by the officers.  They would get the money and not pass it to the informers. However, we were overwhelmed by the information we were getting and the improvement in the tax collection. So, let us stick to the 10 per cent of the net of what is recovered. 

I saw it work in Uganda Revenue Authority because 10 percent is not much. If Shs 100 million – it also involves someone risking to come up – so if it is Shs 100 million and you deduct the cost, it may go down to Shs 80 million or Shs 70 million and someone gets Shs 7 million. The regulations should go into details to specify this. I really support the 10 percent of the net recovered.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, whereas the principle seems to be right, I would like to emphasise the fact that it is every citizen’s national duty to fight corruption. I think it would be wrong for us to sort of bribe people into volunteering information or even paying for that information. The culture that we shall be building in this country will be that of people wanting money to provide whatever information is available to them. So, once we start this, even those offenders or wrong-doers will become clever. They could pay 20 percent once they are aware there is somebody who could volunteer information to the state. You will find them as smooth-operators. I bet you are not going to arrest anybody doing anything wrong.

The other discredit to the argument of my brother hon. Odonga Otto is the fact that he would like to make this House believe that those who whistle blow in respect to bigger thieves should earn more money. I think even those who whistle blow and their whistle blowing results into the arrest of those who evaded little taxes or even steal little money still contribute probably equally or even more than those who may cause bigger thieves to be arrested. 

If we must consider this amendment, rather than think in terms of percentage, we should talk in terms of absolute figures. We should talk about some currency points. In that way, we are going to treat corruption at all levels; different magnitudes of corruption; in the same way and we would be emphasising that corruption at whatever level and whatever amount, is corruption. We are not addressing corruption in this case.

MR MAWIYA: Madam Chair, thank you so much. I agree with hon. Odonga Otto, and I support his proposal because whistle blowing is a risky venture as you have already alluded to. Giving it 10 percent is little because –(Interjections)- I will qualify my argument.  After all, all this money will have gone for nothing to whoever will have taken it. Giving 10 percent to somebody who is risking his or her whole life is an impetus to the service done. 

I would also disagree with my colleague, hon. Amuriat, who said that we should put it in clear terms. There is no clear term regarding percentages because what currency points are you going to put? There are various magnitudes of embezzlement. For instance, one may steal Shs 100 million; another one Shs 1 million and another – you cannot mention every amount stolen. So, percentage can describe any amount you can talk about. That is my submission.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. On page 10, the committee report clearly said - borrowing from my brother’s ideas - Brazil and USA do it by percentage. I do not know which other example would be used other than the two that have been mentioned by the committee. They have referenced countries from which we always borrow ideas. You can adjust the percentage but the percentage will be the most appropriate way of apportioning a reward to the whistleblower.

Also, some of these organisations we have worked for, we had information to give as whistle blowers, but once we realised that there is no benefit, we did not attempt; yet billions of shillings have been lost. If we put a percentage and a time-bound element, then it will be too good like hon. Odonga Otto has suggested. I thank you. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chair, the issue of rewards is extremely attractive. I happen to be one of those who believe we should seriously think about it. But at this point, we in Government have not given it any serious thought. I can imagine the financial implications of this; they need to be very carefully studied. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: From the recoveries? 

DR NSABA BUTURO: I wish that you allow us to discuss this and come with proposals. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I would want to encourage you as we discuss – you know in my other life as a lawyer, I have often met people who feel that if somebody is convicted and he/she goes to prison, it is the state, which benefits. They end up asking, “Okay, he was convicted, but how did I benefit from that conviction? I am still in pain.” That person has worked for the state.  That is the mentality among the population. I think – 

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Let me add to what you are saying. The reason why most people are not reporting defilement cases is because they feel that they do not benefit; like the family of the child who was defiled. They find it better to negotiate with the offender so that they can benefit instead of taking the offender to the courts of law and possibly follow the normal procedures.

I feel if a whistle blower knows that there is some kind of benefit, they will be motivated, then sufficiently report and blow the whistles. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chair, whereas it would seem an incentive where money is involved, it could be a disincentive where there is no money involved. For example, some of these managers who would like to have sex in order to promote people; or lecturers who want sex in order to give - it is happening everywhere and there is no monetary value attached to that. What percentage are you going to give to a whistle blower who discovers that there is a manager or a professor who is giving marks in exchange for sex? It is an abomination; it is something that is so painful. You cannot quantify it. So, what business do I have going to report such a person if I am his student yet there is no commission? What commission in terms of sex will be given to me? Somebody could think of it that way. 

I would like to plead with this House to have some kind of single standard when we talk about whistle blowing. If we are going to exercise double standards, we are going to endanger the effectiveness of the law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But why don’t we allow the minister to look at it? He could look at the report and see how it could be improved.

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, I just wanted to say that the act of whistle blowing tantamounts to some patriotism. Recently, we passed money for patriotism, so we have to send the correct signal of the kind of society we want to create. Do we want to create a society where people no longer have patriotism and it is just a question of them getting something? What exactly do we want to send as a message in regard to the Shs 10 billion we have just passed for patriotism? 

MR OKUPA: We have even seen countries where patriotism is high and they are giving rewards. You have just given us your position; so, I still stand by that position. It is good the minister is going to look at it. But I had wanted to also bring – yesterday I had discussed with the minister – I remember afterwards, I brought it up here that we also need a timeframe within which the information is provided. I should not bring information that Otto stole Shs 1 billion when it is gone. There should be a timeframe within which this whistleblower should give information.

Also, reading the documents from those countries that have been referred to, Brazil and USA, there is also a timeframe for investigation once a whistleblower has given information. They give 240 days within which the investigation should be completed. So, we could also look at those areas such that when the minister comes tomorrow or next week, we see how we could incorporate it in the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we request the minister to review that proposed part vii and then report back in the next meeting. So, let us go to 18.

Clause 18
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 do stand part – 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at clause 18(2)(b), I think the minister needs power not only to include other persons, but other institutions or persons. Thank you.

MS OBURU: Madam Chairperson, we would like to insert a new clause 18 - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Another clause 18?

MS OBURU: Okay, call it clause 19, if we have clause 18.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Of the original part vii?

MS OBURU: Of the original part vii -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But let us finish with clause 18. I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

MS OBURU: Madam Chair, I would like to insert a new clause called clause 19.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it new?

MS OBURU: Yes. I want it immediately after clause 18 to provide as follows - This is offences and penalties - “An authorised officer, who unlawfully takes no action upon receipt of a disclosure made to him or her, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding five years or a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or both.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the justification?

MS OBURU: To ensure that upon receipt of a disclosure, the authorised officer acts on the disclosure as provided for in this law. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have any objection? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No objection? Okay, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.     
       
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

The Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

MR OKUPA: Clause 1, since now we have already accepted the office of the RDC, I think even clause 1 now – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there nothing contentious? 

MR OKUPA: Unless someone has something contentious to bring. 

MR AMURIAT: While we accept the office of the RDC, we need to specify the officer because these are authorised officers. Which officer in the RDC’s office do we think -(Interruptions)– the RDC himself? Is it the RDC and the deputy or just the RDC?  What is Government saying? 

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think the amendment was very clear. It is the RDC or the deputy RDC. That one is clear. But since we agreed to add on Parliament and NEMA, I think we also need to define the officers or the officer in Parliament who will be given this information. I suggest the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, and a NEMA officer at the rank of principal NEMA officer –(Interruption)- The officer should be at the rank of principal environmental officer.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay minister? Is that okay in clause 1? 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chair, I am not quite clear. Maybe my colleague would want to say that again because we have not done that with the other offices –(Interruption)- We have not –(Interjection)- Yes, office of the RDC - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have. We have a Police officer at the rank of Inspector - 

DR NSABA BUTURO: Yes, Madam Chair, I concede. That is fine. Thank you.   
 
MR OKUPA: On the issue of NEMA, I think let us put it to the head of the institution, that is, the Executive Director, to decide other than just us saying the principal environment officer. There are so many principal environmental officers. So, let us put it to the Executive Director, the one who will assign or delegate. 

Just like -(Interjections)- Parliament you did decide on classified information. You picked Members who would look at –(Interjections)- I remember the late Dr Okulo Epak was one of those who would look at the classified expenditure. It was not everyone; not even those on the Public Accounts Committee; but the Office of the Speaker picked a few members. So, let us leave it to the Executive Director of NEMA who will be the one to -(Interruption) 

MS OBURU: Madam Chair, I think that is fine. Yes, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that –

MS OBURU: There are other sub-sections. Madam Chair, we propose clause 1(b): “‘Employee’ means a person who has or had entered into a contract of service; an apprenticeship or contract for services with an employer under this Act; and it includes a member of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.” The justification is for clarity and to harmonise it for definition of employer. That is employee.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe in the absence of that legislation, we could adopt the definition of an employee in the Employment Act, if the minister could take on that.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Chair, I want to reject the committee’s proposal because the definition in the Bill in my view is adequate and it re-echoes the Employment Act No.6 of 2006. Further, the proposed definition is very narrow. So, I would wish that we maintain what we have in the Bill because it re-echoes, as I have just said, the Employment Act No.6, 2006.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But the UPDF is also here in the Bill; what is new? Because what I see in the Interpretation means any person who has entered into a contract of service or an apprenticeship contract and includes a person who is employed by the Government of Uganda, including the Public Service, a Local Authority, a parastatal organisation, a member of the UPDF - it is there - has or had - that is a small one. So, the amendment should be, “has or had?” 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, “has” or “had” and secondly, “contract of service and contract for service”. One has only “contract of service” then the other one has “contract for service”. The difference is that in one you are your own boss and the other one you are under someone. So, we need the two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Contract for service; isn’t this a supplier? I do not think so. Contract for services - you are hired to do something; you are not an employee. If you hire me to paint your house, I do not become your employee. 

DR NSABA BUTURO: I want to attract the attention of our colleagues. The truth is that the definition that is contained in the proposals by the committee is narrow compared to what we see in the Employment Act, and that is why I do feel that what the Bill has captured is adequate.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Chair. You see, the committee’s definition, to me, is more acceptable. It brings in two elements: Someone who has or had entered a contract, just in case you are terminated because you reported; and it makes a distinction between contract of service and contract for service.

In your Bill you are talking of contract of service. This is like when you are hired -(Interjections)- there is a big difference. One is an independent person who acts without receiving direct orders from the other, and then one takes orders directly from the other. So, by ignoring the committee’s suggested definition, where someone is an independent contractor, then he may easily put a defence in court that, “I am not in a contract of service; I am in a contract for service; so I am not under obligation to disclose any information.” So, we rather include both scenarios as long as they have information which is necessary for public interest other than considering only those in a contract of service and leaving the independent contractors. So, I would still buy the committee’s position.

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: Madam Chairperson, then it becomes a matter of drafting that the basic provision is what appears on page 4, but that if there are any new ideas in the proposal by the committee, they should just be incorporated in the existing Bill rather than to say, “It is either this or that”. This is a very short thing, and what the drafters need to do is to ensure that the new elements which are in (b) on page 12 of the report are included in the existing definition. That is all. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But has our legal team understood what to draft?

MS KABAKUMBA: There is another one, Madam Chairperson. I was looking at the objective of the Bill; the private institutions are conspicuously missing; yet in the main body of the Bill, we did include the private institutions. So, if it is agreeable, where would we put parastatal organisations like Uganda Police, Uganda People’s Defence Forces - let us add, “And private institutions” after parastatal organisations. Let us put, “Private institutions and members of the UPDF”. There are people who may be employees of some private organisations and have useful information. 

MR GAGAWALA: In the private sector, I think the argument becomes slightly harder because the classification of corruption in the private sector when one company is competing with another internally, public interest comes in; that is why there is PPDA which judges and disqualifies where need be. There is social responsibility, but we also have to make profit. 

Therefore, as minister of state for Trade, this is an area which needs careful consideration because we may lose investors with such a law. (Laughter) Yes, because if everybody starts feeling insecure because all the officers he is hiring are likely to report on their internal matters – I am not saying that they are corrupt but the law is okay for me as it is now. So, I beg the minister and the chairperson of this committee that it is in the interest –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I wanted to give you an opportunity to look more at clause 1 and the other issue of part vii, because we have done the rest. 

MR MENHYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to inform the honourable minister that private establishments have been catered for in our amendment, because if you look at the interpretation that we have provided for employer on page 12 of our report, “Employer means any person...” 

PROF. KHIDDU MAKUBUYA: You know, I have to repeat what I said earlier that sometimes I am puzzled; because the argument that I see is that the definition of employee should as much as possible tally with the definition of employer. And frankly, it is almost 8 O’clock; we have been here all this time, and it may not be possible. So, when the Rt. hon. Chairperson says that we sleep over this, I do not see the harm in that. But for some reason, I agree with you, hon. Member, that since we have done most of the work –(Interruptions)- why not finish!

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Whistleblowers’ Protection Bill, 2008”, and passed it; and stood over clause 1 and 37.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr James Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that that report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The motion is that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I want to thank you. There is a lot of work on a Bill which we thought was small, but so much work has been done. So, we will give the minister and the other Members time to look at the areas of contention and part vii so that it can be concluded on Tuesday.

Secondly, yesterday Members, we agreed that the Local Government Accounts Committee Report would be debated. Members asked for time to go and read it. So, the time is between now and Tuesday so that we can also look into those reports. So, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.52 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 2 March 2010, at 2.00 p.m.) 
