Wednesday, 26 February 2003 

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I informed you about the victory of the Parliamentary Football Team of Uganda over the Parliamentary Football Team of Rwanda, last weekend. They did actually come back with the trophy. (Applause). I am requesting you to be at the steps of Parliament tomorrow at 1.45 p.m. The team will then hand over the trophy to the Speaker. 

The team manager, hon. Bakkabulindi, has also requested that after today’s session the football team should meet upstairs in the canteen. I think this shall be to review your victory and plan for more victories in future. (Interjection) Mr Bakkabulindi will do the needful there. 

The second matter concerns our contributions to aid our friends and relatives in Northern Uganda. As you know, before the recess, we collected some money. We did purchase a number of items which we would like to deliver in the first week of March. So, we shall put up a form on the notice board, for those who wish to go to the affected districts, to list their names. The affected districts are Pader, Kitgum, Lira, Gulu and Apac. Those who would like to take the trip, so that we commiserate with our friends and relatives, will indicate on the said form. The trip should be undertaken in the first week of March. Thank you very much.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Since we started this Session on the 12th of this month, I have been very attentive but have not seen a question for oral answer feature on the Order Paper. 

The people we represent speak through these questions for oral answer. For the last four months or so I have had a question on tariffs. People are paying the wrong figures which must be corrected. I tend to think it is deliberate to ensure that Lukyamuzi’s question on tariffs does not feature so that we continue being cheated as consumers of electricity in this country.  

I would like to express concern over the way my question, which has been pending since September last year, has been deliberately ignored, yet it is a cornerstone of the people I represent of Lubaga South. In light of that, can I assume the question is coming up tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I appreciate your difficulty and the concerns of your constituency. I have directed that starting from tomorrow the questions for oral answer will re-appear on the Order Paper. I ask Government to be ready for them.

MR AWORI:  Madam Speaker, more than a year ago, to be specific 12 January 2002, one young man was shot dead by a policeman while he was going about his duty. We took up this matter with a responsible person in Government, the IGP, and he admitted that that young man was wrongfully murdered by one of his officers. That officer was detained briefly in the custody of the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  Since then we do not know whether that officer is still in custody or he has ever been tried at all, or not.  

I make it supplementary to my honourable colleague’s concern. This is because I sent a question to the Minister of Internal Affairs wanting to know what has since happened to this young man’s murderer. Do I assume that policemen who commit felonies or any kind of mayhem in this country shall be detained briefly to please the general public and thereafter we assume that people will forget and that shall be the end of the matter? And for that matter, the minister responsible did not even bother to answer a question from a colleague.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me ask the honourable minister responsible for the Police to answer. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Aggrey Awori is being unfair to us. We have not refused to answer his question. The last time I stood here, I said we had taken care of all the questions that were brought to us. Even for those we have not yet answered here, we have the answers ready. As soon as they are put on the Order Paper we shall answer them. So, hon. Aggrey Awori should be honest. He was here the last time I answered that same question. As soon as we are on the Order Paper we shall be here with the answer –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I do not intend to answer his question now. Thank you.

MR AWORI: I asked a question and put it to the Speaker to guide me on matters of questions for oral answer. Now my honourable colleague is saying, among other things, that hon. Awori is not honest. Is she in order to impute such a bad motive on my part?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the minister did not properly hear what you were saying. However, I think she has taken note of the very serious anxieties of the people you represent. I have also directed the clerk to put these questions on the Order Paper so that they can be answered starting from tomorrow.

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I would like to be clarified by the Prime Minister or the Minister of Internal Affairs. I have in my possession a letter from the District LC V Chairman of Katakwi District, by the name of Steven Okule Elimukolit. 

The letter is addressed to the Rt hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, and it refers to the insecurity caused by the Karimojong warriors. The letter states that from the time of December 2002 the following atrocities have taken place:

• 12 cases of murder in the sub counties of Ngariam, Obalang, Kapelabyong, Ogongoja, Ocowa and Magoro. 

• Rape: three cases in Obalang and Kapelebyong, including one of a 12-year-old girl.

• Head of cattle raided: 170 in Ocowa, Muruga town, Katung - 10, Obalang - 57, Kapelabyong – 23, making a total of 260.  

• Cassava gardens destroyed: Obalang 46 gaderns, Ogogonya - 28, Kapelabyong - 38, a total of 112.

May I be clarified by the Prime Minister, to whom this letter was addressed, what methods and progress has he done to alleviate the situation of the people of Katakwi District in particular and all the affected areas in general?

MR FELIX OKOT: Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the Prime Minister is not available today. As Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, I have not been availed the letter being referred to. That being the case, I will inform the Prime Minister and I believe in due course he will come and respond to that query.  I thank you.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to seek some clarification and guidance from the Chair. During recess, your office authorised certain committees of Parliament to stay behind and generate some work for this House. Two of these are the Committee on Social Services and another one on Equal Opportunities, of which I happen to be the Vice-Chairperson.

These committees handled in detail certain important Bills to be presented to this House. One of them is the Bill for establishment of a national council for the disabled. For more than one month we have been waiting for the Certificate of the Financial Implications to accompany this Bill. Every time we ask the Minister of Finance to tell us what is going on, he says, “soon, soon, soon”. 

We are tired and disappointed. This Bill does not require billions of shillings in order to be enacted. It is only a few million shillings required. As far as I can recall, even the President committed himself to the establishment of this council, in his election manifesto. But we are now shocked and people are disappointed.  

The minister is acting as if he does not understand what I am talking about. Madam Speaker, may I seek clarification from the Minister of Finance on when he is bringing that Certificate of Financial Implications? I want to know exactly when, he should not tell us “soon” again.

Madam Speaker, may I also know what happens in case the minister refuses to bring the certificate? The Cabinet has brought forward the Bills, but they are not bringing the certificate. We have been working for many months putting, in our energy and time. What can we do in case the minister is not interested in bringing the certificate? Thank you.

MR SSENDAULA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the honourable member who has raised this issue of the certificate, which is now a condition for each and every bill that is presented before Parliament. As far as the council for the disabled is concerned, initially we had issued a letter that indicated that we have no objection in having the Bill presented at the end of the year 2000.

Recently the matter was raised here and that was the first time it was being brought to my attention that the certificate of no objection that we earlier provided was not appropriate. I understand we changed to a new format, which among other things needs to provide details of the costs.

Accordingly, the officials both of my ministry and of the Ministry of Gender and Cultural Affairs are now working on the certificate, which should be produced before the end of this week. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Madam Speaker and honourable members, you are all aware that 8 March 2003 is International Women’s Day. UN member countries celebrate this day in recognition of the contributions and roles women play in the development process. 

Ugandans will join the rest of the world to commemorate this day on Saturday, 8 March 2003. Women’s Day is a product of the struggle by -(Interruption)
  
MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with humility I am standing on a point of procedure. The statement being read now by the minister seems to be coming from heaven. I have no access to it and yet I am supposed to follow what is going on. In terms of procedure, is it correct for him to read a statement of public and international concern when it is not accessible?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I understand the paper is being copied and I think you will receive them before the end of the day.

HON. MEMBERS: No, no!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you can listen.

HON. MEMBERS: No, no!

MR BITANGARO: The struggle is against exploitation, social injustice -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: No, no.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a statement about the forthcoming International Women’s Day. It is not a ministerial statement in the usual sense. This is an information paper about the Women’s Day celebrations.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, we are supposed to access the paper before it is read.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which rule? Honourable members, what I know is that the document you are required to have in advance is the one in response to oral questions. That one they must bring in advance and give it to members before they answer questions here. But this is for your information.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, every ministerial statement must be distributed before it is delivered. Rule 35.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It does not talk about distribution. Minister, read the statement.

MR BITANGARO: Thank you for that wise ruling, Madam Speaker. The struggle is against exploitation, social injustice, campaign for peace, democracy, social equity, equality and development. 

In recognition of this struggle and the need to keep the momentum, the UN in 1975 designated the year the International Women’s year and declared 8th March as a day on which member nations were to recognise and honor women. Thus, what had started as a struggle of a few women in a few countries brought together women the world over. 

Uganda as a member of the UN was bound by the 1975 declaration and as a result the Government of Uganda formerly marked the International Women’s Day for the first time in 1984. From 1985 onwards, Government through the National Council of Women (NCW) ensured that the day was celebrated annually.

Following the creation of the Ministry of Women in Development in 1988 as national machinery for advancement of women, the ministry responsible for women’s affairs has spearheaded the International Women’s Day activities.

This day being a national day, all sectors of society are expected to be part of the process and women assess progress of the process of empowerment of their country and also work out strategies for addressing the existing remaining gaps.  

Themes and Venues:

Since 1986, Uganda has celebrated this Women’s Day with a specific theme in mind. The theme guides the activities for the year. This year the theme is “Act now, say no to violence against women.” This was chosen as a follow up on last year’s theme, “Break the silence, stop violence against women.” And as you know, so many women have broken the silence over the past year.

Throughout last year, we focused on “breaking the silence” on violence against women. While many women still remain silent, we think we have set the initiative and hope that more people will speak out now and in future. It is only logical that we follow the speaking out by calling for people to “act” on violence against women. We should not just talk but “act”. 

This theme is also in line with the resolution of the Beijing +5 Conference, which calls upon member states to address violence against women. 

The Uganda Participatory Poverty Assessment report (UPPA) also identifies violence against women as one of the concerns that escalate poverty. It is therefore important that we in Uganda continue to address this subject. 

Honourable members, the practice in the previous years has been to commemorate the International Women’s Day under a theme selected by the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM). The theme selected by UNIFEM this year is “Women and the Millennium Development Goals.” 

However, honourable members, you will note that Uganda is committed to meet the Millennium Development Goals for 1990 to the year 2015, as reflected in Uganda’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PEAP). Gender is a guiding principle of PEAP and its ongoing renewal is expected to strengthen the national efforts to address gender inequalities.  

Using 1990 as a benchmark, the following targets are set to be achieved by the year 2015:

• To reduce infant mortality by two-thirds.
• To reduce under-five mortality by two-thirds.
• To reduce malnutrition of children by a half.
• To reduce maternal mortality by three-quarters.
• To ensure access to reproductive health services.
• To halt and reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS.
• To halt and reverse spread of malaria and tuberculosis.
• To ensure that boys and girls alike complete primary schooling.
• To eliminate gender disparity at all levels of education.
• Halve the proportion of people surviving on less than US $1 a day.

As Government, we are optimistic that through the theme “Act now; say no to violence against women,” if the women are liberated from violence, we can achieve these goals in even less than the set time. 

This year, our national venue for Women’s Day is Gulu. Gulu was selected because we are all aware that there is a lot of violence against women and children there, committed as a result of the war. Yes, it is mainly as a result of the war, not other things. It is important to focus our minds on this, and commit ourselves to stand with our fellow Ugandans and in particular women and children in this region.  

By going to Gulu, we are identifying with all those whose rights have been violated as a result of the war -(Interruption)- in fact if you agree with me, then it will not be necessary to debate hon. Aggrey Awori’s motion. Our aim is that this violence must stop. We are also in Gulu because it has been customary, as funds permit, to rotate the venue from one region to another. We were in the Western region in 2001; last year we were in the Central region; and this year we were in the Northern region.  

All districts are expected to celebrate the International Women’s Day on 8th of March or later as found appropriate. In this regard all actors in various sectors including district leadership, women leaders, NGOs, CSOs, Government departments, including community services, education, health, police, the media, cultural groups, are expected to participate in the preparations to ensure that this day is memorable and to allow the theme to guide their thinking and actions throughout 2003. Honourable members, act now. Thank you very much.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for that statement. I have two points to note before I make any other comment.  

First and foremost, when you look at our Rules of Procedure, you find that under rule 24(1), it is stated that: “Sufficient copies of a paper to be tabled shall be made and distributed to members.” 

We have heard the statement, but as Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee of Parliament, I feel that we have been deprived of a chance to talk about this issue in a more concrete manner. If we had the papers, we would be in position to highlight some of the issues that we feel Government has not addressed or is only paying lip service to. Nonetheless, I would like to appeal to you, Madam Speaker, to give this House an appropriate time when we can debate this statement after we have got copies. This is my humble request.

I do not know how we are going to proceed. However, I would also like to refer to rule 35(2), which states that: “All statements made by the Ministers shall be debated.” When I looked at the Order Paper, I noted that this is a ministerial statement. Do we have time to debate this statement or can we debate it at another time? If we debate it at another time, what impact will it have on the March 8th celebrations? 

We have been celebrating this day since time immemorial but now we are doing it as if it is a functionary celebration. We are not giving it the kind of attention that we should be giving it - we as the Legislature. Madam Speaker, I seek your advice. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, there are two aspects to this paper. One is the notification of the whole country that the International Women’s Day celebrations will be held in Gulu District. And I believe this also includes an invitation. I thought the minister would request everybody to go to Gulu that day and celebrate with women there, but he did not say it. 

The other aspect is still the information contained in the statement. That is why I was saying it is not the usual statement in the way we understand them. It is an invitation passing on some information. However, I think that you are right. You may want to evaluate what we are celebrating and how we are benefiting from it. So, the clerk has assured me that they are producing some copies of it for the members. We could find time to debate it even today. However, I hope that will not stop us from going to Gulu for the celebrations.

CAPT. GUMA: Madam Speaker, we have a budget as Parliament. Hon. Bitangaro has his line ministry budget. Why should it be our clerk here to photocopy the documents of line ministries? This has been going on since last year. Ministers should come here with photocopied ministerial statements. Why should it be our Parliament to do that for them? We have a different budget.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have noted that and we shall deal with it as a commission.

MS SANTA OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to get clarification from the Minister of Gender and Cultural Affairs on the issue of the celebrations he has just explained to us, before I join my colleagues, the women from Pader District, in these very important celebrations.

Today is going to be the second time of my asking this question. When you look at the Local Governments Act and the Women’s Statute, they stipulate that women’s councils are supposed to be elected after every three years. In my district, the women play a very vital role in mobilising their fellow women for this kind of celebration.  

In addition to that, it is not only this celebration but also all activities involve women. Women’s councils play a very vital role in immunisation, nutrition, in whatever he has read.  We believe that a woman can mobilise a fellow woman better than a gentleman –(Interjections)  

Can I get clarification about whether these women councils are yet going to be elected or not? We believe that people who are working now are working with the kind of fear in them that says that their time is already up. We want to get the clarification before I go to Pader District; so that I will be able to explain that this election is going to take place or that it has already been rubbished.

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker for according me the opportunity to look at this ministerial statement. I do not know whether it is an announcement, an invitation or a statement of fact or policy. However, I rise to more-or-less question the sincerity or commitment of Government to the women’s cause. 

I have reasons to doubt what the minister said. Why do I doubt Government’s commitment to the women’s cause? Year in, year out we go to celebrate Women’s Day, quote conventions, and yet we have not made municipal law so that the women in this country can also enjoy what we are celebrating. I do not know whether it is a political gimmick to appease the women! “We have given you powers, privileges and rights,” we tell them, and yet in effect we have not. Madam Speaker, why am I saying so?

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Speaker, I would like to elaborate on what the honourable member is saying.  Let me just give you some examples. Uganda is signatory to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women. But we have taken over 40 years to come up with the revised law on marriage and divorce.  

As we speak now, we have no specific law on domestic violence. Circumcision is still going on in this country. As we sit here, wife inheritance is still rampant. As we confer here, we do not have any law against sexual harassment in the workplace and many women have been made to abandon their work. As I speak now, many of the women’s homes are unsafe places and yet these places are supposed to be safe for them. Are we serious about what we are doing?  Are we serious about Article 31 in the Constitution on rights of women? Are we serious about marriage rights and equality in marriage? We still have laws in our statutes, which enable men to divorce on one ground of divorce, while women have to adduce two grounds. Madam Speaker, these are the points I wanted to raise.

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for taking a whole paragraph out of my speech. I will appreciate that it was more articulate than I would have put it. 

However, I was about to make a point to elaborate what my honourable colleague has just said. You recall that last week I rose to seek clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs or preferably the Minister in Charge of Parliamentary Affairs on a matter of promotions of women in the Police force. Out of the 38 officers who were recently promoted in the Police force, only eight were women; only eight out of 38. And in the top six positions in the Police force they are only two women. Only one, who happens to be the head of the CID, and who is in charge of -(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Aggrey Awori and his views because he is a very ventilated politician. However, I seek the following clarification with respect to promotions, demotions and employment of our counterparts the women in this country. 

I am a great advocate for women’s emancipation no doubt, but the clarification I seek from hon. Aggrey Awori is, the promotion of anybody at his or her place of work considers various criteria. It considers competence of the person, the education of the person, experience, and many other things. Can hon. Aggrey Awori tell me that all those were not considered, and only the gender aspect was considered? So, at the end of the day was it only the few women to achieve? Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, my honourable colleague. I know you are an advocate of women’s rights but your submission was so long that I got lost. I do not know where to start so let me get back to my point. 

Madam Speaker, it is not a matter of promotions of women in the Police force. It is a matter of their welfare and opportunities. I will give you an example. A man police officer in the Police does not consult the IGP before getting married but a woman police officer has to seek permission to get married. What kind of thing is this? (Interruption) Yes I accept your information.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really appreciate hon. Aggrey Awori’s concern about women within the Police. I just wish to inform hon. Awori that the Police Statute has been reviewed and we have eliminated that. In any case, the Constitution says that those laws that do not conform to it shall automatically fall by the wayside. So, we do not require policewomen to ask for permission. Further, the statute has been reviewed to eliminate all those discriminative laws. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you. I believe this transformation has taken place since my honourable colleague joined the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Other than that, I do not think it has ever taken place. But I really appreciate that effort. 

Madam Speaker, unless a law is in print, circulated and otherwise, we cannot know that it has been amended. There is a process for changing or amending the law. We need that type of thing to be done publicly, for public consumption.

It is not a matter of promotions alone. What are the prospects of a woman going through the ranks to the top position? Almost zero! When you look at the Prisons Department, the way we treat the women inmates is horrible. We do not accord them the basic needs of a woman above the age of 13. You know what I mean; we do not! Likewise, we do not have affirmative programs in the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the women to come up in the ranks to the highest positions, being mindful of among other things their own welfare and prospects for higher visions.

Madam Speaker, I can also tackle the Ministry of Defence. What have we done for women in the Ministry of Defence? We only use them during the parades. That is all we see them doing; no other thing. Is there a higher-ranking woman in the UPDF than a Colonel? Yet these women have been in the NRA right from the time of inception. People who joined the UPDF are now Lieutenant Generals. Women who have been there from day one have never gone beyond the rank of Colonel. 

What are we talking about when we say affirmative action? These are issues which I need to know before you take me to Gulu to celebrate Women’s Day. I wish that when you go there. you could tell the women, “we have done the following for you,” instead of saying “a-third, a-third, a-third”, when they have no powers to change anything at all.

Madam Chair, when I look at the Ministry of Education, it is a much more serious situation. You go to any primary school or any secondary school between senior one and senior four, and you will see it is horrible. The needs of the little girls have never been taken care of. Every school has got what they call a shop for personal needs. I say that even before you put sugar in the shop for the kids, sanitary pads are imperative for the little girls; they must be provided. It should be mandatory that every shop in a boarding school or any school where they are girls between the ages of 13 and 18 should provide these basics. 

The question of an extra 1.5 points for admission to Makerere, I want to see it applied elsewhere, in the armed forces especially. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did say we shall appoint a day specifically to debate this matter. Let us allow the minister to answer and we shall create time next week for this. The debate does not really relate to the celebrations; it relates to the whole policy and implementation.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sure by now you have got the papers; they are being distributed. I will begin by answering –(Interruption)

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I have a very important matter to raise concerning women. The minister should answer my concern in respect to women with disabilities. 

First of all I must commend the minister for coming up with this statement and I would like to encourage other ministers to come up with similar statements prior to national and international days. The International Day for Disabled Persons, which is the 3rd of December, passed without notice.

I am glad that the same ministry has this time come up with a statement in regard to the Women’s Day. I hope next year they will come up with a statement on Women’s Day, the day for people with disabilities, the day for the youth and the day for the children –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nayiga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Mwandha for giving way. I would like to remind this House and the public that the day for people with disabilities does not pass unnoticed. The Ministry of Gender and Cultural Affairs has since the establishment of the Department of Disability and Elderly - and even when we just had a section within the ministry to handle that – had a policy of reading a statement on the eve of the day for the disabled. 

Before that, a week of activities is held and stakeholders are informed. So, it is not right for the honourable member to say that it goes unnoticed. He should at least appreciate that some work has been done. I am always there to read, and there is a sign language interpreter when I read the statement.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I do not think that the minister understood what I was talking about. I started by commending the minister for coming to this House with a statement. I also encouraged the minister to in future come up with similar statements for women, disabled, youth et cetera. I also encouraged other ministers to come up with similar statements on national and international days. That is the statement I made.  

However, the reason I rose is that when these women celebrate their day, the 8th of March, there is a tendency not –(Interjections)– our day. Can I repeat that? When women and men celebrate the International Women’s Day which falls on the 8th of March, there is a tendency not to take adequate care to accommodate the needs of disabled women. I do not remember which year it was exactly when we dispatched a number of disabled women to the venue of the celebrations. They were not even allowed to take an active part in the activities. They were left on the periphery. 

I want to make an appeal. The organisers of this day should go an extra mile and make sure that women with disabilities also enjoy their day like all other women. That is the statement I wanted to make, Madam Speaker.

MRS DOROTHY HYUHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the statement read by the minister. What has made me rise is our method of work. I also recognise your ruling, Madam Speaker, that we shall find time to debate this. However, we are supposed to celebrate on the 8th of March, which is next week. 

From experience, Members of Parliament have to make an input now because they are fundamental in mobilisation of their constituencies. They mobilise resources, they are guests of honour, and circulars have to reach the districts in time. This is a national event for which we expect women and people from all over the country to gather. When shall we get this information to the rightful people?  

I also wish to add to the remarks made by hon. Dora Byamukama. The Committee of Social Services, which is mandated to analyse policy issues of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development - where this important statement has come from – has taken us by surprise. When do we make an input, Madam Speaker? Are we only recognised when we are appropriating money and making statements? Is that the only mandate we have? Should we not even analyse the budget given to the women? When is the statement which touches the majority of the population of this country given value?

The way the ministry is under-funded; the way issues of women are treated is the way the statement has been treated and it is the way the minister has handled this.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mrs Betty Akech): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a special appeal to Members of Parliament. While we are still discussing the Women’s Day celebrations, I appeal to you to come to Gulu in solidarity with the suffering women and children of that sub-region. 

Colleagues are aware that for the last 16 years a lot of violence has been meted out against women and children because of the insurgency that has been going on there. The violence has been in form of abductions, rape, defilement and killing as well as destruction of property. The theme of this year’s celebrations of the Women’s Day is really very pertinent for the women of that sub-region and is therefore –(Interruption)

MR ALEX NDEEZI: I thank the honourable member for giving way. I also thank the honourable member for inviting us to Gulu. I am one of those people ready to go to Gulu. However, we are here as legislators. When we go for celebrations, the people want to know from us what legislative programmes we have got to bring about empowerment of women in this country.  

Before I can go to Gulu, I want to know what we as legislators in this country are going to tell people there. You have been told that many Bills pertaining to the empowerment of women are shelved in the Cabinet. What are we going to tell them? What promises are we going to make? What are we going to tell them about the Domestic Relations Bill? What are we going to do there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a general question. The minister will answer it.

MRS BETTY AKECH: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Ndeezi for his concern. Mine is really an appeal. I am not going to look at the complexities of the whole issue. It is just that as Members of Parliament we had shown concern earlier. We raised some funds to assist the people of this sub-region. I think the next step is to be there with the people, show solidarity, and say that we support them and we are really concerned about their suffering. 

I want to invite you to be there. Despite the suffering of these people, the women of that sub-region have remained unbowed by their suffering and they will show you –(Interjections)- I just want to tell you that despite the suffering that these women have gone through for the last 16 years, they have remained unbowed. They have continued to be the breadwinners for their homes and they have supported their families. Your presence on that day will be a mark of solidarity, and this will be highly appreciated by the people of that sub-region. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable members for the remarks and observations they have made on this paper. 

I will begin by answering hon. Santa Okot, who wanted to know why the elections for the women councils have not taken place yet. You recall that during the last Session of Parliament I presented an amendment to the National Women’s Council Statute. The women of Uganda wished to have the legal framework under which they operate, amended. They needed a restructuring of the law, and indeed we presented the law for amendment, and we did amend it. 

So, currently we have the restructured legal framework, and the Electoral Commission is preparing to hold the elections of the National Women’s Councils sometime this year. I will request hon. Mukwaya to answer that later on.  

With regard to the celebration of Women’s Day, hon. Byamukama observed that there are many things that have not been done to operationalise Article 31 of the Constitution. Admittedly, Article 31 of the Constitution has not fully been operationalised, but a lot has also been done. It is not correct to say that nothing has been done about all these international conventions. We have domesticated some of the laws relating to women. The National Women Council Statute was not there before 1986. It was not there, but so much has been achieved which I cannot elaborate on now, because Madam Speaker has ruled that there will be a day to debate this. But admittedly, there is a lot to be done.  

Putting into practice a social policy is not like driving a car where you start the ignition and you drive off. Social dynamics do take time, honourable members.

With regard to hon. Byamukama’s observation about the amendment to the laws relating to marriage and divorce, I have the pleasure to inform you that as we speak now, the Domestic Relations Bill is before Cabinet and it is nearing completion. I can assure you that within this Session, if the Speaker’s calendar permits, we shall present it to Parliament.

I am grateful to hon. Mwandha for the reminder and the kind words he showered on the ministry. It is true that the women with disabilities have not been specially catered for on such days. However, we promise that we are going to consider this very seriously.  

Hon. Dorothy Hyuha, the Chairperson of the Social Services Committee, expressed surprise that her committee was not consulted on this day. With due respect, 8th March is a gazetted day. You know it. Definitely preparing a statement to Parliament is an Executive function. The day-to-day running of a ministry cannot be done by the Social Services Committee. Definitely not! But we shall certainly consult you next time. (Laughter).  

She also said that they needed to analyse the budget for preparation. Before the budget of the ministry is approved, it passes through the Social Services Committee. How the money is spent on a day-to-day basis, I think is the role of the ministry. 

I am very grateful for your observations, and with those few remarks, I wish to invite you to come to Gulu and celebrate with the women. Thank you very much.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Madam Speaker, it is very hard to talk from here, but thank you for allowing me to move my motion pursuant to rule 40(k). Rule 40 provides for motions without notice, and (k) reads as follows: 
“Any motion certified by the Speaker to be a matter of emergency.” 

Madam Speaker, I request to move that this House considers the statement made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development tomorrow, and that we take time and debate it, considering that March 8th is only less than a week away and that we need to have more input into what will happen on that day. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. I direct that the motion be placed on the Order Paper of tomorrow. The Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities could formulate it so that we can generate debate tomorrow. Thank you.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED
          
(Debate Continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, notwithstanding the importance of this debate, I would like to appeal to you to be firm but cool. Allow one another to contribute so that everybody goes home happy.

MR NOBERT MAO (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that at long last, after keeping on my feet for several days, I have the opportunity to contribute to this important debate.  

I do believe that the committee presented us with a good report. However, the response from the minister is - to put it mildly – arrogant. And I believe the hon. Margaret Zziwa touched on this issue.  

From the little Luganda I know, the Baganda have got a saying, which I will attempt to say in Luganda, that goes; “Ow’empaka akunama ebiri”. Roughly translated into English it means that if you are not sitting properly and somebody who is concerned urges you to sit better, and you only respond by saying, “how do you want me to sit?” you only make matters worse. “Am I not sitting well,” you respond, making worse your manner of sitting. Your posture becomes even more embarrassing to yourself.  

Madam Speaker, I think this is relevant because the response from the Government is exactly in line with what I have stated.

I refer members to page seven of the honourable minister’s statement, the last sentence. After commenting on some issues, he says, “Again this suggestion by the ad hoc committee demonstrates how little it has understood the technical issues involved in the UCBL resolution”.  

Madam Speaker, I will not try to stand shoulder to shoulder with the experts on technical know-how, but I think I am qualified to speak about technical “know-why”. I think technical “know-why” is more important than technical know-how.  

Why UCBL? Ugandans know why UCBL exists. Ugandans know why UCBL was a beneficiary of a lot of investment from public funds. It is from that angle that I want to approach the debate. I want to approach this from my knowledge, from my technical “know-why”.

There are four questions that this House must decide on today:

One, was there transparency? Madam Speaker, it looks like UCBL, or the entire privatisation process has been a game of ping-pong between dubious investors and interested parties in Government. UCBL is simply the biggest ball in that ping-pong.

Two, did we get money for the value of UCBL? 

The third question is, was there compliance with the laws of Uganda? We have argued that there was no compliance with the law because the purported seller did not have the powers to sell. That is why when the His Excellency the President wrote a letter, he urged the Governor to invite PERD and DRIC. Why was he now inviting them at the last moment? Because UCBL is not just any bank. 

What the Governor Bank of Uganda did was a privatisation exercise. Whether you call it resolution, whether you call it what, it was transferring a publicly held company into private hands. That is why, based on the legal principle of Nemo dat, you cannot give what you do not have. If something is not yours, how do you give it out?  

Madam Speaker, I know that the Attorney General has been feeling hot under his collar since this debate started, because of the many challenges. But I think he has been insulted greatly by this process. Far from being consulted, he has been insulted. And I believe that Government has not adequately answered our arguments that there was non-compliance with the law.

The fourth question, Madam Speaker, which is for us to decide is, did the process satisfy social policy? The Government talks eloquently about fighting poverty and uplifting the standards of living of Uganda, but did this satisfy social policy?

Those of us who talk about UCBL do not only talk because of technical issues. There are deeper philosophical issues. It is said that these companies, in any case, were not being run very well. There are those who even went to the extent of saying they would give it away freely to anybody willing to take it.  

Privatisation is not just to achieve efficiency. Efficiency is not the only objective of privatisation. I hear some members are now dazzled by the colourful paintings on the new Stanbic walls. I hear the uniforms of the staff now bedazzle some members. Madam Speaker, let us talk about substance. Privatisation is also aimed at spreading wealth by increasing the number of individual citizens of Uganda who have a stake in the economy. I think this is the crux of the matter.  

For as long as Ugandans think that we have transferred UCBL into the hands of a clique, which is even largely foreign, then we are not satisfying social policy.

Then, should we just sell to the highest bidder? By the way, this Parliament supports privatisation fully. We should encourage strategies that enable even small Ugandan investors to have a stake in the privatised companies. 

I understand Ugandans will have 10 percent of Uganda Commercial Bank Ltd (UCBL), or the merged company. I want to remind this House that the same Stanbic Bank, after acquiring Grindlays, pledged to float 20 percent shares on the stock exchange. Have you heard about it lately, honourable members? I have not. I have not heard about the 20 percent shares being floated. That question was not asked.

There is a great parallel between this and what happened with Nile Hotel. Parliament objected to this sale. I remember talking to Mr Simphiwe Shabalala, the boss of Stanbic Africa in South Africa. I asked him, “Would the privatisation process in South Africa go on if the Parliament of South Africa was fuming and objecting?” He said, “No way”. Then I said, “Why are you going ahead to sign this contract when you hear that Parliament is not happy? Are your hands clean?” 

Madam Speaker, this institution represents people. This is the same thing that happened with Nile Hotel. The contract was signed above the heads of Parliament. That in itself was contemptuous! I do recall the experience of Nile Hotel after that, but I think the Tahar Fourati Hotels run down the hotel. And to add insult to injury, one of the chiefs of the company even did not pay his hotel bills before leaving. But still the company was sold to the Fouratis, run by that gentleman who did not pay his bills.  

I wish to say that the Vice President, a member of Cabinet then, disapproved of the sale. All Ugandans stood with her when she put her foot down and said, “no”. She was holding the portfolio of Minister for Tourism, because the hon. Wapakabulo was busy in the Constituent Assembly.  

But because Fourati had hosted many politicians in Tunisia and USA, the then Vice President, Dr Samson Kisekka - may his soul rest in peace - ordered the Finance Minister then, the hon. Mayanja Nkangi, to sign the deal over hon. Speciosa Kazibwe’s head. And that was done.  

Madam Speaker, when Alexander the Great was at the height of his power he used to say, “My people and I have come to a consensus. They are to say whatever they want and I am to do whatever I want.” Is this the kind of Uganda that we are living in; where we can say whatever we want, we can explode with eloquence in denunciation of evil, but that evil shall still be done? 

Madam Speaker, I want to submit that some of the so-called investors do not even intend to invest in those companies. They want to milk without feeding the cow. There is evidence of this, and Westmont was one example.  

I want this House also to recollect that some of the best examples of privatisation actually involved Ugandans. One example is the Lake Victoria Bottling Company. It was privatised largely to Ugandans, and I read last week that they are now hot on the heels of Coca-Cola. Must we therefore talk about how bad we are as Ugandans? Is this the integrated, self-sustaining, national economy we are building?  

Are we going to have an economy, which is a wagon whose engine is in Cape Town, Paris, London and Washington? I think this is the philosophical issue, which underpins the various debates. That is why those of us who belong to the younger generation believe we shall have a popular mandate to confiscate what has been stolen.  

I will not be shy if I have the power to sign a law re-nationalizing the Uganda Commercial Bank - (Applause) - even if people say, “you are discouraging investors; your statements are hostile.” 

I know that a South African official who visited Uganda recently, Mr Cyril Ramaphosa, is engaged in ensuring that the blacks in South Africa have a stake in their economy. They are not just looking for somebody with a fat wallet. At the end of the day, increasing the number of people with a stake in the economy stabilizes the nation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to wind up.

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, let me submit on the responsibilities of the key actors by reviewing what we know to be factual. They are only five.

One; our banking system has been, and still is, open to fraud and corruption. That is why we had Westmont. That is why we have had all this.

Two; there are the Government elite close to the President. I have stated here on record that when sweeping stairs, we must start from the top. You do not sweep stairs from the bottom. That is how I propose this House should proceed. The looting was presided over by the most senior officials, because many of these meetings are said to have been held at State House. This is what I know to be true.  

I will just refer to this as an example. Consultants Morgan Grenfell opposed the UCBL sale. The World Bank and the IMF insisted and UCBL was sold to an engineering company linked to Gen. Salim Saleh - that is Westmont. The World Bank just sneaked off and was never to be seen at the scene of crime. They refused to take responsibility because for the World Bank, Uganda is just a project. For us Uganda is the only country we have, it is not just a project. They can mess up this country and go to another. 

Madam Speaker, I know of a chicken farmer who once went to a witchdoctor to seek advice about his farm and the witchdoctor advised him to pray about it. He prayed but his chicken continued to die. Then the witchdoctor said, “Perform such rituals”, but the chicken continued to die. He gave so many other solutions, but the chicken all died. Then when he went to the witchdoctor and the witchdoctor asked, “How are the chicken?” He said, “I am so sorry, they are all dead.” The witchdoctor said, “How sad, I still had so many good ideas to suggest to you.” 

The witchdoctor said he still had so many good ideas! This is the relationship we have with the World Bank and the IMF. They have so many good ideas to suggest to us, but our chicken continue to die. Therefore, we must stand up and blame the officials who are so gullible.  

Madam Speaker, Dr Sulaiman Kiggundu revealed that there were underhand discussions involving The Bank of Uganda Governor, President Yoweri Museveni, General Salim Saleh, Bart Katureebe - the Attorney General then, Muhoozi Kainerugaba - the President’s son, and the Privatisation Unit of Micheal Opagi. There were informal discussions and they agreed to loot - that is what I call it - and then conceal the facts. The process of concealment continues, and there are those who are trying to wait out this debate, hoping that this matter will just go away.  

But no question is settled until it is settled right. The ghosts of UCBL will continue to haunt all those who have looted it. General Saleh accepted responsibility, probably to shield the guy upstairs. Dr Kiggundu was a sacrificial lamb; Matthew Rukikaire resigned and Bart Katureebe found that he could not live with that kind of thing. His conscious haunted him until he quit –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I always enjoy the contributions of my young brother, hon. Mao, and I have been following very well until I have reached a point where I think I need help. Twice, or is it three times, hon. Mao has said that a meeting at the State House “sealed the deal to loot”. These are the words that hon. Mao used. 

Yesterday, Madam Speaker, you appealed to us to use parliamentary language as we argue this case. Is hon. Mao in order to say there was an “agreement to loot the UCBL”?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think hon. Mao left when we were still discussing this matter. However, please tone down your language; you will still be understood. Also, try to wind up so that I give your colleagues a chance to speak too.

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, I thought I would be treated like the hon. Kizige and be allowed to express myself fully. (Applause).  However offensive my submission may be to some people, I speak from the bottom of my heart and I would like the hon. Kiyonga to know that I am exercising maximum restraint. Those who know the way I express myself know that I am really restraining myself.  

There are three other things from the committee’s report, that prove that the IMF and the World Bank forced the Government to accept this privatisation in a corrupt and non-transparent way. The committee has also proved that the UCBL privatisation was political, not really economic and involved important families in this country. 

The committee has also proved the fraudulent privatisation and other dealings. 

The honourable minister says Stanbic has done Uganda such a great favour by taking this burden of our bank, which we were greatly suffering with. Madam Speaker, why should such banks, which are doing so well in their own country and abroad, die to pick up this kind of liability in “Banana Republics” like Uganda? I have done some research and I want to give three reasons why these banks love to buy small banks in “Banana Republics”.  

First of all, the market is small. In terms of regional markets UCBL cannot stand up to the competition. There are even few short-term benefits from normal banking operations. I understand our record of paying back our debts is very bad. So, do not think Stanbic was counting on us borrowing money and paying good interest. 

I want to submit that there are other legal ways of profiting from owning a bank in a country like Uganda. The first way is selling technical assistance to the local subsidiary. Go to the bank and you tell me how many Ugandans are there. There are so many technical assistants, who are supposed to be helping us manage our banking sector better. Those people are paid very highly.  

Madam Speaker, that is how Uganda Airlines collapsed, although now we are being blamed. When South African Airways came in, they first of all came with their contribution in form of an old plane – one from the apartheid era. It was a fuel guzzler, which was supposed to fly from Johannesburg to London. It guzzled enough fuel to make our balance sheet bleed. Then they brought in technical assistance, highly qualified and over-paid workers. But I believe their main qualification is just that they were from out of town; not that they knew better than Ugandans.  

The second reason, which makes these banks interested in our small inefficient banks, is that the parent bank, like in South Africa, starts holding foreign deposits of the local subsidiary in Uganda. That way our deposits will be banked abroad as a foreign deposit of a Ugandan bank, and when it is banked there we are not going to earn interest.  They will pay us a very small interest. This is one of the reasons why they are very excited about these deposits. While they are officially called a liability, for a clever businessperson they are not a liability.  

The third way in which these banks benefit from investing in “Banana Republic” banks, which are a burden according to the Minister of Finance, is that the profits from most Ugandan banks actually come from foreign transactions that are guaranteed by a very high aid level. Actually, the confidence the international community has in Uganda has boosted the banking sector. You hear of US $20 billion given to the North for example for RUWASA, all this makes the banks a strategic terminal to benefit from the foreign transactions.  

A close study of the books from all banks, even their balance sheets that are published in newspapers, show that most of their profits come from foreign exchange. To make us shudder, Madam Speaker, all this is linked to the transfer of illegal money, which they call money laundering.  

The Minister of Finance talks of credible international banks with sterling reputation. I have news for you, honourable minister. In 1992, the US Senate carried out an inquiry on CitiBank, one of the banks that we stand in awe of, which we really revere so much and would love to be quoted by. They revealed that CitiBank held accounts for many corrupt third world leaders:  US $100 million belonged to Omar Bongo and included bribes from a French firm, US $40 million belonged to Bhuto’s husband, Sadali; US $110 million belonged to the three sons of Abacha, and US $100 million belonged to Rola Salinas, brother to former Mexican President Carol Salinas. 

Madam Speaker, the short point I am trying to make is, if this is our country then can we take steps based on logic and consultation with fellow citizens, rather than becoming appendages to international profiteers and racketeers. 

I wind up, Madam Speaker, with a call. The scriptures say that a true shepherd will not run away when wolves come to attack the sheep, but the hired hand will flee. When wolves come to show off today, we must stand up clearly for all Ugandans to see whether we are truly shepherds or hired hands who will cut and run when the wolves come. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will limit you to five minutes each.

MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I will try to put the five minutes to good use. I would like to thank the committee for the good job they have done, and the minister for his brilliant rebuttal to the committee’s work. 

First, I would like to express my joy that indeed the minister is a lucky man, because I am sure when he goes into retirement he has got a ready place at the National Theatre. (Laughter).

It is my submission that the minister’s rebuttal is misdirected and it is an attempt to exonerate himself and Bank of Uganda from the misdeeds in the Uganda Commercial Bank Limited sale. On pages one to two of his rebuttal, the minister claims that this sale ensures future soundness and safety of deposits of UCBL. But, Madam Speaker, he himself agrees that there was no opportunity for competition for this sale. 

Therefore what he is talking about is a concoction, because it is possible that if there were competition, possibly some other bank, more reputable than this one, could have bought this bank and given it a better financial base. I do not accept that proposition.

The minister reminds us that this bank was insolvent twice because the owners, who are the Ugandans, mismanaged it. But this is unfair to Ugandans who collected money and put it in this bank. The minister himself knows that Ugandans generally were not managing this bank. It was government that was managing the bank on their behalf, and it was this government that mismanaged the bank. It is unfair to turn around and say that we Ugandans, owners of the bank, mismanaged it. We know of the political loans which became a problem; we know of the looting that took place in this bank and none of this was committed by Ugandans themselves.

The minister in his statement claims that this sale ensures the maintenance of the rural branches. This is a myth, because in the agreement, these branches are guaranteed only for two years, and these are about to expire. You cannot come to Parliament and tell the people of Uganda that this sale guarantees that rural banking will remain intact when you know that this is only for two years. After that, any maintenance will be – what if there are losses in those branches at the expense of the Uganda taxpayers, which is suggested through subsidies by Bank of Uganda? I think this is circumventing the truth and I am sure the minister will have to explain to us. If not, then he should apologise for this unfortunate statement.

As for the argument that this sale guarantees retention of 10 percent of the equity for Ugandans to buy, I want to put it this way. The 20 percent shares were worth Shs 4.8 billion. Their 10 percent equivalent in a merged bank will be Shs 8.9 billion. That is the price of those shares. It means the price has doubled by more than 100 percent.  

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are poor. I see this as a way of putting the price of the shares beyond the ordinary Ugandan, but for the rich clique to purchase and monopolise the bank. I do not accept the arguments put forward by the minister and there is no reasonable defence on those grounds. 

The main issue really is not to go on enumerating, point by point, what the minister put forward. The questions raised by hon. Mao are to me the issues that we should consider. I reduce them only to two. One, was the bank sold legally? The answer to that is a very clear no. Two, do Ugandans get a fair price for their bank? The answer is equally no. 

It is sad for me to note that our brilliant Attorney General was treated the way he was. According to Article 119(5) of our Constitution, which states that no agreement and no negotiation should take place for the sale of government property or a property in which government has got an interest, without the input of the Attorney General. It has been demonstrated here clearly, and he has explained to this Parliament many times during this debate, that he did not take part in this transaction.

LT KINOBE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the member for giving way. The information I want to give the member concerns what he has just read. That is Article 119, which he has quoted wrongly, which concerns the participation of the Attorney General. 

He has said that no agreement shall take place, but Article 119(4)(b) says, “to draw and peruse agreements… that is the operating clause. But 119(4) generally says; “The functions of the Attorney-General shall include the following
(b) to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest.”  

Article 119(5), “subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” 

The catchword there is “concluded”. The process can start but before conclusion, it must have the legal effect -(Laughter)- yes, that is the information I wanted to give the honourable member. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Order, honourable members.

LT KINOBE: If it is contrary to what he has, I challenge him to read the clause he referred to. Thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for the honourable Chairman of the Movement Caucus. However, I cannot blame him, because yesterday a learned friend of ours indeed quoted more or less the same Article 162, which talks about the independence of Bank of Uganda. If a learned friend could quote that Article and argue that what was done was correct, when Article 119 is clear that you cannot conclude any agreement without the involvement of the Attorney General, then what about the non-lawyers? I think we have to pardon him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we started this debate, we agreed that we should allow one another to speak. Could you please allow whoever is on the Floor to speak? 

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the honourable member on the Floor to Article 119(5), which talks of circumstances when Parliament could pass a law to dispense with Article 119 (4). In this regard, the Financial Institutions Statute would allow the deal to go on without necessarily reverting to the Attorney General. The Constitution is very clear in Article 119(5). 

Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence for you to assist me and read it out, because I do not have a copy right now. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I read it out? You want us to read Article 119 of the Constitution?

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Article 119(5). Is there someone who could help to read the text?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I ask the clerk to read out Article 119 (5).
“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Further information from the Minister of Finance.

MR RUKUTANA: Honourable members, the article talks of an agreement being “concluded”, and I want to draw your attention to the contents of the agreement. You look at page 16 of the sale agreement between Stanbic and Government. The committee looked at the agreement and scrutinised it. I read it to you verbatim. Let us first get it clear as you heard for yourselves - those who do not have a copy of the Constitution - the article talks of an agreement being “concluded”.  

Clause 7(2) of the sale agreement lists the conditions to obligations of the seller and the Government. 

Further, in 72(5) it says that; “All appropriate Uganda Regulatory Authority approvals shall have been received -(Laughter). So the question now is whether the approvals were received, and it is very clear that the approvals –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, all of us in this House respect hon. Rukutana as a very eminent lawyer. Hon. Rukutana must know that nothing in this agreement can actually go against the Constitution. Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, a respected lawyer in this country and a Member of Parliament, to confuse the House by trying to tell us that this contract, which was fraudulently entered into, is actually above the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, the agreement is subordinate to the Constitution.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I was saying that the agreement itself stipulated conditions and obligations for the conclusion of the sale agreement. As I read to you, the conditions and obligations included approval for the agreement, which all appropriate Ugandan regulatory authorities shall have given. 

Those were the conditions. Since the Attorney General’s approval is one of the requirements, it was envisaged and was included. That makes it fit and in line with the Constitution. 

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: We want clarification from the minister in light of what this eminent lawyer, hon. Rukutana, who is also a friend, has said. I have a document addressed to the Clerk of Parliament, dated 24th of June last year, signed by the Attorney General, Francis Joash Ayume. Reference: Advice to the Ad Hoc Committee on the Sale of UCBL. Hon. Francis Ayume wrote: 

“On the issue of the Shs 9.278 billion that was transferred from UCBL to the Bank of Uganda…”  - I am not going to bore you with reading the letter verbatim. He is saying that the information available from the Bank of Uganda indicates that this was excess cash in Uganda Commercial Bank, belonging to the Government of Uganda as a shareholder in UCBL, which the buyer, Standard Bank Investment Corporation, did not wish to form part of the asset of UCBL, which it was purchasing.  

Accordingly, it was agreed by the parties, in terms of clause 7.15 of the sale agreement, that in the invent that there was more tax due to URA than what was actually paid as at the end of the closing of the financial year for the bank, namely 31 December 2001, then this amount of money would be used to meet the deficiency.  

The Attorney General concludes on this very controversial amount that it was therefore an anomaly to have included –(Interruption)

MRS SEBAGEREKA: There is a honourable member here who is holding another meeting. That is hon. Salaamu Musumba. Is she in order, Madam speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see she is just seated beside hon. Epak, smiling, and they are not saying anything. So, please proceed.

CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA: Hon. Ayume said that it was therefore an anomaly - these are words of hon. Francis Ayume, who is an eminent lawyer and a very senior person in that profession. 

“It was therefore an anomaly to have included it in the total purchase price in the agreement.” What hon. Ayume, the Attorney General, is careful of not saying is that it was probably a deliberate oversight (these are my words) leading to some fraud, but he said it was an anomaly. I do not know who we would expect to accept an anomaly of Shs 9.278 billion!

On page three there are many issues that the clerk wanted to know but I am tackling a few of them. On waiving tax on the payment of the consultant hired by the Bank of Uganda, the minister is saying that the authority to impose or waive taxes is vested in the Minister of Finance. Without obtaining such authority, the waiving of tax in respect of the Bank of Uganda consultant was unlawful. 

We are saying that if the Attorney General had been brought on board in the negotiation and discussion of these matters, all these issues would have been clarified. He went on about the Escrow account, which also cast doubt on this. He said; “It is therefore necessary that the seller, buyer and the Escrow agent enter into an agreement to regulate how and under what circumstances the buyer can access monies on the Escrow account”.

Up to now we do not know how that Escrow account is managed, three point something million dollars of it. I think hon. Kamuntu has the specific figures. These are the issues we thought that if the Attorney General, the Chief Government Legal Advisor, had been brought on board over - this innocent sale of a public enterprise - all these issues would be discussed. The other pertinent issues concerning the nation in this deal would be discussed. We would not be discussing a bank that was given away.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I cannot be any wiser than what has been said. On the same issue of legality is the question of the two members of the negotiating team, Wendy Abt and Mr Neal Curtin, these members were practising in Uganda without practising certificates; it has been said here. This was an illegality and for us what they did is null and void.

A member yesterday said there was no law requiring these people to get certificates. However, I would like to refer to the Accountant Statute, No.12 of 1992, and the Advocate’s Act No.22 of 1970, which requires them to have had practising certificates in Uganda.  

Madam Speaker, another matter of the law –(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you please try to wind up?

MR ANANG-ODUR: That waiving of tax for the consultants was illegal. In the same document quoted by hon. David Guma, on page 3, paragraph (d) says that the authority to pause or waive taxes is based in the Ministry of Finance and without obtaining such authority, the waiver of tax in respect of the Bank of Uganda consultant, was unlawful.

As I wind up, we must agree that Ugandans have incurred a lot of losses in this deal. I would not like to read a long list, but to give you an indication as to what has happened; I will just read out one or two items If you compute income tax and VAT from the figures given in the report of the committee, in fact the total loss in taxes noted comes to about Shs 1.9 billion. And now we are being told that we, Ugandans, who should have received payment in taxes from these foreigners, are now going to pay these taxes through Bank of Uganda? I think this is unacceptable, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Point of clarification.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, you have given me very little time so I will not take the clarification.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MR ANANG-ODUR: Madam Speaker, re-capitalisation, from the minister’s own statement, was Shs 7.2 billion because of the mess in which the Government put this bank. 

Loss of profit was Shs 23 billion, and this is profit that was made and which was not returned to us at the time of changing the ownership of this bank.

Provision for bad debts Shs 24 billion; arbitration of Westmont, which was started here on the Floor, cost Shs 11 billion; donation of UCBL headquarters, which was not bidded for but included in the sale agreement, was worth Shs 14.1 billion; excess cash that was transferred from UCBL was Shs 9.5 billion. Madam Speaker, these few items, out of possibly so many, total to Shs 155.3 billion lost to Uganda.  

I tell this House that the time has come; the moment has come. I think we must stand firm; we must take action; the responsible officers who have brought us this loss must all be held accountable. I request the hon. Minister of Finance that I think it is honourable for him, like his colleagues have done, to take the responsibility and resign so that we start on a new plate.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate on UCBL has taken long and it has really been overstretched. 

The problem I see here is that there are some elements in our report from the committee, which were overlooked. These have made our report a bit longer. For example, what would a report from a committee that has gone to investigate an asset of this magnitude provide? Hon. Nandala Mafabi raised his concerns in his petition to this Parliament and at that time there were other issues of concern that were raised by Members of Parliament. I have been trying to peruse through and I do not see them being addressed.

Secondly, I expected the committee, which had about three research officers and a legal counsel from Parliament, to bring up the meat and bones and put it there so that members are guided, and can get a balanced debate. For example they point out that “this is wrong, this is correct”. I mean, as Ugandans we can decide for the good of this country. 

Like the bidding process, I expected and would have loved to be told in the report that there were so many types of bidding. But the Bank of Uganda used selective bidding. Is it provided for in this country, in this continent, in the banking law?  

I have been trying to look at the list of witnesses who appeared before the committee. It is only Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance officials. We would have loved it for these other people, from the banks who were contacted, to appear because they would really give us a very good story –(Interjections)- all of them? I do not know. I have not seen them in the report.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the member to contribute please.

CAPT. MATOVU: I would like to see how they expressed their case in the committee because now these ones are free. Some of these consultants whom we see are Americans and they have no serious attachment to Uganda. They have their money. Those ones would actually also tell us their version of truth. 

There is Barclays Bank and Standard Chartered Bank. These two banks withdrew from the deal. I would have been a very happy man and would have taken a position on whom to kill. But they do not even tell us why these people withdrew. It would have been very good. Why did Barclays Bank withdraw? I would like to know that. 

In the DFID report they just hint about it. What do they say about Barclays and Standard Chartered Bank withdrawing? It would really be a very good educator, to make for a balanced debate and a balanced decision.
 
CAPT. GUMA: Can I inform my friend Capt. Matovu David, a fellow military officer? Hon. Matovu, KPMG Kenya, which carried out some kind of valuation; Wendy, the financial external advisor; Curtin the external legal advisor, Bank of Uganda; did not have professional practicing certificates in this country. You know this one contravenes some sections of the law: the Accountant’s Statute of 1992 and the Advocates Act of 1970. They did not have local practicing certificates. 

Hon. Moses Kizige here missed a lot of money. He is a financial expert. He would have taken the business. He has a practicing certificate in evaluation.

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Capt. Guma that in accounting, practicing as an accountant is defined. It involves performing public audits and filing tax returns. A consultancy like an evaluation of a bank does not tantamount to practicing as an accountant.

CAPT. MATOVU: Madam Speaker, let me continue. DFCU is a bank operating in this country. It came up and offered itself for the bidding process. I wanted to see in this report; how did it know about it? Originally it was not contacted by the Bank of Uganda. It was not. How did it know? That would also be an area we would get interested in.
 
MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the honourable member is raising questions, which members of the committee would have provided. We can save the time of this Parliament by answering questions which are simple.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, allow the members to explain how they understand this themselves, then you will get the opportunity to answer.

CAPT. MATOVU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would be a happy man if the committee had also come up with other banks, both local and international, which say, “Well, we were mistreated. We offered ourselves and we were closed in,” and we see what they were willing to offer.  

Then my last one is about the recommendations. This committee is supposed to have helped this Parliament to take a firm decision. But now they have put us in a dilemma of even re-investigating the whole process. 

Look at page 28 of the report - selling of banks by Bank of Uganda. The Financial Institutions Statute 93, which is due for review - that word alone is very bad - it is a desperate word. Why do you use it? It should be amended to address the lacuna existing in the law regarding the powers of the central bank in dissolving the previously insolvent bank that has regained solvency under management. What does it mean? 

It shows there is some truth; there are some powers which we have seen here. That is why you are making such a flexible and fluid statement. Why is it not firm? Maybe the FIS has got powers.  

Look at the independence of the central bank. It is also expressing some doubt. I would like to see a firm statement, because we had a legal counsel that the AG met. Me as an MP who is going to debate this report, I want to be helped. What does the law say about the powers of the central bank? What does the law say about the FIS? But now they are saying it should be given correct interpretation? Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and the honourable members.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for granting me this opportunity. I have a few comments to make on the facts about the sale of UCBL, and my own opinions about the manner in which these issues have been handled. 

I draw our attention to page three. I want to raise a primary argument. The 6th Parliament in its own wisdom did this country a very big disservice by changing UCBL from class two to class four of the assets to be privatised. What we are doing today is flogging a dead horse. 

The bank was under class two of the assets of this country. What is happening now is that even developed nations like Britain have not reached the level of privatising everything. Ugandans should realise that even road transport, the buses, in other developed countries like Britain, are still partially owned by government. Now we have jumped to the level of even privatising national institutions like banks! So, that was a very unfortunate bid. 

I have read through the Hansard on the debates on that particular issue and I have failed to get any convincing reason as to why this particular institution should have been removed from class two to class four of the national assets. However, it still makes sense for me to cry over spilt milk. 

I have two questions to ask. If Bank of Uganda took over UCBL after the foiled attempt from April 1999 to February 2001, they made profits and the bank gained its solvency, do they then sell it? I see that there is a lacuna in this particular law.  

My second question is; why did we find it most appropriate to sell UCBL under the FIS Statute of 1993 and not the PERD Statute of 1993, which this particular Parliament debated?  

I stand to be counted. This is the most democratic robbery being exhibited in this particular country. As long as I am still alive, their relatives, friends, in-laws and perhaps well-wishers will have to be brought to the guillotines of political justice of Uganda. (Applause).

There are two substantial issues here. One, the credibility of this Parliament is being judged at this particular time. We made a resolution and everyone walked over it. In Acholi there is a saying that “pe kinyero yer ma otwi j kom longo.” It can be translated into English to say that it is not wise to laugh over a hair, which has grown on a hydro-cell.  

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that today we are handling the second aspect of the debate. My colleagues have been asking, “Why was the Attorney General excluded from all cardinal elements of the issue?” I would perhaps guess one answer; he is too honest to be in that team. (Applause).  

This clique of individuals is raping Uganda and they want us to chant for them. It is not very wise for you to praise a man’s strength yet that man is raping your mother! These people are raping Uganda in broad daylight and we stand to make a difference. You are asking me who those people are? Hon. Mao has just named them. 

I am not ready to undermine the integrity of Minister Kajura who did a commendable job in that particular bank. Next to me on my left is hon. Omach Paul, who was one of the bank managers. I would say that their credibility is on this particular day being debated by Ugandans, when they are still alive. I am not ready to be among those discussing these particular issues.

Let me raise one more challenge reflected on page 28. What will be the fate of the 52 upcountry branches? The agreement says that 47 will stay open for two years and then they leave it to the discretion of the buyer, Stanbic bank, to see what they can do with those upcountry bank branches. What kind of agreement is this, which you enter in a very defeatist manner? 

What makes me more sad is that we even donated the buildings! We did not even sell them! We donated the physical buildings of this particular company! What kind of love of money is this? If you wanted to improve the management of UCBL you had to know that the building are part of this management. 

What we have done is to just change UCBL from a Bank of Uganda monopoly to the Stanbic bank monopoly. We have seen what has happened. We have seen the architects of these activities, and I would say every reasonable government needs an equal number of shepherds and butchers. In the next government, I am ready to be counted as a butcher. I will substantiate on this. You will eat the peasant’s money but you will not walk away with it. Your bedrooms will be investigation chambers. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, my speech might sound like a scare but I intended to make it the way I am doing. It seems it is the only weapon we have at our disposal. We shall forgive but we shall not forget. Thank you very much.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee that has given us the opportunity to once more debate the issue of UCBL. I want to thank the minister for having excelled in showing us the characteristics of a venture capitalist during his presentation here.  

I will start by quoting a proverb in Atesot, but I will use English to save time. “A tree that fails to dance will only be made to do so by the wind.” This issue of UCBL has come and we are debating it. If the tree does not dance, the wind will force the tree to dance.  

Madam Speaker, the other day when the honourable minister was making his presentation, he told us here that we were scaring the investors away from this country. We do not have any intention of scaring any investor away from this country. What we are doing here is only scaring the corrupt people in this country, but not the investors. 

What we see today is that the sale of UCBL suffered from “transparency deficiency”. That is what the sale suffers from, and that is what we were trying to save. We do not want this bank to suffer from this deficiency. We do not want to see the Chilubas of Zambia replayed here tomorrow. This will be too much for the liberators of this country.  

I am going to quote from the honourable minister’s response the other day. On page nine, section 8.8 he mentions something about taxes on consultancy payments. I will read it verbatim:  “The contracts between Bank of Uganda and the consultants did not contravene the tax laws of Uganda”. I repeat, “did not contravene the laws of Uganda”. That is what the honourable minister said. 

“The Bank of Uganda negotiated the contracts net of taxation, so that the Bank of Uganda is responsible for paying the applicable taxes to the URA. Bank of Uganda is currently finalising payment of these taxes. No loss has been incurred by Bank of Uganda…” -(Mr Tim Lwanga rose_)- Madam Speaker, I am reading this information. I am wondering what the honourable minister wants to add to this information that was presented here by none other than the Minister of Finance. I will not take your information, honourable minister.

“No loss has been incurred by Bank of Uganda, because if Bank of Uganda had negotiated contracts with the consultants, which were not net of tax, the amount paid to the consultants would necessarily have been higher, to recover the tax payments, which the consultants would themselves have had to make to Uganda Revenue Authority.”

I want to prove to the minister that the laws were contravened, and I will quote from the Income Tax Act of 1997, Sections 122 and 125. Section 122(1) of the 1997 Income Tax Act reads as follows: 

“Every person who enters into an agreement with a non-resident for the provision of services by the non-resident which services give rise to income sourced in Uganda shall, within thirty days of the date of entering into such an agreement, notify the Commissioner in writing of – 

(a) the nature of such agreement; 

(b) the likely duration of the  agreement;

(c) the name and postal address of the non-resident person to whom payments under the agreement are to be made; and

(d) the total amount estimated to be payable under the agreement to the non-resident person.”

The honourable minister did not do this. Uganda Revenue Authority was not involved. That is why you realise that up to today no tax has been paid.

Section 125(1) of the same Act says: 

“A withholding agent who fails to withhold tax in accordance with this Act is personally liable to pay to the Commissioner the amount of tax which has not been withheld, but the withholding agent is entitled to recover this amount from the payee.”  

This is why I am saying the honourable minister lied to us that the law was followed. It was not followed.  

I will go further and quote from the Attorney General’s submission to the committee, page three. This document is to the Clerk to Parliament, Parliament House Kampala. Reference was, “Advice to the Ad hoc Committee on the Sale of UCBL on the 24th June 2002.” It reads as follows:
 
(d) “waiving tax on payment to the Consultant hired by Bank of Uganda: The authority to impose or waive taxes is invested in the Minister of Finance, and without obtaining such authority, the waiver of tax in respect to the Bank of Uganda Consultant was lawful.”  

Who is now telling the truth? Madam Speaker, I will lay this document on the Table at the end of my speech. This is a document from the learned Attorney General of the Republic of Uganda. So, when the minister says no laws were flaunted, who is telling the truth? We want to know, who is telling the truth?  

I want to appeal to this House –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I am very reluctant to interrupt my colleague, hon. Okupa Elijah. However, I just want to give information that later this afternoon I will seek opportunity to give some explanation on this tax element. I will also lay on the Table some documents that will show a view that is contrary to what hon. Okupa is saying. 

To that effect, therefore, I would request that hon. Okupa restrains himself from referring to anybody as a liar until all sides have been heard. I thank you.   

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance. The payments to the consultants were done some time last year. We would anticipate that payments were also made immediately the deal was sealed, last year. Should you lay a document on the Table showing that the payment was made a few days ago, what shall we do with you? Are you a liar or are you telling the truth? Are you flaunting the law or are you following the law? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we agreed in the beginning, let us allow members to make their contributions. I think he has even lost his trend of thought. Please allow him to make his contribution.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know what the honourable minister wants to clarify on. I was quoting from the law, the Income Tax Act, and I have also quoted the Attorney General’s response, and I asked, who was telling the truth. Is it the Attorney General or the minister? But the law is supreme. So, he leaves me wondering where his clarification is coming from. 

It now reminds me of what my mother used to tell me, and I will say it here. She used to tell me, “a man eateth from where he worketh, and he worketh hard from where he eateth much.”

Madam Speaker, I will read from the Agreement about the contract act for consultancy services that was between Bank of Uganda and Bingham Dana c/o Neal Curtin. I read section 1.7, on page four, about taxes and duties: “Unless otherwise specified in the scope of work, the consultant shall not be liable to pay any Ugandan taxes, duties, fees and other imposition levied under the applicable law.”

Hon. Attorney General, is this the type of agreement we signed? Where does the Governor Bank of Uganda get authority to waive taxes and to draw up such an agreement? So many people are suffering in this country because they have not paid tax of Shs 50,000 or Shs 100,000. Their shops are being locked. But here we see foreigners come in and get out without paying taxes worth Shs 1.9 billion! I will prove this when I go to the figures, Madam Speaker.

What we need at this moment is to improve on any deficiency or loopholes in the committee’s report, if they are there. We need to improve on it but not rubbish it. That is the most important thing. And I will go to page 30 of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Try to conclude.

MR OKUPA: I am about to conclude, Madam Speaker.  On page 30 of the report, they have computed income tax at 15 percent but they left out one important element - Value Added Tax. Value Added Tax should have been computed at the rate of 17 percent. 

When we calculate the VAT on the amount of US $ 2,523,136.14, it comes to US $428,933.14. When you add to the income tax of US $378,470.42, we get a total of US $807,403.56. But let us not forget that there should be a penalty that should be attached to this. 

If you go to section 137 of the Income Tax Act, I will not read it because of time, it talks about the penalty for late payment of taxes. When you look at the VAT Statute, Section 30(3), it talks about the penalty too. So, the penalty should have been calculated at the rate of 2 percent per month, compounded. When I did these calculations, I got a total tax penalty of US $242,221. When you convert it to the Ugandan Shillings, it is Shs 1,973,294,303. That is the money lost, in terms of taxes alone, in this dubious deal. 

How many hospitals would we have built in this country, in our parishes? There are so many people dying in this country, and I think the tears of the people of this country will haunt the people who are involved in sentencing these people to suffering forever and ever. Madam Speaker, I want an explanation.  

When you look at the bid document, which was submitted by Stanbic to Bank of Uganda when they used the selective bidding, they quoted a range of between US $18,000,000 to US $25,000,000 as the purchase price for the business. It is there in their document, Madam Speaker, on the first page. “The price for 90 percent of shares of the company’s capital, expressed in US dollars, is 18 million to 25 million.”  

They go ahead and say, “the prospective acquirer excises its option to exclude certain assets and liabilities.” And they go ahead to list those assets and liabilities that they do not want included in this price: 

- Head office: that is the City branch and the Corporate branch.
- Nkrumah Road Office.
- The Non-core real estate;
- And the staff loans.

But then what do we see in the sale agreement? The bank is being sold at the same price but including the headquarters’ building. Surely, honourable members, can’t we see that this is daytime robbery? The value of the headquarters’ building was Shs 14.4 billion and it is being given away just like that, for free. That is why some of us think it was a donation. 

When I hear the minister asking, “Have you seen the renovations going on in these banks and how people are dressed”, surely, what do you expect someone who gets something free to do?

MR MWANDHA: If the headquarters building of UCBL had been left in the hands of Government, it would have saved Government a lot of money in rent. It could easily have housed three to four ministries. 

Our own Ministry of Gender, which is hiring a building called “Simba amanyo” - I do not know where that name came from - is paying a fortune for rent. If that building had only been saved, this government would have saved money in rent and housed up to four ministries. It is a real shame that the building was donated.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Mwandha, for that information. The most noble and royal thing the honourable minister should do, for our sake and for himself, is to save his name and go home. I think that is what he had in mind originally, because he refused to stand for parliamentary elections. I think he had reached the point of satiety. In economics this is where you cannot add anything of value to a product.  

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister committed a criminal act and charges against him for financial loss, neglect of duty and abuse of office should be preferred.

Let me sum up my presentation with a verse from the Bible, from St. Matthew. It reads as follows:

“What will it benefit a man to gain the whole world and lose his soul?” Thank you.

MR SULAIMAN MADADA (Bbaale County, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the committee for work well done. But I also want to move on a principle of the present world, which says, “The world is a world of a receiving giving and a giving receiving and a receiving giving.”  

I want to appreciate the findings of this committee as they are giving us a basis for the decision of the future. I have listened to the debate in the House and the discussions, and I think it is a challenge for us in the 7th Parliament to make one good decision that will be counted on us. (Applause).

This decision must be weighed with a lot of analysis. One, we are discussing the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank (UCBL) and we are saying this was done without transparency, but it might be appreciated at one point or another. But what are we going to do for the future? Are we suggesting that we cancel the sale of UCBL? 

To me, as a representative of the people of Bbaale, I can see a lot of legal implications in this. This is an international agreement which has a number of implications that must be considered. I appreciate the report, and I want to say that there might have been non-transparency in one area or another, which the committee has also stated. I want to go further and ask, “what was the cause of non-transparency?” The committee has rightly brought out a few issues, like the lacuna in the law, and I think this is a challenge for Parliament. If there is a lacuna in the law, it is not only the Executive but also Parliament to correct the lacuna in the law. That can be a cause of non-transparency.  

When you look at point 8.1.2 and 8.2, on the sale of banks by Bank of Uganda, they suggest here that we should be able to address this law. I think that is a role that Parliament has to do. 

In the same manner, in point 8.3, they talk of independence of the central bank, and they say we should review the law. 

I think these are genuine recommendations, and that might be the cause of part of this problem. So, as we look at the weaknesses on the other side, we should also appreciate the strengths. At this particular point, I would like to say –(Interruption)

DR ALEX OKOT: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I would like to seek clarification. You have noted that there are lacunas in the law, and the recommendation is very clear on what we should do. We have also noticed the gravest misconduct of the ministry, notwithstanding the law, which they know very well. Should we excuse them for that and they go away with it so that in future other people may continue in the same way and get the excuse for the people of Uganda?

MR MADADA: I would like to put this clarification to rest by using the very recommendation made here. The recommendation said that what happened is a misinterpretation of the law, which misinterpretation must be addressed in the review of that law. So, it is a question of the law having a lacuna. Therefore it requires proper address in order for us not to have that misinterpretation.  

It is a challenge to the 7th Parliament to ensure that that law is addressed -(Interjections)- I would like to continue, because I have got limited time and I must make my points clearly. The long-term objective of privatising UCBL was agreeable to this Parliament, and even to the 6th Parliament. What is being queried is the issue –(Interruption)

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member for Bbaale in order to interpret a lacuna as a misinterpretation of the law? Is he in order? He is misleading the House by interpreting the word “lacuna” as a misinterpretation of the law. I would like for you to guide us whether he is in order. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He seems to be reading from a report of the committee. Is that not what you are reading?

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling - (Laughter)- I heard it, and I want to request Members of Parliament to give opportunity to others and listen. I would like to –(Interruption)

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, is my honourable colleague in order to put words in your mouth that you have made a ruling, when you have not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked him whether he was reading from the report of the committee, because he keeps on talking about it.  

MR MADADA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was quoting from the report itself. I want to continue by saying that the long-term objective of privatising UCBL was agreeable to both this Parliament and even to the 6th Parliament that we succeeded. The most important point here is how best we can privatise UCBL. 

The best way forward is to look for those weaknesses, which we have already addressed in this report. The way forward would not be pointing fingers at mistakes of others without looking at ourselves. Therefore, I want to say that as Members of Parliament, we have a big challenge to make this country move on, by not putting any issue at a standstill. 

Assuming we today decided to stop the sale of UCBL, I believe this would bring the country to a standstill. Parliament is supposed to be here to help in development and make people believe in themselves. As a Member of Parliament for Bbaale, I really want to call upon Members of Parliament to look at this issue, agree on the weaknesses and look at the best way forward and appreciate what has been done. Thank you very much.

MR DANIEL KIWALABYE (Kiboga East, Kiboga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Kiboga District is part of Luwero Triangle, and Luwero Triangle was the birthplace of the Movement Government. 

I start by thanking the committee and its chairman for the report they have made to this Parliament. This report is not intended to retrieve the bank, because it is already sold. We are only considering the post-mortem report. This post-mortem report is to guide us to evaluate our methods of work. 

Have we been transparent? Have we followed the law? Is the sale beneficial to our people? If not, why? These are the questions we should ask. Because, Madam Speaker, UCBL was formed because of a purpose, and the purpose was to fill in the gap left by the imperial banks. There are certain aspects the imperial banks could not address simply because they were profit driven. So, the wise people of that time, the Parliamentarians and government of the time, thought that to help Ugandans, there had to be a bank established to address the gap. 

Today, if we are getting rid of that bank, we must be mindful of those objectives for which that bank was set up. I therefore submit that it is wrong to say that the bank failed completely simply because it did not make profits. There were other aspects to be considered, apart from making profits. These banks, which are driven by profits only –(Interruption)

MR MADADA: Thank you very much. I want to quote from the Minister of Finance’s letter - let us not forget that UCBL has twice in the space of 10 years been mismanaged. It made a loss from 1988 to 1998, except from 1995/96. That means that prior to that, the bank was making a profit and it was even providing the social benefits to the Ugandans who could not afford borrowing from the so-called “foreign banks” to which we have sold. Thank you.

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you very much, honourable member for that information. Madam Speaker, the impression I got from the honourable minister of Finance when he was presenting his rebuttal is that we should congratulate him for having got rid of the bank, after all we have resolved the bank. But, honourable minister, what about the services that this bank was rendering to our people? 

This bank was set up to mobilize the small deposits of our people and bring them into the modern sector of the economy, for development. This is not what the original banks did. In fact in this report they say that this bank could not be valued highly because the deposits did not measure up to the standards the prospective investors wanted. Even this Stanbic bank, to which we sold UCBL, still regards the small deposits of our people as nothing. 

But this bank was also established to address the problem of Ugandanisation. It was also established to address, at that time, the problem of Africanisation. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my honourable colleague from Kiboga that the mission of an institution evolves like a culture. The needs of 1964 cannot be the same needs today. So, most of the issues that led to the formation of the bank have adequately been addressed and therefore the mission changed.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Kizige should not mislead the speaker on the floor. You cannot divorce the mission from the objective. What sort of business is that? 

MR KIWALABYE: Well, Madam Speaker, perhaps hon. Madada should have come in at a later stage when I had formulated my argument, because the question is, has the Uganda Commercial Bank achieved those objectives for which it was established, apart from profit? This is how we judge it. You judge according to the objectives. So, it is wrong to say that the bank was a failed bank simply because it failed to make a profit.  

We should also remember that this bank did not fail to make a profit simply because it was badly managed but because of the interference of the people in government, those who held political power in this country. I therefore submit that mere saying that you can discount the future income alone and get the value of the bank without considering other achievements, which the bank had, is wrong. 

That is why, despite that the bank has not been making huge profits, Ugandans still consider it as a their treasured, Ugandan bank. Therefore, my people in Kiboga, whom I represent and who struggled in the protracted struggle –(Laughter)- have been very much concerned. My people are concerned that their bank was sold. It is the only bank, which people had ever seen opened in Kiboga District. That is why the question of whether or not the branches will be maintained is crucial to them. We still have one branch left in Kiboga District and if this bank is sold out what will happen?  

The suggestion is that if the people of Uganda want those branches to be maintained then they should subsidize them. Why should we subsidize?  We had our bank running irrespective of whether they were profitable or not, you sell it because you do not want to incur any more costs, and we are to subsidize a privately-owned bank? Government should find a way of filling in that gap. 

I also do not agree with the honourable minister’s report that they sold bank “as is”. To me as a lay person it means that you buy the bank as it is and you do not subtract or add anything but you take it as you find it and you just buy it. If you are buying a motor vehicle you do not ask the buyer why the car has got worn out tyres. You look at it and buy it as it is. But the Uganda Commercial Bank was not like that. 

Bank of Uganda came in after it had been run down into insolvency. To make it solvent again the government pumped in a lot of taxpayer’s money. So when it was sold it was a solvent bank. But look, the minister, the seller, was allowed to take out Shs 9 billion to keep it there. Is that sale as it is? Then the buyer was given the opportunity to select what he should buy and what he should not buy. Is that sale as it is? (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the bank was solvent at the time it was sold and all these valuables, the branches, the mobilisation of our small deposits, the Africanisation, the training of our people in banking, all those valuables should have been put into consideration when selling the bank. I do not agree with the honourable minister when he said the bank had to be sold at any price, or without a reserve price.

Although I may not agree with the calculations, at least a seller should have something in mind. That if the price goes below this -(Laughter)- but to sale as if you have to get rid of junk or something that is worthless! Supposing nobody came to buy, what would have happened? The potato growers of this country would sit there -(Laughter)- and manage their bank. Therefore we had an alternative.

I must therefore submit that the principle of the Movement is transparency. The principle of the Movement is open criticism. Open criticism expects us people who are being criticised to say sorry if something went wrong. Madam Speaker, when you look at the explanation given for not advertising, it is not convincing.  

When you look at the way the bidders or the would-be-buyers were solicited by a foreigner, you wonder. It was done by somebody who is persona non grata in our neighbouring country. If something went wrong, somebody has to say “honourable members, I made a mistake”, and we would see what to do. We have seen honourable members apologising, each one embracing the other and we said, “Well, let us continue because life has to continue.” If there was a mistake, we should own up to the mistake and this is the principle of the Movement.

I want to finish with one observation. The mistakes of the Executive will impinge on the credibility of the Movement as a system. These glaring mistakes made by the Executive are not the objectives of the Movement as a system, which came here to usher in fundamental change.  

Time will come, or has it come, to separate the two. I was considering it an advantage to the Movement that the Chairman of the Movement is also the President and the Head of the Executive. But now I see there is a problem with that. People out there cannot separate the mistakes of the Executive from the mistakes of the Movement, and when they open up, we shall have a task -(Laughter)- surely we shall have a task because we must be prepared. We should prepare for such confrontations as “you sold the people’s bank at a give-away price; you did not cater for the branches here; you did not do this and the we smelt a rat in the whole exercise.” This is the problem. 

I urge whoever handled the situation and made some errors - because to error is human - to apologise to this august House and to the Ugandans and we see what we can do with them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues of the House. First, I want to start by responding to three of the colleagues who have spoken before: hon. Mao, the hon. Member for Kiboga, and hon. Odonga Otto.

Hon. Mao started by saying that we are Ugandans we have no other place to go to but Uganda. He could not be more right. This applies to those on the backbench as much as those on the frontbench. Hon. Kiwalabye has just said that under the Movement Political System, open criticism is a principle and those who error, whether they are on the backbench or the frontbench, should admit they made errors.  

Hon. Otto did point out, in line with that principle, that when you look at what happened in the 6th Parliament in regard to UCBL, something was decided, which he considers was perhaps the mistake of Parliament. We have a critical issue we are trying to resolve. It was discussed in the 6th Parliament; we have picked it up and I think if we are going to resolve it conclusively then listening to each other would be very helpful. 

Where the frontbench has made a positive point, we pick it. Where the backbench has made a positive point, we should pick it and then see how we move forward. The attitude of each one being defensive will not help us to resolve the problem. (Applause). 

First, we can commend ourselves as the 7th Parliament. We found a matter on the records of Parliament, which our predecessors in the 6th Parliament had tried to resolve, and it did give us some guidance on what we should do in order to carry on with this task. It would have been a mistake if we did not pick this matter up. Therefore I think history will judge us right. Indeed we did pick up the matter, but the question is whether we went forward or backwards.

The committee has raised the issue of partnership between the Executive and the backbench. My answer to this is that this issue of partnership is not by choice. It is a must. That there must be partnership between the backbench and the frontbench is a directive of the Constitution. That is because we are all here on behalf of the people and whatever we do we must centrally address the interests of the people. 

How do we form a partnership? First we decided that we would divide some work; you in the frontbench will do this; we in the backbench will do this; and the Judiciary will do something else. In the course of doing that work, we may even have disagreements of opinion or disagreements of interpretation. What you may think is right today, the other party may think it is wrong, but you have to listen to the other party. It is your job; you do it. 

However, in my opinion, despite your explanations, I think you are making a mistake and as we go on things will get clearer. Whoever has made a mistake will have time to reverse it. If it has been so fatal, he must answer because there are sanctions for those who error. 

Members have said that the Executive has been disregarding the backbench, but you have not given the evidence. Let us start, for example, with the 6th Parliament. Even on this matter alone, the Executive is doing its work and they sold UCBL at first and it was a big failure. 

The 6th Parliament came and said, “no, you people have made a mistake” and they brought the facts. The Executive realised that they had made a mistake and the minister responsible had to step down in response to the Westmont saga.  He had to step down in response to this error where the bank had been sold to a person who was not qualified to take the bank. That person was trying to rip this country off by taking the asset - this bank.  I cannot call that disregard.  

So partnership means that sometimes we shall agree or disagree, depending on the interpretation. What one party thinks is positive, the other party may not think the same. So we should not have a stalemate but keep moving on the principle of division of labour.

My second point is with regard to the rule of law, the issue of justice. I think we are not doing ourselves justice, Madam Speaker. As of now, our adviser, we in the backbench and those in the frontbench, is the Attorney General. The Attorney General is here, he stands up to give his view, and someone says to him, “I do not agree with you.” I do not think that is acting correctly. It is not acting correctly -(Interjection) I will come to that point whether he was ignored or not. But in principle –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, we agreed that we were going to behave in a civil manner towards one another. Let the NPC speak, and you will also get a chance to speak too.

DR KIYONGA: I want to address some points with regard to the rule of law as we resolve this matter. There is on record an opinion from the Attorney General indicating that the central bank could proceed and resolve the bank in accordance with the Financial Institutions Statute (FIS).  That is on record and the bank proceeded in accordance to that advice, and the law. So, for us who want to go in accordance with the law, we should accept it. For us to –(Mr Mao rose_)- we will come to that, hon. Mao.  

The evidence I am tendering is that there is an opinion from the Attorney General saying the central bank could act in accordance with the Financial Institutions Statute, in order to deal with UCBL. That is factual. 

Secondly, members, if we go to our important report, which is guiding our discussion, page 19, paragraph 46.2 – if you read the last sentence of that paragraph, it says: “A strong view was that the current law gives too much power to the Bank of Uganda and it needs to be reviewed.” 

I draw two lessons from this formulation. One, apparently there is a law that the central bank followed. It just happened in this interpretation that it was given too much power.

Two, in the words of hon. Odonga Otto, that is another case where we could say that Parliament made a mistake. Parliament gave power to the central bank which we now realise – with due respect- is too much. We cannot go and kill the messenger on that account. We send the man, “you go and take this letter”, and in the letter there are apparently very bad instructions. If we need to blame anyone, we must go to the man who sent these instructions. 

It is Parliament that made the law that the central bank is using. So, in that particular respect -(Interjection)– if I could first develop this point then we can discuss that later. I will be able to leave the Floor subject to the time available to me. In that particular respect really, we are saying that the law gave too much power to the central bank. We cannot in the same voice go after the central bank on that issue.  

Madam Speaker, I thank all Members of Parliament, Cabinet and members of the public who have been very suspicious about this issue of the central bank -(Interruption) 

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, perhaps the Minister without Portfolio could clarify to me before he leaves that point. I thank you, Sir. The minister says that the central bank sold UCBL under the Financial Institutions Statute. I think it is Statute 93. I am looking at section 32 of the Act, which talks about the powers of the bank upon possession of a financial institution.

I am sure the minister may be having this statute. Do you have it, Sir?  I want you to read section 32(2) and tell me where it is provided that when the central bank possesses insolvent banks, it has power to sell them. I will read it and then you make your own judgement. Section 32(1):“The Central Bank shall, upon possessing a financial institution under Section 31 of the Statute, be vested with exclusive powers of management and control of the affairs of the Financial Institution.”  

Then 32(2): “The power referred to in sub-section (1) of this section shall include power to:

(a) Continue or discontinue its operations as a financial institution (notwithstanding the revocation of its license);

(b) Stop or limit the payment of its obligations;

(c) Employ any necessary staff;

(d) Execute any instrument in the name of the financial institution;

(e) Initiate, defend and conduct in its name any action or proceeding to the which the financial institution may be a party;

(f) Re-organise or liquidate the financial institution in accordance with this statute; and

(g) Do any act, which is necessary to enable the central bank carry out this obligation.”

Let me explain (f). In liquidation, do you transfer, do you sell the ownership? In re-organisation, do you transfer the ownership? The answer for me as a lawyer who did commercial and banking law is, is in both instances, no.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I need to address that first. I thank you, hon. Ben Wacha. I did specifically give way because I thought hon. Wacha was going to bring a very strong point and I am grateful because it helps us. As I said, we must clarify to each other and at the end of the day move forward.

I have earlier on said that there is on record a communication from the Attorney General to the central bank, saying the central bank had authority to deal with UCBL under FIS. That is the starting point.  

Two, I am not a lawyer as you know, hon. Wacha, but fortunately I am surrounded by many lawyers in this House and elsewhere. I did raise those very points to my colleagues so that I could be clear about them before I take the Floor.  

I was authoritatively informed that under re-organising there are similar activities. The central bank has more than once before achieved the very same end that has been achieved under UCBL. There are banks in this country that had difficulties, like Sembule and Nile Bank; they were taken in by the central bank.

They were re-organised in the sense that the central bank worked to get core investors to come from outside and re-organise the partnership in that bank. (Applause). In the case of what we are discussing, this is what we are driving to achieve, former owners should stay with some shares too. You may ask whether there are 20 or 30, but the principle is that he will be there. So, I will leave it to the Attorney General when he stands up to speak. I was convinced by his explanation, and there is a precedent.

Perhaps to drive the point further home, hon. Wacha, you talked about liquidation. If we are liquidating the business, its capital may have been Shs 10 million. If at the time of sale it is left with Shs 1 million, maybe the safe is still in the house, maybe the shelves in the shop are still there too, then surely under liquidation we will sell those things. It is a liquidation agreement, and whoever is buying is taking the shelves, the safe and everything else, because they are all under the umbrella of liquidation. But in this case it is under the umbrella of re-organisation.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of information.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, may I proceed and finish so that I can give opportunity to other colleagues? Hon. Lukyamuzi, I would like to develop my points, I am not ready to give way yet. 

I was making the point that I greatly thank Members of Parliament, members of Cabinet, and members of the public who have been very suspicious about the sale of this bank. Why do I say it is right for people to be suspicious? When we are guarding public property –(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Thank you very much. I was getting a little bothered. I want to understand and raise a point of order that since when did this particular Parliament define re-organisation to mean sale? Which criteria are we using to equate re-organisation to sale, the way the NPC is doing? Is he in order, anyway?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, if Parliament did not spell out what constitutes re-organisation, then it is subject to many interpretations.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of order with reference to our Constitution vis-à-vis what hon. Dr Kiyonga has been articulating. Article 1 of this Constitution says, “All power belongs to the people….” This Constitution goes on to say that all fundamental laws of Uganda shall be passed here in Parliament. It goes on to say that this House is so strong; it is so powerful that it can even remove the President; it can even remove a minister.

Aware of the observation I have given with reference to the basis of argument as articulated by Dr Kiyonga, namely, on Page 19, paragraph 4, the basis of his argument is, “A strong view was that the current law gives too much power to Bank of Uganda, and needs to be reviewed.” 

Madam Speaker, laws are not static. In public interest, this Parliament unanimously passed a resolution to advise that they should not sell UCBL. We are not here to support evil. Is the honourable minister in order to degrade the image and the powers attached to this Parliament, capable of doing almost anything, provided it is done rightly? What is he talking about? In other words, is he in order to confuse the House that what we did cannot stand even if we are the people’s main representatives?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Lukyamuzi, I think the minister was talking about an Act of Parliament as opposed to the resolution. And that is what I think our committee is saying, that we need to do some work here about the Act.

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I did not in any way say that Parliament erred. I have been very clear that there is a law, there was advice, and I have also said my colleague, the Attorney General, is here to give further substantiation on that issue.

Let me go to the point of suspicion. Once we are handling public property, we need to have a high index of suspicion so that we can guard this property very well. When people say that the bank has not been sold for value or that it is being bought under cover, that is a very good starting point. However, it is only useful as a lead so that we follow it through to reach the truth. It would be wrong for us to get suspicious and not use it as a basis of action. We would have to go on until we can put our finger on the problem. In that way, we leave nobody in doubt.  

Madam Speaker, I spent the whole of last weekend trying to understand this complex matter. I asked many questions of my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance, and even asked him, “Could you please call the central bank people?” At the end of the day I told the central bank officials that, “If I find out that it is you, the Bank of Uganda officials who erred, we the government cannot go. You will be the ones to go.” 

Because I need to understand fully who is at fault, as hon. Kiwalabye was saying. The Movement cannot go if it is not at fault. On the other hand, it could also be wrong to just bundle someone up and chase him away if the fault is not clearly defined. 

In this House we are very privileged to have a lot of skills. Hon. Mafabi, for example, has taken the Floor a number of times. Yesterday he tendered a balance sheet. Hon. Kizige did the same, and hon. Tim Lwanga did the same. All these brothers are accountants. So, at least let us agree on one point rather than everybody trying to push his line. On the Floor today, I still heard someone saying that the headquarters of UCBL were just given away. Really, we must have the evidence. The balance sheet which is before us, of December 2001, clearly shows the properties and equipment of UCBL in which the headquarters building was included.

MR MAFABI: Thank you, bwana minister for giving way. What you are saying exactly is that the balance sheets were laid on the Table. I would like to correct one impression, but before I go ahead, some of the arguments we are advancing are accounting points of view. The book value does not necessarily mean that is the market value. When we put the balance sheets down they were not showing the market value. 

What our colleagues are stating is that when the valuation was carried out, like for the headquarters building, the one of 1996 shows that the building was worth Shs 14 billion - okay we can say Shs 15 billion - but the book value shows only Shs 2 billion because of depreciation. As time goes on, we write off some of these, and as we wrote off in all economies, most assets appreciate. But what I want to provide to you, which will help you is that sometimes when I am the one you have called, who is in the wrong, I will hide the truth.  

Let me give you some more information. When we were selling the bank, we used the date of 31 December 2000 and the evaluation report we based ourselves on is at 31 December 2000. I want you to get me clearly. When we were doing that deal, we never took into consideration many things which I want to give you. We had a tax loss computed and agreed on by URA, of Shs 73.7 billion. It is even in the DFID report on page 26. You can quote the page and you will be able to check it. That one, as far as the bank is concerned, it is an asset. So, as we were selling, that asset should have been taken care of.

Secondly, provision for bad debts –(Interruption)

DR KIYONGA: I gave the Floor, Madam Speaker, to receive clarification on the building and I have received that. So, I would like to continue, with your permission -(Interruption)

MR JAMES MWADHA: Madam Speaker, I will give clarification on the building, as a member of the committee –(Interruption)- if the minister is genuine about getting information, I will give the information to him.

DR KIYONGA: I am genuine but I am not yielding the Floor at this stage. What hon. Mafabi has said is very helpful and I want to make two points in respect of that. If something is sold cheaply, use those very words. Otherwise if you say you gave it away as a gift, the people who will read the Hansard will not interpret whether it was a gift or it was cheap selling. That is point number one. 

So, we should be clear on the Floor and tell colleagues who are not in the know, that the building was in the schedule for sale. The only difference is how much it was valued at.
 
Secondly, as hon. Mafabi has finally cited, is the market value. You find the market value in the market. You just do not get it from your head. You go into the market to find the market value. And I am coming to the point now. During the sale, did we really go to the market or go elsewhere? So, even if you value something at Shs 100 million, when you go to the market they could offer you Shs 70 million. They could also offer you Shs 50 million, and the choice remains yours whether you are going to sell or not. 

I am talking about the balance sheet so that we clear this point first, because I have heard, not only in Parliament but also on the streets, that when the sale was being conducted, the negotiations excluded the headquarters building. Many say that after negotiations were done, then the building was donated, that “you take this as well”. I need to be helped with the evidence about that so that we can move -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, can I give the evidence? I was on the committee; can I give information to the minister?

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I have not given way, so I think we should follow our –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: You are telling lies to the House! You just want to accept your line of argument. You do not want to accept any more information. (Applause).

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I am holding the Floor.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The concept of government is collective. The minister holding the Floor is a whole minister who sits in Cabinet, and an NPC. He is therefore a very big and senior man, capable of knowing the top secrets of government. Is it in order for Dr Kiyonga to stand here and tell us that he did not know that it had been resolved that the main building be given away to the buyer? Would that not be total deceit to the House? 

You are at the centre of power in Uganda, the National Political Commissar, a main advisor in the Movement Government, Minister without Portfolio and a former Minister of Finance! Is it in order, Madam Speaker, for the minister to give an impression that he could not know the story of the deal?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think the reason we have so many ministers here is that each person is responsible for his portfolio and answerable for that. This gentleman seated here is the one answerable for the finance portfolio.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: The NPC, while on the Floor, did request for evidence and I thought it would be part of good parliamentary practice for him to give way and receive the evidence. Is he in order to block evidence from being given to this House, which he himself so badly wants?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I cannot force a member to receive information.  

DR KIYONGA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Surely, my brother, hon. Patrick Mwondha, if he has been following what I was saying, knows that we all take the Floor, collect information and we build what we shall use to evaluate this. While I am on the Floor and I oppose a question, I am not closing the debate. When someone else comes to the Floor, he will then help us and put that evidence. I am not in any way blocking evidence from anyone.

I now go to some specific aspects of our report, Madam Speaker. The report said that 11 banks were approached so they could elicit their interest in competing for the UCBL. What is not in the report, which I have read carefully, is that no doubt was cast on any of the 11 banks that are listed here as having shown interest. The report has however argued that if it had been an open bidding process, we would probably have got more competition and a better market and probably a higher offer. 

That is a very good argument theoretically. But since our purpose is to get to the very bottom of the matter and get the truth, it would have been more helpful if the committee had also shown in their search that “yes, we looked at these 11 banks but in addition we have” –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I will require some protection from the backbench.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, order!

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, it would have been very helpful so that we get to the bottom of this matter. If the committee had come back and said, “well, we did not have the time but at least we approached three other banks, who because they did not know, they could not offer interest in this –“ (Interruption)

MR RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the NPC for giving way. I am a member of the ad hoc committee. I also enjoyed the privilege to have been a Member of the Finance, Planning and Economic Development Committee. 

In the ad hoc committee we were told 11 banks were approached. There was no evidence that actually they were approached and there is no way we could have left it out in our report. We had to capture it. But we were told they resourced from 11 banks. Actually a list was provided but we did not have evidence that these banks were approached. Thank you very much.

DR KIYONGA: I thank you, hon. Bright Rwamirama. Really, for me as someone who read the report outside the committee, the understanding I got was that 11 banks were approached. The point I am making is not faulting the committee, but it would have been more helpful to come up - even if the 11 banks were not proven to have been contacted - the committee could still have come up with two or three banks. These banks would have said that, “we were interested but we did not know. This was hidden and only certain banks were being approached”.

Again if you go to page 10 of the report, I think it is very useful. Paragraph 4(2), the heading is “Evaluation and comparison of the Stanbic and DFCU bids.” Madam Speaker, when I read this chapter, I go away with the impression that even in the judgement of the committee, they thought that DFCU’s offer was inferior to the one of Stanbic bank. The only little fault you could find –(Interruption)– (_Mr Katuntu rose_) if I could first finish that point so that it is very well understood –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: But I think you are analysing from wrong premises, honourable National Political Commissar.

DR KIYONGA: Can I please make that point first then I yield the Floor later on? The only point where the conclusion was a bit weak is 4.28 on page 13. The committee says; “However the ad hoc committee observed that the method of sale preferred by Bank of Uganda predictably failed to generate a competitive sale process resulting in low price offers.” But as far as comparing the two banks was concerned, I think they concede that Stanbic bank was superior.

Madam Speaker, on the point of procedure of the central bank, I did stand here and say that where we think there is some fault we should bring it out. There is the question of the principles of transparency and procurement. Parliament is concerned that the Bank of Uganda appears to have used sole sourcing, particularly used by the consultants. In my search, what I discovered is that actually in the central bank, quite often they use this principle of sole sourcing.  

I am making two points on that issue. One, it was not particular to this arrangement that they went for sole sourcing. But it is true that for purposes of public accountability, we need to review the procedures of the central bank in respect to procurement. I think the Ministry of Finance will undertake to ensure that this is done.

Therefore, Madam Speaker –(Mr Nabwiso rose_)– Ndugu Nabwiso, could I finish this so that other members can also come on the Floor? My own reading of this situation is giving the circumstances surrounding the sale of UCBL, given its history. My own judgement as Kiyonga is that we got some value from the bank. Maybe we could have got more but I think we did get some value from this bank. 

I also think that there is need for us, through the Ministry of Finance, to scrutinise the procurement procedures of the central bank.

Finally, what is our point of partnership? I want again to end with what hon. Mao said that the House is not here to chase investors. The House is interested in investors so that the economy can grow –(Interjection)- yes, genuine investors, I absolutely agree with you. So, in the pathway of dealing with any errors wherever they are, higher goal must be protected. 

I think we can still have a good debate and resolve an issue without giving signals which could be misunderstood. Someone to stand here and say, “Even after 40 years, we shall chase you; even at 50 years, we shall reverse the sale,” this is not in the interests of the people that we represent. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Madam Speaker, I think the National Political Commissar should not wind up his discussion without answering this question. Is the National Political Commissar saying that this whole exercise of selling UCBL was done transparently?  That is the question. If it was not done transparently, what do we do to Movement cadres who do not do things transparently? (Laughter and Applause).

Let me read what we are supposed to do to such Movement leaders. This document is titled, “Movement System: methods of work and code of conduct for Movement leaders.” Page 17 says; “Readiness to learn: The world is a very wide classroom and society is a very broad blackboard. Therefore, a revolutionary must always be ready to learn from others and avoid the “I know attitude”. This has always been the problem with Movement people. I am a Movementist and I have experienced it before  -(Laughter and Applause)  

Then the last point is on page 18. This was written by Jacob Asiimwe, Special Assistant to the Chairman of the Movement and it reads as follows: “Shame is a revolutionary sentiment. A revolutionary should always be ashamed of doing wrong and even when one has done wrong, one should regret having done the wrong and should therefore be repentant.” This stuff is from the Movement Secretariat.  

I am still seeking clarification –(Laughter and Applause). On page four of the Movement 15-Point Programme, it says; “The NRM took the line of maintaining an independent line of economics, politics, culture and foreign relations. Because of this clear stand by NRM, Uganda is fully respected by major powers and engages in all her negotiations with its shoulders high.” (Laughter and Applause). 

According to the Monitor newspaper of today, Madam Speaker, hon. Ssendaula, who is supposed to be walking with his shoulders high in these negotiations, is in trouble over the defence budget. The World Bank is saying it will not approve anything unless he bows down according to their demands.

We also had hon. Henry Kaijuka who walked with his head high in the negotiations that concern Bujagali Dam Project. He went to the World Bank, and we know how Uganda is still walking high – (Laughter and Applause)  

Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. We have these documents here, and have heard of the experiences of neighbouring countries. In Tanzania in 1981, when there was a treason case and some prisoners escaped from prison, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Ali Hassan Mwinyi, said that although he was not responsible for the escape of prisoners on treason from Tanzania’s prison, he decided to step down because his conscious could not allow him to continue to be minister. 

In 1985 when Nyerere was going to give up power and they were looking for a President, they looked for Mwinyi because he was the only man at that time who had agreed to resign on matters of moral integrity. (Laughter and Applause).

I am finalising my clarification. (Laughter and Applause). I do not believe, as hon. Ken Lukyamuzi does, that we should censure the President. I think he has done a very good job for this country and after all we believe he will give up power in 2006. We also believe that he will not try to have a “project Uhuru” in this country. We cannot censure the Prime Minister either because in a few years’ time he will be taking charge of a particular situation. (Laughter and Applause). 

In view of all this, can the National Political Commissar, who is also the Minister without Portfolio, advise that in order to consolidate the culture of the Movement and build up ethics and moral integrity in this country, the Movement people should accept this? Can he not advise the people in the concerned ministry, the presidential advisors, and those who wrote the NRM 15-Points Programme, including Roland Kakooza Mutale? Can he not advise these people to resign now? That is my clarification. (Laughter).

MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have very few points to raise in this debate. First of all, however, I must congratulate the committee for creating this opportunity of mobilizing ministers to attend such an important debate. (Applause). 

Madam Speaker, on the 29th of July 1965, when the President of the Republic of Uganda then gave assent to the Uganda Commercial Bank Act, a window of hope was opened to the indigenous people of Uganda. They would now be able to have access to credit, and improve on the production of the country. This was a caring government. This was a government that had the people at the centre of the economy. 

At the time Uganda Commercial Bank was born, no foreign bank could give credit to any indigenous farmer or trader. I cannot imagine whether the ragtag farmers that vote for us in our respective constituencies can come to Kampala, walk to Barclays Bank, Standard Chartered Bank, Stanbic Bank of yesterday or today, and get access to credit. That is the gravity of the matter, and that is why I want to start by quarrelling - a little bit - with the committee. 

I think the recommendations that you should have given us should have been a little bit more than just “expressing displeasure”. What is “expressing displeasure”?  

I want lawyers here to educate me. When a deal is discovered to be fraudulent, is it still legal? Is it still binding? I want to understand that. 

I have taken the trouble to read the report of this committee. I have taken the trouble to read all other reports that we have received concerning UCBL, and I think nobody here should pretend that you need further evidence to prove that fraud did take place. Nobody here, if you are a Ugandan, whether you are the NPC or whatever you are –(Laughter)- and you have read the reports, and you have seen the documents tabled to the committee and to this Parliament, can still go around and say you need evidence. That is not being sincere. I think that is what we should be dealing with. How do we deal with the insincerity of the system?

One of the problems I also have is that when such a matter arises and becomes a national issue, we tend to deal with personalities. We are talking about the Governor Bank of Uganda, we are talking about the minister, but it is the system that has institutionalised corruption and robbery of the highest order.

You can censure my brother, the Minister of Finance, today and bring another one, and tomorrow the same thing will be repeated. It is the system we should look at. Let us be serious, Madam Speaker.

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, I have the results of an opinion poll, which was done by Corridor Opinion Polls in 1998, and they were published in our newspapers. Sixty four percent of Ugandans said President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni leads the most corrupt regime since independence. Twenty percent thought it was Dr Obote, and 12 percent thought it was Gen. Idi Amin. 

Seventy percent of Ugandans said this government is not doing enough to fight corruption. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much, hon. Mao. That goes to confirm that we are wasting time dealing with individuals who are presiding over the various responsibilities in this government. We should begin to look at the core of the issue, the system itself.

UCBL remained focused even at the time when the sale deal had been more or less concluded. The auditor’s report that I have read, covering the period 1996/1997, confirms that that particular year, UCBL lent 53.5 percent of its loan portfolio to the agricultural sector; 22.5 percent to trade and commerce, touching on produce trade, coffee and all that, which is the lifeblood of Ugandans; and 10.4 percent to the manufacturing sector, in which you know very well that Africans are still very rare. That shows UCBL remained focused on its goal. 

Therefore, a government that is sensitive to the needs of the economy and to the needs of its people should have been conscious when making a decision for sale. That is one of my prime concerns.

My second concern, Madam Speaker, is that experience in the recent past has shown that these foreign banks do not care about rural branches. You know that recently, Barclays Bank closed the only branch in Jinja. You also know that Standard Chartered Bank closed the Masaka branch. How do you expect Stanbic Bank to maintain the rural branches, which have been serving our people? And then we talk about it here and laugh! I do not understand it, Madam Speaker.  That is my second concern.  

I want to clarify my position. I am a believer in privatisation; I know the value of privatisation. However, I have been betrayed because of the manner in which the privatisation process has been recklessly managed and used as a tool of plundering the nation. That is my concern. What are my reasons? 

First, right from the onset of this process it has been very clear that the government has been putting more focus on the interests of the investors as opposed to the interests of the indigenous people. If you want evidence, definitely we are capable of piling you with books and books to prove that this government is focussing and serving the interests of the foreigners in this privatisation process.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the process is enriching those who are already rich, and it reminds me of what happened during Amin’s time. Amin presided over what used to be called “mafutaminginisation” of the Asian enterprises. In that scenario, Idi Amin plundered foreign companies in order to enrich indigenous people, still a bad exercise. But what is happening now? The current “mafutaminginisation” is plundering our own in order to enrich the few of our own. It does not matter whether you are a minister or a Member of Parliament. The 24 million Ugandans have put us on the door. They want to know which side you belong. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INVESTMENT (Mr Sam Kutesa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for giving way. In fact, I am going to talk about an experience I knew as a member of DP on these benches. 

I would like to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that while she was Chairperson of Uganda Development Bank (UDB) in 1984, that bank imported Boran cattle from Kenya and it allocated 200 head of cattle to President Milton Obote who did not have a ranch. He sold a piece of allocation paper to the late Yafeesi Sabiiti who took these cows to Mulungu Estate in Gomba. I thank you. (Applause). 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am very happy that my brother, Sam Kutesa, has come out of his closet and he is now giving us his true identity, which I did not want to disclose. However, I want to tell you that Milton Obote, when I was Chairman of UDB, I was then called “Chairman” -(Laughter)- and you know as Minister of Finance that under my chairmanship that bank was revived. 

That bank was able to adopt financial principles and it became professional, and you cannot produce any evidence to this House that Milton Obote was allocated anything by Uganda Development Bank. I challenge you; you must come here with a document to prove that Uganda Development Bank donated animals to Milton Obote. You must come to Parliament with it; I am not going to accept withdrawal. You must come to Parliament because that touches on the integrity of Mrs Ogwal, personally. 

Whether it happened when I was there or not, whatever it is, I know that under my chairmanship, nothing - I want to repeat this, nothing was ever donated and Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) as a party never believed in donation of anything to anybody. We never believed in patronage; that is the point of our departure.

MR MAO: Madam Speaker, according to our rules, when members make allegations, they are required to substantiate them. We have the Rules Committee that has been vigilant in following up that provision and disciplining those who make reckless allegations to sometimes deflect barbs that are aiming at them. 

Is it in order for the hon. Sam Kutesa to make an allegation and fail to substantiate it to this honourable House? If not, then this matter may have to be referred to the Rules Committee for investigation.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mao, you are now usurping my powers. However, before you interjected, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal said she was not interested in withdrawal. She wanted the hon. Kutesa to produce evidence. So at an opportune time he will produce the evidence, because that is what she wants.  

MR KUTESA: Madam Speaker, I am willing to do that, and I will repeat what I said. While hon. Cecilia Ogwal was Chairperson of Uganda Development Bank, she says “Chairman” but I think she was “Chairperson” –(Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, order.

MR KUTESA: In 1984, the bank imported Boran cattle from Kenya and allocated 200 cows to Milton Obote. The allocation paper was sold to the late hon. Yafeesi Sabiiti of Mulungu Estates in Butambala. I am willing to call people from Mulungu Estates to testify to that.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter, an allegation against a former President of this country. Can the hon. Sam Kutesa tell us when he is bringing that evidence, or are you going to give direction as to when he should bring that evidence here and we settle this matter? 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, at the end of the day, this country may have to claim this money from whoever got these cows free of charge. Therefore, I think it is very important that hon. Kutesa does us a favour and produces this evidence at the earliest opportunity possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he has undertaken to produce the papers.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, taking into account the seriousness of this matter and the fact that at one point the honourable member who made the allegation was found not to have told the truth to this House; can this House specify the format of the evidence that the honourable member must produce?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the member has offered to bring evidence. When he brings it we shall determine its validity. We cannot at this stage say, “you must bring a title deed”, or this and that. I do not think it is fair. Let him bring evidence and present it to this House.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: In view of the fact that the late Yafeesi Sabiiti jointly owned what is now known as Kisozi with Kiwanuka, can we put a time limit to which the evidence must be brought before someone else dies, like Sabiiti did? (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like Sabiiti did? (Laughter). Order, order! I think nobody is dying here. So please, hon. Ogwal, proceed.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, members, particularly those of us who are grown up, should be very conscious of the statements we make. The moment you begin to refer to a dead man as being your witness, it is a very dangerous matter. I am just raising this -(Laughter)- but allow me to proceed. 

On the issue of evidence, I am for withdrawing. The position of Mrs Ogwal the MP for Lira Municipality and the people of Lira Municipality is for cancellation of the sale and withdrawing the whole process. That is what I stand for and I have this evidence to give. It is not from anywhere but the reports and the evidence submitted to us by the committee that we entrusted to do the job for us. 

One, the KPMG consultancy firm was appointed by the Government of Uganda, both as auditors and as valuers. This was in absolute defiance of the international set standard of the two professions. I want to ask a simple question. There is already controversy on the report submitted by the valuers, who happen to be KPMG consultants. Who is supposed to scrutinise that valuation other than the valuer who happens to be KMPG itself? That is evidence number one. What else do you want? 

Whoever appointed the auditor, were you not aware that both the auditor and the valuer could not be one and the same? So, that was a conspiracy to conceal fraud, and that is what I want to bring out. That is my evidence number one.

Madam Speaker, the report of the committee, if you could turn to paragraph 4.4.1 stated that KPMG presented guesswork on its valuation. I think it is important that members look at this so that you understand the point I am trying to make.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which page is it? 

MRS OGWAL: Paragraph 4.4. It is important to re-read that paragraph because it clearly stated that despite the guesswork that is contained in that paragraph, the consultancy did not provide professional valuation of the bank, but it provided guesswork. 

Despite that, the government paid US $58,000 for the guesswork. I hope we will not resurrect some dead man to give further evidence on that. (Laughter).

Further evidence, Madam Speaker. Before the agreement signed between the Government of Uganda and Westmont to manage the affairs of UCBL, it was known that Westmont was a prospective buyer. In other words, whoever allowed Westmont entry into the bank wanted it to get all the privileged information in order to out-bid other competitors, or Westmont to make an entry into the bank and plunder it knowing very well that eventually it would go. That is my evidence.

The agreement signed with the auditors, a copy of which the Clerk has - I do not have it with me right now because it is quite bulky. I would like members to consult that particular agreement, section 8, clause 8 or whatever it is. It clearly states that the US $2 million fee, which was to be paid annually, could only be done after full documentation was done and after the approval of that payment by the board. 

I have looked at the auditor’s report of the year 1998 and it clearly stated that Shs 1.199 billion was remitted to Westmont for the fee, without any documentation and approval by the board. How did this money leave the bank and get remitted without any kind of documentation? It is in the auditor’s report. That is why I want us to focus on the bigger issue, not this one of the Minister of Finance. That is nothing. There are bigger issues. This was a calculated move to rob, to plunder. 

I now want to focus very briefly on the merger of equals. Some of us who did commerce know what “a merger of equals” means. We should be treated equally in due diligence and everything else. From the report that I have and other information that will be within my reach, I know that UCBL was valued by independent valuers in order to establish its value for the purpose of this merger.  

Why was the other partner, who is supposed to be an equal partner in the deal, not subjected to valuation so that we know about him? The onus is on the government to prove that it was all free and fair. Somebody should have taken the trouble to make sure that both parties were fairly and equally treated. Somebody should tell me, why did the government accept the value presented to it by the partner and not accept value presented to it by other partners, like you? I want to know the merger of equals.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, perhaps you could –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is UCBL that was on sale and in all joint venture sales; the goodwill value should have been taken care of. It is absent here - absolutely. I am emphasizing this because the minister said the future value of UCBL would have been absolutely bogus, useless, and what not. I am raising this point to let you know that the future value of UCBL is much greater than the foreign partner. Its goodwill was never valued. 

Two; the customer’s loyalty, which is evident in the Shs 400 billion deposits, is evident of the confidence the people have in their own bank. 

I also want to give you further evidence that the cost of start-up of branches, particularly rural ones, is very high. Those in the banking sector, particularly those in the Ministry of Finance, know it. The start-up cost is very high. UCBL has already involved itself in the strenuous exercise of opening branches virtually throughout the country. Why was the cost not valued so that when the foreign partners came in they were told that we had already catered for the start-up cost? They did not have to start-up anything. It is all there, and it is all theirs. Why was it not there? Was this a conspiracy to conceal fraud?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, please try to wind up. 

MRS OGWAL: I am about to wind up. Madam, I think this information will help. When we look at reports we look at them from different perspectives, but I was looking at this from my perspective. And because of my vast experience, you may benefit from this kind of exposure. (Laughter).  

Madam Speaker, the exchange rate covered two periods: when the process started and the period of conclusion. The exchange rate that was established in the agreement is Shs 1,800 to a dollar. But my pain is the variance between the point of the start of the process and the point of conclusion. By December 2001, the exchange rate was Shs 1,726. If this were to be a genuine sale, the US $19 million should have been submitted. I believe it is done in Uganda shillings, with another package of that variance of Shs 74 per dollar for the 19 million dollars. Calculate it, you will find this.  

I want to painfully conclude like this. Considering the mood of the nation, considering the mood of the people on the issue of privatisation and the mood of the House concerning the sale of UCBL, I think that whatever it may cost, a reversal of this issue will help all of us. It will help the government, and it will help us the representatives of the people. What I am trying to avoid is what the English people say that, “A stitch in time saves nine.” It will save us nine stitches if we do not do this later on. 

I would not like to see a scenario where a government will come in and say, “Look! It was all bogus.” It would save us the painful process of having to take back what actually rightfully belonged to us. Now that we have discovered fraud - in many instances it escaped our eyes but so be it - this was a bad deal! For this particular one, we have caught a thief, and red-handed at that. 

We have got evidence to prove that there was fraud, there was theft, and there was plunder of the nation. There is further evidence by the fact that the losses caused to the company of UCBL, the loss caused to the Uganda Government through legal fees and through the plundering of the bank, were never made good.

Madam Speaker, I would not want these people who I hope will be nationalists, to come up and say, “Let us reverse it all.” That is the scenario I am trying to save. If we can take a bold decision in these brave matters, we will save the future of this nation. May God bless you all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have sat here for nearly five hours now. Despite my attempts to manage the time, however, members are making very lengthy submissions. We have only managed to receive 17 submissions today. So, we shall not be able to conclude the matter today. We shall resume the debate tomorrow at 2 O’clock.  

However, before we adjourn allow me, on your behalf, to congratulate in advance the Prime Minister and to wish him well in a certain endeavour he is going to undertake this weekend. (Applause) Hon. Prime Minister, normally the members invite one another for the kasiki. So if you would let us know where it would be held, we would be happy to attend. Thank you very much. We adjourn until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.14 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 February 2003, at 2.00 p.m.)

