Thursday, 27 February 2003

Parliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate that on Tuesday the Deputy Speaker, in her communication, informed you of the return of our parliamentary team from Rwanda. Maybe I should not say anything more, but this afternoon the football team, on your behalf, presented to me the trophy which they gained in Rwanda. I commend them and urge them to increase what they are doing. 

Honourable members, we went to Rwanda at a time when there were adverse reports about our relationship with Rwanda. We feared this could cause problems, but fortunately it did not, although it was the first question the media had to confront us with. But our being there, I hope, has improved the relationship. 

I urge other sectors in Uganda, public and private, to utilize this interaction, because if you interact and talk, you tend to solve many problems that would arise if you cannot talk and interact.  So, I thank you for that support and the support you have given to the team today when they were reporting back. 

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, as you have rightly put it, I was one of the members of the football team that went to Kigali. Apart from football, you have also stated that we interacted with our Rwandese counterparts. 

More importantly, in that interaction, they took us to visit various places of interest, one of which is the genocide centre. That is a place where they buried those who were killed in the genocide. Their bones and other remains were interred finally. It is slightly outside Kigali City but within the confines of the city. We were informed by the guide there that, that place was one of several others that exist in various parts of the country. 

But genocide in Rwanda really took place. It is so bad, so greasy, so saddening that I feel, and I think my colleagues who went there may be feeling the same, that that country needs to have a chance to recover. I discovered that almost every Rwandese is very sensitive. When they hear anything about insecurity around them, they think it is just about to happen again, and I think they are right to think that way. 

In my opinion, the Rwandese have been traumatised by that genocide. We saw graves at that centre, which actually are not normal graves but are very big holes accommodating thousands of bones. We were told that those people were killed within three months. 

They told us that the people who hid in the stadium where we played soccer were bombed by soldiers of the then regime. When they knew the stadium was full of people, the soldiers simply shot into the stadium with heavy weaponry. 

We were further told that at the heart of genocide, the people who were being hunted to be killed would buy the form of death they wanted. One Member of Parliament narrated to me that if, for example, people had machetes to cut victims, they would even ask the victim which form of death they wanted. The person would say, “please, to make me die quickly, can I pay you some money so that you can shoot me instead of cutting me?” In other words, you would give money to a man who has a gun so that he would actually shoot you rather than use his machete to cut you. 

They also told us that children of a few days or months old would be hit against walls and they would die. They said women were the greatest victims of rape. They would get a woman, rape her and they would finally pass wood through her, up to the mouth, and she would be left to die. 

They also said that there are very many bones and other remains of human beings still lying uncollected in the countryside. In fact, there was a grave that was not yet full and they were collecting remains. You can remember the various forms of killing equipment they had - pangas and all sorts of things, including old rifles. 

The people who were killed were generally old people. We could see from their clothing that they had left behind or that were removed from them. They were simple clothes. In other words, genocide did not care about the status of the person. Whoever was to be killed had to be killed. Some had rosaries and other forms of personal effects, which were put in that place to remind people of the genocide. 

In conclusion, that place made me change my mind about how we feel about Rwanda. I think Rwanda is a peculiar nation, a nation where people almost speak the same language. They have the same culture but they turned against each other for no other reason but for the purpose of destruction. 

I also learnt that the Rwandese depend a lot on us in many ways. For example, when we went to the institute of technology, we discovered that they rely a lot on our manpower, even on our institutions, to develop that institution. Therefore, I think for a short time, they will rely on us. 

I know our government is a government of good will and shall certainly help that nation to stabilise. I think their instability is not also beneficial to us, because it is a nation which will depend on us for a long time.  

But more important is what I noticed when we went to Kigali Institute of Science and Technology. I discovered that the Rwandese are very focused people. They have an intention and they want to achieve it.

For example, we were told that because they had so many prisoners, so many of these institutions and a high population, wood fuel is a problem. But they are resorting to using their waste as biogas for heating. They are doing very well in that field.  They are also doing very well in IT. For example, they told us that they assemble some of their computers locally in Rwanda now. They do not import a whole system, but they sort it out and they bring it.

So, we should use the experience we have had not only for our benefit but also for good neighbourliness. I believe those people look to us as a source of inspiration for the stability of their country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues who have congratulated you and the team on a successful tour of Rwanda. Every effort that will create harmony between this country and our neighbours should be encouraged.  

However, as a legislator, I am seeking your guidance whether it is possible to encourage this co-operation through the joint meeting of the legislatures of Rwanda and Uganda one day? A joint meeting in terms of promotion of co-operation between the two countries and solidifying smooth public and diplomatic relations in the Great Lakes Region.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is okay. But I know that even the Government has a structure of increasing the co-operation. The heads of state meet; the ministers of defence meet; military officers meet. But we should only encourage this to continue. 

On what you have suggested, this is something we can explore. If it is possible, I think it can be done. Definitely that would encourage and improve the relationship between Uganda and Rwanda and any other neighbouring country.

MR JACK SABIITI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the Order Paper and I would like to use Rule 40(d) to suspend the rules, so that we re-align our Order Paper in such a manner that we continue with the UCB issue, finish it and then go to the – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: We shall continue as arranged. There is no reason why we should change. I have seen the minutes of yesterday. There was a statement which was made by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I have noted from the minutes that people wanted to debate this matter, especially as the Women’s Day is due on the 8th next week. Then there is also another statement. There is no reason to change; we shall deal with every item that has been put on the Order Paper.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am raising on a point of procedure regarding today’s Order Paper. Yesterday, I was assured by the Deputy Speaker that my pending question - a giant question - on electricity tariffs, would feature. I do not see it anywhere. When is it coming?

THE SPEAKER: I cannot really explain that. What I have seen from the minutes is that questions for oral answer will be put on the Order Paper, and questions for oral answer have always been put on the Order Paper. It is not only you who had a question for oral answer. There are many other Members of Parliament who had questions for oral answer. There is no harm in answering these questions and then maybe yours will come. But I will take note of it so that maybe next week it is considered.

Honourable members, I do not see the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. What we can do is to get the statement of the Minister of Defence, and then we shall consider the other one maybe when the minister is here.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, it is true the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not here. I also wish to inform the House that only 40 copies of the Minister’s statement were distributed. This means that maybe most of the Members of Parliament who are present do not have these copies. So, as we listen to the statement from the Minister of Defence, is it possible to get more copies of this statement circulated so that when the minister comes we can debate this issue from a point of knowledge?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let it be done. Now let us go to the second statement. Please avail members with copies.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  May I add my voice to the many to congratulate our football team on accomplishing the feat of defeating the Rwanda parliamentary football team. Congratulations! I think, they won - I should use the word “won”. Congratulations for winning, and I hope you will continue to win as you engage the colleagues of Rwanda Parliament in the exercise of consolidating our relationship through football. I simply want to pledge my full support and to say that next time you go, I will be happy to accompany you.

Mr Speaker, in fulfilment of the undertaking I made to Parliament recently, I wish to brief Parliament on the security situation in the north of our country and on the state of disarmament in Karamoja. As all of you are aware, – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the statement which the minister is about to deliver, will be subject to some kind of reaction from the House. According to our rules, copies should be made available to members so that they can give informed reactions.  I do not know whether the minister has circulated his statement, or intends to circulate it. We do not see it.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you do not have it, but it seems some members have copies. I ask the people who have been distributing them to avail you with a copy. Let us solve it that way. Other members have copies and you do not have.  I agree with you.  

MR MWANDHA: The point I was making, Mr Speaker, is that sometimes ministers produce very few copies. You heard that only 40 copies of the statement from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development were distributed. So, the rest of the members would be at a disadvantage. I do not know whether the minister produced enough copies.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you, but I have said, let copies be produced. Honourable minister, can you answer that?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, Mr Speaker. Hon. Mwandha has one, and there are others here which – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This is a simple matter. Let us solve it. Let copies be given to members. I agree with you. You are entitled to copies, so let the copies be given out.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the statement which is about to be read, is a matter of public importance. This is not the first time hon. Amama Mbabazi reads a speech as it is being circulated. On a matter of public importance like defence, we should have received this copy slightly earlier so that we organise ourselves and not be ambushed in this manner.

THE SPEAKER: Let the statement be read and let copies be given to members, as they are entitled to receive. Would you proceed with your statement, honourable minister? If you do not have a copy, please put up your hand so that we can know the numbers involved. So, we need about 30 copies. 

Read the statement and copies will be produced in due course. I am sorry, honourable members, let the statement be read out. We are always bogged down by procedural matters when somebody wants to bring up another issue. Let the statement be read.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If hon. Sabiiti could switch off his microphone so that I do not share the power with him. Thank you.  

Mr Speaker, as I was saying in the beginning, in fulfilment of – (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I have just seen the Minister’s statement. This statement is not signed! May I know whether what we have is the authentic statement, which shall be attributed to the minister? Is he, therefore, in order? 

THE SPEAKER: I think it will be authentic if he reads out the same statement. Please read it out -(Interjections). Honourable members, we are wasting a lot of time on this. You do not talk while you are sitting. When you address the Speaker, you stand up. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I propose that the minister follows the rules of the House.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, read the statement. Let us not waste time. We have a lot of business to do.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Mwandha is determined to stop me from reading it. 

In fulfilment of the undertaking I made to this Parliament recently, I wish to brief Parliament on the security situation in the northern part of our country and on the state of the disarmament exercise in Karamoja. I hope hon. Sabiiti will see my signature and recognise it, or buy glasses.  

As all of you honourable members are aware, the so called Lord’s Resistance Army, the main Northern Uganda rural terrorist group led by one Joseph Kony, has been terrorising the people of Northern Uganda since 1987. This group has never had bases inside Uganda. It had been a militia of Sudan where it had bases and was provided sanctuary, enabling them to flee from UPDF pressure, to treat their wounded, replenish their supplies, train and re-organise for fresh incursions into Northern Uganda.

The group has thrived on abductions of young boys for manpower and of young girls for use as sex slaves for commanders. The group has always carried out massive abductions, massive killings of innocent civilians, looting of shops, health centres, granaries for food and domestic items. They have also, now and again, carried out ambushes along the roads. 

Honourable members, all this mayhem and heinous activities of the terrorists have resulted into serious humanitarian consequences. An estimated 14,000 children in Northern Uganda have been abducted at different times over the period, and hundreds of thousands of people have been displaced. 

The history of the problem in Northern Uganda and what Government has done in the past to overcome it is well known to all of you. Therefore, I will restrict my brief today to updating you on the efforts Government is making to handle this problem.

Honourable members, the Commander of UPDF, since I last gave you a brief in a written statement that I circulated, came up with the concept of zonalisation of forces. It entails placing the UPDF in zones spread over the area that is under threat of attack by the LRA.  

We have recruited, trained and deployed 23 battalions of LDUs all over Northern Uganda as zonal forces to guard internally displaced people’s camps and occupy enemy hideouts.  

Armed vehicles have been provided to escort relief organisations like the World Food Programme. In addition, two rapid reaction mobile brigades - well facilitated - are to be created to reinforce this zonal force.  

With the formation of the 5th Division, the UPDF is now able to permanently occupy, and thus protect all the rural zones of Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and Adjumani, which used to be enemy hideouts. Such areas, which are now unpopulated, include Latanya hills, Atut, Akilok Game Reserve, Opok forest, Gurugulu hills, Zoka forest, Zambia swamps, Kadomera hills and the Aswa ranch. These units protect Internally Displaced People’s camps (IDPs), roads, health centres and schools.

Honourable members, the UPDF has put in place mobile forces from regular units of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, which are constantly in hot pursuit, tracking the enemy footpaths, carrying out ambushes and counter ambushes. This force reacts quickly and maintains pressure on the enemy to deny him time to plan, abduct and commit atrocities. It is constantly searching for the terrorists in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Pader, Lira, and in Southern Sudan.  

Other security measures put in place are the patrols and convoys along the main roads, to protect the lives of road users. Several weapons, including light, medium and heavy calibres, continue to be recovered. The LRA terrorists are killed and several civilian abductees, including women and children, have been rescued from the clutches of these terrorists. 

Let me give you an example of the last 6 months in statistical terms: 

Abductees rescued		- 	2,227 
Enemy killed 		-	422 LRA 
Enemy captured 		- 	138 
Enemy defectors 		- 	93 

Equipment captured from the enemy: 

-	295 SMGs and 114 empty magazines 
-	3 RPG pipes, e.t.c

As I said earlier, people are in camps, which are protected by UPDF forces. This gives opportunity to the UPDF to trace the LRA terrorists without mingling the population who, apart from being used as shields against UPDF pursuing forces, are vulnerable to forced recruitment (abductions) and wanton killings and crossfire.  

Government has shown willingness to talk peace with the LRA terrorists. It extended a hand of peace through its policy of amnesty, through the Amnesty Commission. It appointed a team of political leaders, headed by the First Deputy Prime Minister, to talk peace with the bandits. Guidelines and terms of reference were also given.  

A ceasefire offer was given to the LRA terrorists, provided they fulfilled a set of necessary prerequisites namely:

(a) To stop abductions of children.
(b) To stop the extermination of families of captives who escape.
(c) To stop attacking Government’s installations and civilian traffic; and   
(d) to assemble in named places where they can be monitored by an international neutral body, which would provide medical care and food.

Mr Speaker, Government has worked tirelessly to improve Uganda’s relationship with the Sudan Government. It has done this through a number of initiatives that have included: 

(a) The signing and renewal of protocols for the UPDF to carry out operations against the LRA inside Sudan.

(b) The co-ordination and co-operation in military operations against LRA by both the UPDF and the Sudan Peoples Armed Forces (SPAF).

(c) Regular meetings between liaison officers from both the UPDF and SPAF in Gulu and Juba

(d) The exchange of state visits between the Presidents of both countries, the Ministers of Defence, other ministers of government, the top leadership of UPDF and SPAF, plus other diplomatic visits. 

(e) The deployment of military attaches in each other’s capitals.

During my visit to Sudan last week, the Sudanese leadership, including His Excellency General Bashir, the President of Sudan, assured Uganda of its total determination to completely eliminate the Kony, LRA presence from Sudan territory, and to fully co-operate with Uganda to achieve this.  

Accordingly, it was agreed to extend the existing protocol for UPDF operation in Southern Sudan from 31 January 2003 to 31 May 2003.  

It was further agreed that the Sudan People’s Armed Forces would operate against the LRA whenever LRA sneaks into territory close to the Sudanese army defence positions. They will search for, capture and hand over to UPDF, LRA fighters and their collaborators.

It was also agreed that immediately, the Sudan Peoples Armed Forces will deploy in the former LRA camps of Bin-Rwot, Lubangatek and Lalar, and in any case not later than 17th March this year.

In implementing Article 4 of the Nairobi Agreement of 1999, which was signed between Uganda and Sudan, and taking into account the progress in the IGAD peace process for the pacification of Sudan, the Uganda Government reiterated its commitment not to support SPLA militarily, including providing intelligence to it or allowing it to carry arms while in Uganda. 

Furthermore, Uganda will not train the SPLA or any other dissident force for the purpose of fighting against the Government of Sudan, or allow them to plan or prepare to wage war or hostile propaganda against Sudan from Uganda.  They will also not be allowed to transit military goods through Uganda. 

I would like to correct the impression given by the media that this was a condition for renewing the protocol. That report was incorrect. In fact, the aspect concerning the SPLA was simply formalising modalities for implementing what was agreed on in Nairobi. There was nothing new; we simply put it that Uganda will not militarily support SPLA. That is all.

Finally, it was agreed that further review of the bilateral relations would be considered at the joint ministerial conference to take place next April.

Honourable members, all the above security arrangements are aimed at ensuring that peace returns and prevails in Northern Uganda. It is hoped that these arrangements shall soon bring an end to this problem once and for all.

The security situation in Karamoja and the disarmament exercise.  

Although the general security in Karamoja region is slowly normalising, and intra-clan cattle raids have subsided, there are still ambushes along the roads by Karimojong warriors with illegal guns. They still cross over to the neighbouring districts of Lira, Soroti, Katakwi and Kapchorwa to cause chaos, killing innocent civilians, raping women and uprooting food. Instances of such occurrences often happen during the dry season when there is movement in search of pasture and water.  

I would, however, like to note that the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) has always intervened in response to such situations.  Operations are carried out together with auxiliary forces, directed to the affected area. In such operations, guns, several heads of cattle and goats have always been recovered from the Karimojong warriors and returned to the owners.  

Insecurity is the Karimojong’s number one problem, caused mainly by the presence of the illegal guns among their warriors. Gun trafficking also impacts on the Karamoja security situation. It is mainly done along the Uganda/Sudan/Kenya borders involving the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA) deserters and warrior tribes such as the Didinga, Toposa and Turkana from the three countries. Southern Sudan has been the major source of these illicit arms and ammunition.  

Government has deployed the UPDF to cover the gun traffickers’ routes. Due to the good UPDF public relations existing with the civilian population in the area, some gun traffickers have been arrested and some ammunition recovered. For example, on 12th February this month, 350 rounds of ammunition were recovered from an ammunition trafficker at a roadblock in Nakapiripirit District.  

On the disarmament exercise, as members may recall this involved two phases, the voluntary and the forceful stages. The voluntary phase of the disarmament exercise run from December 2nd 2001 to February 15th 2002, during which 7,319 guns were recovered. Also, 1,378 and 40 homemade guns were handed in voluntarily. The forceful stage has run from February 16th 2002 to-date.  

The total number of guns so far recovered in Karamoja is 10,696, including 763 guns recovered from Kapchorwa. The UPDF’s deployment at the border with Kenya remains in place to curb cross-border raids.  

During this period, a total of 107 warriors possessing illegal guns were arrested and have been successfully prosecuted.  

The UPDF has carried out recruitment, training and general re-organization of the frontier of the former Anti Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) into eight formidable Local Defence Unit (LDU) battalions.  These have been deployed along the borders of Karamoja and its south and western neighbours, and also within the region.  

Government has been able to criminalize the gun, which has always been taken for granted. In the recent Karimojong culture, it was a normal thing to possess one.  

There are a number of factors that have contributed to the slowing down of Government’s programme to disarm the Karimojong. Those include the following:

(a) Delay in opening security roads. This has hindered the swift deployment and interception of criminals or raiders by the security forces in the region.

(b) Delay by the Government in fully honouring its promise of a token of appreciation to those who handed in guns voluntarily. Such tokens of appreciation had included ploughs, iron sheets and seeds for planting.

(c) Neglect of branding of cattle by the local leadership as a measure of identifying raided animals from a particular ethnic grouping.  

(d) Decampaigning by some local leaders on the use of communal grazing as a measure to contain raids.  

(e) Lack of employment to occupy the youth, otherwise called Karachunas, who handed in their guns voluntarily leaving them redundant and exposing them to temptations.

(f) Lack of adequate numbers of the UPDF in the area to back up the LDUs. It was found necessary to transfer some of these troops, as I told Parliament before, to the North to beef up the operations against the LRA.  

I am happy to inform this Parliament today, however, that two battalions are to be re-deployed in Olilim and Katakwi to handle the problem of raiders from Karamoja in those areas.  
I would also like to state that another impediment to the disarmament programme in Karamoja has been the lack of co-operation, common cause and commitment among some senior local political leaders.  
Some LDUs have also shown disloyalty to the exercise. In some incidents, they have turned their guns against the regular forces. They have also foiled operations by leaking information to criminals or deliberately concealing information relating to raided animals, gun trafficking and other raid plans. To stop this treachery, we are to re-organize these units to include combatants from other areas.  
Meanwhile, the UPDF has ejected the Bokora who had invaded Katakwi, back to their land in Moroto. The Jie who had infiltrated Lango have also been forced out of Lango back to their location. And the forces are now chasing those who infiltrated Kapchorwa, to get them out as well.  
The forces that have been deployed along the bordering districts will curtail massive invasion of raiders into neighbouring districts. In case a few raiders infiltrate, these forces will serve as rapid reaction forces to deal with the infiltrators quickly before too much damage is done.  
So, what is the way forward?

(a) Mobilization of the Karimojong by civil military officers to dissuade them against insecurity.

(b) Regular meetings between leaders of the Karimojong and neighbours to assess the situation.

(c) No Karimojong will be allowed into Katakwi with arms.
  
(d) No  Karimojong, except those employed in regular forces of course, will be allowed into Katakwi with illegal arms.
  
(e) UPDF will guard the bonafide Karimojong who are grazing their herds in Katakwi.  
All these measures should be able to restore order in the region.  
In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon the major sub-region stakeholders, senior and local politicians who are the immediate beneficiaries of a peaceful Karamoja, to play their roles of mobilizing the population, coupled with uniting the local leaders, in order to achieve the disarmament objective which cannot be left to the Army alone. 
I would also like to pledge that the UPDF will continue with its relentless efforts to ensure peace and stability in the entire Karamoja sub-region and its neighbouring districts. With more exertion in terms of manpower and resources, the Karamoja problem shall be solved inspite of the distractions from Kony in the North. Thank you very much.
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Arising from the honourable minister’s statement, I am seeking clarification on the following points:
One, on page three, he attempts to give us a breakdown of a number of people who have been rescued or captured, the equipment captured and so forth.  
Mr Speaker, in his statement he says, “in the last six months”, and he lists a number of items  I would like to know whether this is an exhaustive list or not? Because not long ago in this august House, the honourable minister told us, among other things, that they had captured missiles and anti-aircraft equipment from LRA. I do not see that listed here. Is it an omission, an oversight, or the information he gave us sometime back about missiles was not accurate?  

I am saying so because at some stage he said it was not safe to fly in the North anyhow because Kony had acquired missiles.

Two, again coming to the breakdown, we are very sensitive about the welfare of children and women. The list he gave us shows that the abductees rescued were 2,227. As I said, we are very sensitive about children in this war. How many of these people are children below the age of 18? How many of these people are women? We would like to know whether the trend is going up or down in terms of abduction.  

On the status of escorts for International Red Cross among others, the relief organisations in the last six weeks have been suffering a number of ambushes from LRA. 

As a matter of fact, International Red Cross rejected any escort from UPDF for two reasons. The first reason is that they attract attacks from LRA. Two, is that UPDF are not efficient in terms of giving escort. They are always too far, and whenever there is an ambush, they do not respond, or often they take off and leave these relief organisations at a disadvantage or at risk.

On protocol with Sudan, we appreciate your efforts in maintaining good relations with a neighbouring country where, allegedly, these people have been taking refuge.

We have a similar situation obtaining now in Western Uganda and North Western Uganda. Why is it that we have not made any effort to get into any kind of protocol with Rwanda and Congo so that we can get into these areas and flush out -(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you concentrate on Northern Uganda and Karamoja?

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to skip that Western Uganda part of it, although it is very relevant in terms of our security. 

At the moment we have a problem in North Western Uganda. It is still part of the greater North. I am referring specifically to West Nile. We have a problem in West Nile. People are raiding from Congo into Uganda and into Sudan.  

When you talk about the North, you cannot leave out West Nile. It is the greater North. I want to know whether you are doing anything about it, and I can see my honourable colleague of Internal Affairs shaking his head. Maybe you will give him an opportunity to supplement, Mr Speaker.

Last but not least, I would like to know from the honourable Minister of Defence whether the North is sufficiently secure for our MPs to operate freely.

MR ALEX NDEEZI (Representative of Persons with   Disabilities):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  This is a very useful document, and I sincerely thank the minister. I have only two or three questions. 

I will read from page 10, point 11, for the benefit of members who did not get a copy. The statement reads: “Honourable members, I would also like to state that another impediment to the disarmament programme in Karamoja has been the lack of co-operation, common cause and commitment among some senior local political leaders.”  

Mr Speaker, may I request the minister to name the senior political leaders? These are traitors in our country! Can the minister tell us who is betraying this country? Can we have the names?  Can we have these people exposed, because what they are doing is evil?  

Secondly, somewhere the minister is telling us that as of now, the Sudanese Government has allowed UPDF to operate on Sudanese territory up to 31 May 2003. We know there were many deadlines in the past. How many times are we going to get deadlines from Sudan? 

We also know many senior officials in Government who have given deadlines about ending the insurgency in the North, but all this has been talk about postponement and procrastination. Can we know whether we will still talk about deadlines or we can declare before this country, “sorry, we do not know when the war will come to an end. We cannot give deadlines”  

Lastly, this is not directly related to the statement. Around the beginning of this week, we read in the New Vision, a message to the effect that certain MPs, who also happen to be in this House, were delivering a message from Kony to this Parliament about the terms for peace talks with Government. Can we know whether Government is aware of this position and whether the said MPs were representing Government? What is the position of the Government? Thank you. 

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for his statement.  There are a few issues on which I would like to really obtain clarification. 

The first issue concerns the gun trafficking. The honourable minister has continued to tell us that the problem between Karamoja and her neighbours is in relation to the illegal possession of guns.  

At this particular time I would like to ask the honourable minister whether, if the neighbours of Karamoja held guns illegally for such a long time, the minister would take us for dinner and congratulate us. Because for a long time this has been the argument. As if it is not possible to get the Karimojong to be subjected to the laws of this land.  
     
Then he talks about criminalizing the gun. I wonder which gun he is talking about because the gun has been in Karamoja, it has been used continuously against the neighbours and it has not been criminal. It has gone on endlessly and mercilessly against the neighbours, so I do not understand this aspect. 

Somewhere he says, “they will not be allowed” - I get the impression that they have been allowed previously to cross over. So, what is happening now, a change of position or something? I find this statement a bit disturbing. 

Mr Speaker, the other thing that I would like to get clarification on is the question of cross-border raids. The minister tells me that they have revamped the Anti Stocks Theft Unit to try and cut down on cross-border raids. I am wondering why the minister cannot do something about illegal trafficking at the entry points.  If he can do this about the raids, why can’t he do anything about arms being smuggled into Uganda, so that we get this thing out of our way?

Lastly, on page 10 the minister talks about LDUs who show disloyalty. I thought that statement is a bit too general. What we found as neighbours, and which was very disturbing to us, was that at a certain point in the year 2002, a number of volunteers came up, particularly from the Teso region. These volunteers joined the LDUs in order to try to take care of their own security. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Defence removed these LDUs. I am aware that they are subject to all forms of regulations that govern the UPDF and other reserve forces. 

But I thought if you are talking about loyalty to the cause, the honourable minister should not have left us with such a vacuum, which caused the last raids. The total removal of the LDUs from the border gave us that vacuum and the Karimojong raiders just walked into the neighbouring areas. So, I thought he should clarify on those issues.

MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have three issues arising from this statement. Number one, in the first paragraph of part B, the minister says that the UPDF has come up with its zonalisation concept, which entails placing troops in zones all over the area that is under threat of attacks from the LRA. 

I do not know when this concept came about, and I do not know whether it is already in operation. I am saying this because two of my sub counties are constantly under attack from the LRA. I was in the constituency over the weekend and I can report that there are no troops in these areas.  

Only last Friday night, the LRA attacked one area called Ojui in Otwal, in one of my sub-counties.  I have taken trouble on a number of occasions, both formally and informally, to give details of areas where the LRA enter my constituency, hoping that something will be done to place troops there. Nothing has been done up to date. 

We met the President; we handed over a statement indicating the location of areas where LRA enter Lango, enter my constituency, but nothing has been done so far. I wonder whether this zonalisation concept is also supposed to apply in my constituency. 

On the issue of LRA, the last time we met the President in Gulu, he informed us that he had set up a peace committee headed by hon. Eriya Kategaya. I am surprised that this statement mentions nothing whatsoever, about the operation of that committee; what it is supposed to be doing; whether it has started work and how far it has gone.  

The third and last point is on the Karimojong issue. I see on page 11, point (b), the minister says, “No Karimojong will be allowed into Katakwi with arms” I do not know where that leaves Lango area, which is constantly being invaded by Karimojong with arms! Are they allowed to walk in and out of Lango as they like? I thank you, Sir.

DR STEVEN CHEBROT (Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. We in the districts bordering Karamoja appreciate Government efforts to contain the threats that are posed to us by the Karimojong.  

We only have about two problems now in Kapchorwa. One problem that the minister has left out is the threat that we receive from the Pokot from Kenya.  As you know, one part of Kapchorwa, that is Kongasis County, borders Kenya, and we have continued to receive many raids from the Pokot of Kenya. We would like to ask the minister what efforts the Government is taking to contain the situation.

Number two, we do realise that as of now, we continue to get less and less threats from the Karamoja side. I think this is because of the effort that you have made in that area. But our concern is that you moved very fast to prematurely disarm the Kapchorwa people and at one stage, we were more or less invaded by the Karimojong. The Karimojong almost reached Kapchorwa town. 

I want, at this stage, to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for having come up to Kapchorwa and contained the situation. As of now, some LDUs have been armed. I would like to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for his efforts and for containing the situation very fast.

Another problem is that we continue to get reports in the newspapers about one of our colleagues, who is seated on the Front Bench, indicating that cows were found in his kraal. The first statement indicated that the cows were given to him by his brothers. In the second statement, he completely disowned them, and he said that he only had two cows. I have had the opportunity to meet my dear brother on a number of occasions. These are serious issues which I thought my brother should be able to explain to this House.

MR PETER LOKERIS: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and -(Interruption).

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of procedure, in respect of what my honourable colleague, hon. Chebrot, has stated here. I recall that this matter did arise in the House about a week ago and hon. Lokeris committed to present a personal statement, either accepting or exonerating himself from the allegation. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for hon. Lokeris to respond to what hon. Chebrot has stated, yet he has got the opportunity to do this when he comes to present a complete statement. 

I do know that that statement will generate a lot of debate, and I have a feeling that it would be necessary for hon. Lokeris to wait for that time when he presents that statement and faces the fire that will come from us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the honourable member stood to give information to the honourable member on the Floor. And you know that incidents in Karamoja happen now and then; this could be a different incident. 

Since the Member who was on the Floor accepted, let us hear the information. If it is relevant, then I shall abide with what you have said. But it could be something which happened yesterday or the other day, or which will happen tomorrow. Let him give the information since the other member has accepted. But if it is related to what you promised to give in a statement, please do not give it now.

MR LOKERIS: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise counsel. Honourable members, the problem of the bull arose sometime, and when it arose, it was put together with the disarmament issue. The problem of disarmament has been dealt with by the honourable Minister of Defence, who has the capacity of delving into that matter; it is not for the Karamoja minister.  

About the bull, I did say that that bull is not mine. I have gone to court to ask those people to prove that the bull is mine, and there is no kraal anywhere –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I remember very vividly that hon. Chebrot just mentioned, “a member of the Front Bench”. He did not name any person. Is it in order for the minister to assume that he was the one whom Dr Chebrot meant? (Laughter). Is he guilty?

THE SPEAKER: I think it must have been done by elimination - (Laughter)- elimination in the sense that he mentioned that the member is present on the Front Bench, and the other member from Karamoja region is not here. So, I think he must have known that he was the one. But please be brief as you comment on the point which hon. Chebrot raised.

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to know from the honourable minister which bull he is referring to.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker and members of this august House. Well, I think it is common knowledge that there was a bull pictured in one of the newspapers with the caption, “this bull was found in Lokeris’ kraal”, which is absolutely untrue. I do not have that bull! I even do not know the colour of the bull, except when I saw it in the newspaper. I want the people who mentioned that it was attached to me to come and explain in court. I thank you.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for that information. Our concern is that when Government created the Office of Minister for Karamoja, it was specifically meant to contain the cattle rustling in that area. Now, if one of these ministers is engaged in that rustling, then we are in more trouble. 

I would like to call on Government to investigate, or set up a committee to find out exactly whether the honourable minister is engaged in cattle rustling. Otherwise, he will rustle one of the ministers one of these days.

Mr Speaker, there is now relative calm and peace in Kapchorwa. Our concern is that the day before yesterday, we did receive a report from our RDC and also from the sub-county chief, that there is somebody, one of the senior officers in the Army, who is recruiting people into the Army. What I know is that there is usually a procedure for recruitment into the Army. 

Yesterday morning, I received seven people, who came along with these people and they wanted to go back home because they had promised to recruit them, but the other 17 were put on the bus and taken to Mbarara. 

So, what I would like to know from the minister, as he promised yesterday, is that, is there some recruitment going on which we are not aware of? We have these institutions in the districts, which should know if there is recruitment in that area.  Where are these people going if there is no recruitment? 

The minister yesterday assured me that there is no general recruitment for people to join the Army. Now I would like to know, where are the 35 people going if there is no recruitment by this senior officer in the Army? Thank you very much.

MRS MARGARET ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance. I would like to mention another cause of insecurity that has not been mentioned in this paper, and that cause of insecurity is none other than the Deputy RDC of Lira.  

A few weeks ago, he was on radio stating that the Langi who have Karimojong cattle should make sure that they return them. We were not happy with this kind of statement, because he was imputing that it is the Langi who have grabbed the Karimojong animals. 

It is a well-known fact that when there was a conflict between the Jie and Bokora in Lango, and more particularly in Otuke, the UPDF was engaged. They engaged themselves to send away these people. But what actually happened is that these animals were collected at a centre, and that is Aloi Sub-county. These animals finally found their way out of Lira District in trucks. Therefore, the Deputy RDC is another cause of insecurity in Lira.  

I would also like to bring to the attention of the House the fact that LRA incursions are still affecting Lira and Apac districts. Hon. Ben Wacha has just made it very clear now that his constituency was attacked. That same group came to Lira, and more particularly to Aromo sub-county. I saw one Mr Eleng, whose throat was slit open.  That, therefore, shows that LRA incursions are still there on the ground.

I would like to now refer to the statement made by the minister. I would really like to thank the minister very much for putting his mind in black and white. If you read Page 2, point 2, it says: “With the formation of the 5th division, the UPDF is now able to permanently occupy and thus protect all the rural zones of Gulu, Kitgum, Pader areas including Adjumani”. 

Lango is not affected! The 5th division is not there to serve us. That is very clear. What we are left with are the LDUs to contain such an incursion. 
 
If you read page 3, it says, “This force reacts quickly and maintains pressure on the enemy to deny him time to plan, abduct and commit atrocities.”  The next line is what I am interested in: “It is constantly searching for the terrorists in the districts of Gulu, Kitgum, Pader and Lira plus Southern Sudan.” On this page, you acknowledge that the LRA are in Lango but you do not deploy the soldiers there. That is the point I wanted to make.

Then when you go to page 10, number vi says: “Lack of adequate numbers of the UPDF in the area to back up the LDU. It was found necessary to transfer some of these troops to the North to beef up the operations against the LRA. I am happy to inform Parliament, however, that two battalions are to be redeployed to Olilim and Katakwi….” 

I would like to suggest that Lango, or Lira, is not only suffering from the problem of cattle rustling, therefore, taking these soldiers to Olilim will barely handle that condition. I suggest that more soldiers be deployed in the sub-counties neighbouring Acholi land.

Lastly, he mentions, on page 11, point (b), “No Karimojong will be allowed into Katakwi with arms” That one is very clear. It means they can go to any other place, but not Katakwi, with guns. I therefore thank you very much.

MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. From the 17th to the 24th of this month, the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness, UN agencies and I had a tour of the entire Pader District. We were in a convoy of over 10 vehicles, Mambas and other private vehicles. What I am saying today in Parliament is just reported speech of what the people we were talking to were saying.
 
First, there are 20 protected camps in Pader District carrying a population of 204,000 people, which is 70 percent of the entire population.  Between October and January, there have been 41 LRA attacks on the protected camps by the UPDF. And to be more specific, Mr Speaker, this is in line with the second paragraph on page four of what the Minister of Defence was saying, about how the UPDF is protecting people in the camps. 

Kokokamu was attacked two times. Ata camp was attacked seven times. Omot camp in Agago was attacked six times. I have the letters, stamped by LC IIIs of those particular camps, showing the dates when the LRA attacked them. Pura camp was attacked four times. Pajule was attacked seven times, and one time it was attacked at 5.00 p.m. The LRA came at 5.00 p.m. and they left in the morning at around 5.00a.m. 

I had the opportunity to show the Minister of Disaster Preparedness where the LRA spent over six hours digging through the walls of the shops, which were less than 300 meters from the Army barracks. Acholi Bu was attacked two times. Aweri was attacked three times. Corner Kilak was attacked five times. I might not have the time to state the number of people killed. 

The people of Pader District have said that they have lost confidence in what the Minister of Defence is doing because of the nature of these atrocities. They have equally requested that if it were possible, every protected camp should be availed with armoured vehicles. Because it appears that the nature of deployment would mean that once you are deployed here, you should not leave lest you are shot in the crossfire.

We noted with grievous concern that in Kalongo, the UPDF had enrolled very many child soldiers. This concern was specifically raised to members of our delegation. We had a video recording, Mr Speaker, and I will request your indulgence that at an appropriate time, you allow the whole Parliament to have a look of the seven days’ tour in the 20 protected villages and the exact spots which the LRA have been attacking.  

The issue of child recruitment was raised, and the local authorities were liaising with the UPDF soldiers to return these children. A case in point was a young boy of 16 years who was taken. The mother just came to cry, at a rally, to hon. Santa Okot to go and talk to the soldiers to return her young boy. So, I think it is also an opportunity for us to request you, with sober heads as you can see today, to really review the nature of the young people you are recruiting. 

We noted with great concern that there was what we call, “food rationing” in the protected camps. If the World Food Programme had given 10 kilograms per household, the food would be divided into three - one is for emergency, the other one is for eating and the third portion was for the LRA. They said the LRA would come and collect it immediately, that very evening. To be on the safe side, the people had to reserve this food for the LRA to collect, so that they could live to see another day. 

All these have been actually recorded, and it is a very big disappointment to see that such activities –(Interruption)

MS OKOT SANTA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Otto for giving way so that I can give more information. The minister explained that the LDUs have been recruited to help the UPDF control the LRA from attacking the people. I would wish to request the minister to explain to this House how much money is being paid to these LDUs. Because as we were moving along the road, we saw there was a difference between the UPDF dressing and the dressing of the local defence forces. 

The LDUs who were guarding at Ata sub-county told us that they were not given any uniform at all. They were putting on some trousers, which looked like skirts. And they said that if you are a man and you went for a short call, there would be no need for removing your trouser.

Mr Speaker, the minister has also explained that the 5th division has been put in place to help in transporting the food from the World Food Programme to the affected areas. I wish to say that Pader District as a whole has not been receiving food, except recently when we went with the World Food Programme plus other United Nations groups to do the assessment on the ground. 

If troops are placed to escort relief going to the district, why can’t the same troops escort people who leave Lira to go to Pader District? We have also been told that these troops, which are placed in Lira to escort food to Pader District and Kitgum, are being assisted with fuel and other small tokens from the World Food Programme. 

Where is the money that was budgeted for the Ministry of Defence?  Because, if you ask the Army to escort you, they will say that they are specifically there for World Food Programme. One day I asked them, “are you the UN Army or the UPDF of Uganda?”  Mr Speaker – (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you stood up to give information?

MS OKOT SANTA: Mr Speaker, the other information I want to give is on the Karimojong. The Karimojong have already taken four of the sub-counties in Agago County - Adilang, Lapono, Paimol and Patong. We were together with the state Minister for Disaster Preparedness, and she is aware.  

Another bad statement, which the minister made before the people of Atar Sub County, was that the Acholi have fought the Movement Government for 17 years. This puzzled everybody, and the programme was almost coming to a standstill. 

I want to say that we have not fought the Movement Government but it is because of some groups of people that the people of this country are suffering. Those in the bush are not only the Acholi. If so, we should avoid making such kind of statements.  

MR OTTO: Thank you very much. As I try to summarise, Mr Speaker, we also noted that the UPDF soldiers were smoking out food from those camps.  When they gave an ultimatum for people to come to the protected camps, people came and left their food. 

With looming famine, the people would request for permission from the UPDF officers so that they can be given a day off from the camps to go and collect food. But to our dissatisfaction, those gardens have been smoked up by the UPDF soldiers so that people are not able to go back home. We have all this in the recordings I am carrying with me.

Finally, we noted with disgrace that in the whole of Pader District, there were only 24 Police officers. We have no structure to empower the Army to the extent that we have one policeman per sub-county. And the DPC for the entire district was comfortable on a bicycle. So, these are some of the indicators, and we also feel that we should belong to other groups of Ugandans. As I sit down – (Interruption)

MR ORYEM: Last night in Kitgum town, 11 school children were abducted, right from town. The UPDF did nothing to prevent this abduction. This is information. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: So, my people requested me to come and convince other Members of Parliament so that the minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, is censored and relieved of his duties, -(Laughter)- on grounds of incompetence and failing to protect people in the already designated areas by Government. Anything less than this, would tantamount to us mobilising people to go back home.

Mr Speaker, I have some pictures of the victims of Aruu County who were mishandled by the UPDF soldiers. Some of them are already lame, in the name of being rebel collaborators, and some are students. There are over 34 cases. I think this would give you good impetus in doing your job as we prepare for the big exercise of 118. (Laughter).  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sorry, I am trying to pick members from the affected area, because they have more information. But I quite appreciate that this is a national problem and we should all contribute. I will definitely give opportunity to some others members, but let me for the time being give a few opportunities to members from the affected areas.

MR DANIEL KIDEGA (Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was disturbed emotionally when hon. Odongo Otto was presenting his points. I was majorly hit by one point which he mentioned - the issue of recruitment of young people.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the issue of children being recruited into the Army has been condemned internationally in so many conventions.  I think the minister should examine this matter very seriously and find out this child whose mother went crying. If he was recruited as an LDU or UPDF, this must be examined. If it is a child and does not qualify because of his age, he should be allowed to go back and live with his family.

My other concern is about the 2227 people who have been rescued. Honourable members, most of these people are potentially dead. They are actually living dead. They are sick and infected. They have been abducted and raped, they are traumatised and they are HIV positive. They have been given time to be re-introduced into the community. You can imagine what kind of life they are going to live.  They are human beings and they have feelings that human beings do have. So, the effect of these people living with other people is also there.  

So, what I am trying to find out from the honourable minister is, is it possible for Government to make deliberate efforts to test whether these people are HIV positive. If they are, then give them free and compulsory treatment from these recent drugs, which have been developed.  That is my major concern, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement he made this afternoon.  I would like some few clarifications, and I also want to give the minister some information. In his statement, the minister gave statistics of the success that Operation Iron Fist has recorded. He gave us numbers of rescued abductees, enemies killed and the arms and ammunition that have been recovered.  

Unfortunately, looking at these figures, I am unable to determine how successful this operation is? Apart from just giving numbers, the minister does not give what we would refer to as, “the total strength of the enemy”. So, it is not possible for us to determine how far this operation has gone and how far it is yet to go. I would like clarification from the minister on this matter.  

Many times we have read in the press about deadlines for when the enemy will be completely crushed and how the enemy has succumbed. But these deadlines have come and passed, and yet the enemy still exists and the people of Northern Uganda continue to suffer unabated.

I would like to give the minister information, free of charge by the way. I do not want payment for it, honourable minister. On page 7, item A (1), the minister states, “They still cross over to the neighbouring districts of Lira, Soroti, Katakwi and Kapchorwa to cause chaos, killing innocent civilians, raping women and uprooting food.” 

I would like to inform the minister that the Karimojong have constantly disturbed Kumi District. They have crossed into Kumi, particularly in the sub-counties of Malera, Kolir and Ongino, to kill. I believe these places should have been mentioned, for the purpose of records, in his statement.

Mr Speaker, the minister has stated some challenges that still face Government in as far as tackling the menace of the Karimojong is concerned. On Page 9, under challenges, the minister states in item (i): “Delay in opening security roads. This has hindered the swift deployment and interception of criminals (raiders).”  

Sometime towards the end of last year, we were awakened to the rude shock of deduction or removal of 23 per cent of budgetary allocations to most ministries. This was done under the guise that this money was going to be used for defence purposes. 

One of the ministries that was badly affected - and I say this with authority because I have information – was the Ministry of Works. What did this 23 per cent do, if the Ministry of Defence could not spend some of this money to create conditions for its easy operation? Did it go for possession of arms? Did it go towards buying uniforms? How would these equipment move if there are no roads in the northern part of the country?  

In my opinion, I believe some of this money should have been taken back to the Ministry of Works for the easy facilitation of movement of troops and equipment in the insecure part of the country.

The minister states the following, under the challenges, “De-campaigning, by some local leaders, of the use of communal grazing as a measure to contain raids”. Mr Speaker and honourable members of this House, I think this is no reason. The people of Teso have continuously resisted the practice of the Karimojong crossing over to Teso to graze, especially during the dry season, and they have got their reasons for this.  

Many times our brothers from Karamoja have abused our hospitality. They become humble, when in need. After it has rained on the other side of the frontier and there is a little bit of grass and water, they go on rampage and rape little girls, maim our people, contaminate water sources and uproot our foodstuff. What kind of people are these? How do you expect us to be hospitable to these kind of people who are rude towards our hospitality?   

One of the challenges the honourable minister stated was the lack of employment to occupy the youth, known as the Karachunas, who handed in their guns voluntarily, leaving them redundant and exposing them to temptation.  

Unemployment is rampant in this country. It is not only localised to Karamoja. If we are using this as a justification for the youth to carry arms around, I think this is a total failure on the part of Government, and we need to address this expeditiously and in a proper manner – (Interruption).

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give the honourable member is in regard to page 10. The sentence reads,  “Lack of employment to occupy the youth (Karachunas) who handed in the guns voluntarily leaving them redundant and exposing them to temptations”.  

Mr Speaker, these youth, the Karahcunas, are not only in Karamoja. They are everywhere in Uganda.  The whole population of the youth in this country is currently desperate. They are not employed, and that is the reason why some of them are ready to do anything. You know what a desperate person can do, because he has nothing to lose. 

I am raising this point because the youth form half the total population of this country, and they are the most marginalised group in this country. I would like to inform Government that something should be done to the youth in terms of employment, otherwise, we shall not co-operate in 2006. (Laughter). Mr Speaker, this is not just unemployment, it is economic insecurity. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: I thank you very much my dear colleague for that information, especially the fact that we need to co-operate or not co-operate in the year 2006.

The minister also does state that there is lack of commitment among some senior local political leaders. I think the minister left this statement hanging. He does not go the extra mile to tell us who these local leaders are. This is a grave statement, and I think if there are leaders among us who are a stumbling block to the return of security in the area, they need to be followed up. 
I am saying this with a lot of pain, because leaders are supposed to be exemplary. They are supposed to be a living example to the people they lead. 

It was also stated sometime back that among us, there are leaders who have been implicated in these bad acts of supporting raiders. I would like the minister, without shame, to state who these local senior political leaders are. This information could help Parliament to determine the course of action that could be meted against these leaders.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, as a way forward, under (b) on page 11, the minister states, “No Karimojong will be allowed into Katakwi with Arms”. Will they then be allowed into Lango or into Kapchorwa, or even into Karamoja itself? 

I state this because many times we have seen Karimojong coming into Teso and into the neighbouring districts without arms But arms get into the hands of Karimojong while they are in these districts, and these arms are used to harass people.  

The minister also states that UPDF will guard the bonafide Karimojong who are grazing their herds in Katakwi. Mr Speaker, the Karimojong have caused a lot of pain to her neighbours. Sometime back, the people of Teso took up arms to fight this menace, but the Government harassed them. We lost a lot of lives and a lot of property.  

Today, the Karimojong wander around with guns, and there seems to be very little attention being given to this menace caused by the Karimojong.

I would like to suggest to the minister that, for the Karimojong to be accepted, the guns have to be removed from the hands of the Karimojong. Otherwise, they will continue to haunt their neighbours and create fear in us. The very sight of a Karimojong, even if he or she does not have a gun, causes fear among her neighbours. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister on three areas.

One, in his introductory statement, he says, “to brief Parliament on the security situation in the north of our country.” Mr Speaker, in the local media a lot has been reported about the looming insecurity in Western Uganda. I want to seek clarification from the honourable minister, when shall Parliament and the people of Uganda get a statement explaining what exactly is happening in that area?

I ask that because in the editorial of the papers today, especially the Monitor newspaper, an impression has been created as if Government has something to hide. I think the people of Uganda deserve to know what exactly is happening in that area. I want to seek clarification as to when that will happen.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when you recently travelled to Rwanda with a group of Members of Parliament, a number of them were mesmerized. The Ministry of Defence in Rwanda makes the pacts entered into by the Government of Rwanda public documents, and they are in the Parliament library. 

How soon shall we as the Parliament of Uganda, have access to the pacts that you make, so that we are not treated to this selective treatment of information and to avoid speculation? These are public documents for the people of Uganda. I suggest that they are made available for us so that we know their implications on us. That is what our friends who went to Rwanda learnt. I would wish that the same were replicated here.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, when I was listening to Focus on Africa on BBC this morning, I heard that a new rebel group has been formed in Sudan, and actually, it had taken over an expanse of land in a certain specified area. I do not remember exactly which one. But here you say that you also agreed that immediately, the Sudan Peoples Armed Forces would be deployed in the former LRA camps, which you mentioned here, not later than 17th March.  

Definitely I know that when there insurgency in a country, it has an implication on the efficiency of Defence and on their ability to cover certain areas and to manage defence. This could have implications on us; whether they will come to occupy these areas or whether Kony will go back to occupy these areas that have security implications for our country.

I wanted to find out from you whether at the time you entered the pact, this was anticipated and whether enough precautions have been taken. Or whether the UPDF, in the absence of this, will go to stay in these areas permanently, to ensure that the northern area is fortified to protect our people. I thank you very much.

MRS BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister of Defence for the statement he has brought to the House regarding the situation in the northern region.  

Mr Speaker, to me the most important statement made in this report is on page 6, the second last paragraph. I am unable to read it because it is not in Braille. If it was in Braille, I would have read it for you. But I can give you the highlights. It says that Uganda will not be used as a ground for training SPLA rebels. Then also, Uganda will not allow SPLA to transport arms across, using Uganda. 

I would like to inform the honourable minister that this has been the main cause of this war in the northern region. The Sudanese Government believed strongly that the Uganda Government had been supporting the SPLA, and therefore, they had to also support the LRA against us. I hope that this statement is very sincere and you are going to implement it.  

I would like also to know what plans you have in place to ensure that the SPLA do not roam around in Uganda. I live in Koboko, at the border of Sudan, and also once in a while I go to Moyo and Adjumani. The SPLA roam freely at the border. They carry their guns, food and clothes across to support themselves. 

What measures have you put in place to ensure that these people do not move around and come to Uganda to disturb us again and create this war? 

I have also noticed that in Koboko the Army has been withdrawn and the border is left free. What will happen if they attack West Nile?  

My next point is about soldiers staying in Sudan.  It is going to be one year since the Sudanese Government allowed us to chase the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in Sudan. But from my experience, and from what I have seen in Sudan, Southern Sudan is a very vast area with mountains, forests, valleys, rivers and so forth. 

The terrain is very difficult, and that is why our soldiers have suffered a lot of casualties. The best people who know their terrain are the Sudanese themselves. Now that we are friends, apart from us chasing the enemy in their area, what support are they giving to us so that we can get rid of them forever?  Thank you very much.  

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is good that I caught your eye. I am on record late last year to have moved a motion begging the Uganda Government to endeavour to talk peace with the rebels in Northern Uganda, possibly with an option of talking to them outside the borders of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, We have no angels in war; all fighters are satanic and evil. If you read the Monitor newspaper of today, you can shed tears. They have exposed the kind of torture, which is done within the camps of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF). And yet from time to time, we praise the UPDF and say they are well cultured and a fantastic people.  Where is their fantastic part?  

The first question I would like to put to the minister is, “what measures has he taken to ensure that there is an option to talk to the rebels outside Uganda?” Nobody can deceive us that any rebel will show up, either in Karamoja or Kidepo, and say, “I want to talk to the Uganda Government”. 

You remember during the Luwero Triangle war, President Museveni was in the bush and General Lutwa was in power. It is on record that when arrangements were made that talks take place, they took place in Nairobi. The talks never took place in Nakasongola. General Lutwa would have said, “If you want to talk, let us meet in Luwero or somewhere in Nakasongola”. The only option was Nairobi. I think it is important for us to be serious when we are addressing the concept of dialogue. No meaningful talks will take place in Uganda.  

I was saddened when I read about the minister’s terms of reference. Whose terms of reference are these, an individual? Why can’t Parliament operationalise the terms of reference? We speak for the people, and agony of the people in Northern Uganda haunts us all, including the people of Buganda. When the Baganda recall the trauma of war in Luwero, we become sympathetic about our brothers and sisters in the North. That is why I moved a motion. The Baganda would like that war to end and it must end.  

Mr Speaker, it seems as if the Uganda Government is not serious about this concept of dialogue. I am one of the greatest friends of the donors, and what I have heard from them, with laxity, is that if Uganda does not show interest in talking peace with the rebels outside Uganda, they may consider putting up conditionalities on the 54 per cent contribution towards the budget. So, this is a very serious matter.  

I would like to urge the Uganda Government, with humility, to endeavour to talk to the rebels outside Uganda. If the rebels have nothing to talk, it will be known internationally that they have nothing to talk. But do not pre-empt them with assumptions that they cannot talk. Give them the chance to talk.  

I am also saddened with reference to the pictures I have seen in the Monitor newspaper. When you look at those pictures of torture, what impression do you get? I put it to the hon. Minister of Defence that by refusing to bring to Parliament a proposal to operationalise Article 210 of the Constitution of Uganda - endeavouring to cause discipline and control the Army appropriately - he is deliberately conducting war in Northern Uganda on the command of the jungle law, based on the National Resistance Army (NRA) Statute.  

That is a jungle law, and these are modern times. We need a new law. We are still controlling the Army on the basis of that law. Is that not a shame? I think hon. Odongo Otto was right to urge you to resign, because you have not done anything that can impress us, and this is a serious point. As we think about Ssendaula, you should also be on line - (Laughter).

THE SPEAKER: Please finalise because we have to end this debate. We have a lot to do.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to refer you to the text of the minister, where he talks about challenges in regard to cattle rustling and the optimism in regard to fighting Kony and the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA). As a student of comparative politics, I am perplexed. The minister openly accepts that there are challenges in regard to cattle rustling, and he writes down those challenges. But when it comes to talking about the war in the North with Kony, especially with reference to page four, he does not accept any defeat, and yet he proudly says that about 411 people have been killed by the UPDF. 

Can a meaningful Government express happiness whenever soldiers kill anybody? All the people killed are our people. Do you think they kill only Kony’s people? They have been killing innocent people as well, because mistakes in war cannot be controlled.  

So, I seriously want to end by saying that the minister has two challenges: one, we must have a law to operationalise the control of the Army, because as I speak now, the Army has become unruly and we can never stand that situation. 

Two, you must pursue the need to talk to the rebels. In war you have no angels; you have no bamalaika. Talk to them, and if they have nothing to talk about, teach them.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us end this debate with hon. Epetait, and then the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Defence will make their concluding remarks. We have another debate on gender, which you started yesterday. We will deal with it and then move to another item. I will give you three minutes.

MR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 
If you look at page 8, point 6 on the disarmament exercise, it reads as follows: “The voluntary phase of the disarmament exercise ran from December 02 2001 to February 15 2002 during which 7,319 guns were recovered.” Mr Speaker, that is about a period of 75 days in which 7,319 guns were voluntarily recovered. That is approximately a rate of 100 guns per day.

The second phase, which was forceful, started thereafter, from 16th February 2002 to-date. That is about one year, and they have recovered 3377 guns. That is less than 10 guns per day.

Mr Speaker, the challenges mentioned by the minister on page 9, paragraph 2, included delay by Government in fully honouring its promise of a token of appreciation to those who handed in guns voluntarily. Some of the items that were supposed to be given as a token of appreciation are listed.  

One of the problems that has retarded voluntarily disarmament, and has discouraged everybody, was the manner in which the items to be given to those who had voluntarily returned their guns was handled. Some of the items were actually handed over to those who never gave in any gun. Even those who never processed guns received items, and that discouraged a number of people, to the extent that the whole exercise got abused.  

It has become arduous; everybody is scared as to what kind of protection they would get from a Government that is not concerned about fulfilling its own promises. The people will think Government is not very serious in whatever it says. So, that is part of the information I wanted to give, but -(Interruption) 

MR KOLUO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this country, we are aware that possessing a gun is a crime. Therefore, for Government to give a token of appreciation to somebody who is a criminal is something which is unacceptable. They should not even talk about a token of appreciation. 

MR MALLINGA JOHNSON:  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that much as the minister has raised the challenges on page 9, when I look at the way forward on page 11 I do not see the relation at all. Among the challenges, nothing was mentioned about Katakwi and yet the way forward is about Katakwi. So, I do not know whether Katakwi is a challenge to the disarmament exercise.  

I would like to state here, on behalf of my people, that much as the Government of Uganda is allowing the Karimojong to come to Katakwi, the district council of Katakwi, in their meeting of 20th, said until the disarmament is over, these people should not graze in their land. Thank you very much.

MR LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the House about the token of appreciation from Government on the disarmament process.  First of all, when the Karimojong said they would volunteer, Government said, “thank you”, even though the guns were illegal. This was because they had requested, as poor people, and they had said, “If we are giving you guns, which you will utilise in future, why can’t you consider giving us something?” 

So, Government said, “we are giving you certificates in recognition of the guns you surrender”. I think that is done everywhere, so that nobody comes to ask you after you have given in the gun. So, the certificates were given to those who surrendered the guns, name by name.  

They also asked for some grain; you hear now there is famine. Each one of them was entitled to a bag of maize. Five thousand bags of maize were given out, and each went to whoever volunteered to give a gun to Government. 

Then there was the issue of the plough. Government took a decision that in order to increase food security and production in Karamoja, they should plough. We thought we should give them ploughs so that they can engage in agriculture. There is a factory called in Soroti called Saimco -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Is this a contribution?

MR LOKERIS: I am giving information, because they are talking about ploughs. It was decided that these ploughs be manufactured in Teso in order to boost their incomes in that area. These ploughs are not manufactured in one day. Every month they manufacture 400 ploughs. About 5,000 ploughs have been manufactured and our neighbours in Teso are enjoying the income, which is very good indeed. But the process has been slow. This is the information I wanted to give you.  Thank you.

MR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The honourable minister has not given me any help at all, because he has not reacted to the fact that the disbursement of such token items was mishandled.

Finally, Mr Speaker, while that token of appreciation was given to them, I would like to remind the Minister of Defence and entire House that towards the end of the 21st Century, about 69 people were roasted in a wagon in Mukura. Government said “sorry”, and they promised to pay 1.5 million shillings to each of the bereaved families. But to-date, it is a shame that only less than 50 per cent has been disbursed.  

I have been talking to the Minister in charge of Presidency about the matter. He keeps promising, and for the last five months there has been no reaction. I will soon come with a motion over the same matter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have to continue the debate on UCB. Let us really end this. Hon. Kapkwomu, make your contribution within three minutes.

DR KAPKWOMU KAPKOMU (Kongasis County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has actually stated concisely, as far as the disarmament exercise in Karamoja is concerned.  Unfortunately, during this disarmament exercise, they annexed Kapchorwa to Karamoja. The Kapchorwa people were disarmed and they voluntarily surrendered 763 guns to Government. 

Mr Speaker, the people of Kapchorwa are quite law abiding. The 763 guns were officially known to Government because they were registered. The Government knew where they were, who owned them and how they came to own them. Now here we are told, after the disarmament, that UPDF has been deployed at the border with Kenya to curb the cross-border raids. That obviously indicates that the other areas of Kween County, Tingey County and part of Sironko District that border Kapchorwa, are bare. 

What is stated here, as deployment to curb the cross-border raids, is rather cosmetic practically. The Pokot definitely know that the UPDF cannot cross the border and go into Kenya when they have rustled the animals. The soldiers, under the law, do not cross the border. So, the Pokot just sneak in, get the animals and cross over to Kenya, leaving the whole issue untouched. 

Secondly, the Pokot have, time and again, stolen or raided animals and passed just near the vicinity of the barracks of these soldiers, without any single response. Worse still, Mr Speaker, the chairman LC III of Sham Sub County on Monday informed me that the same soldiers have resorted to continuously harassing the wanainchi, instead of protecting them and their property. So, may I know from the Minister of Defence – (Interruption)

MR WAMBI KIBAALE: Mr Speaker, the honourable member holding the Floor may not know about the idea of changing LDUs from another area. For instance, you may bring an LDU from Karamoja because you think he is not going to leak out information. But when you bring him to Sironko or to Kapchorwa, it is also a cause of this disharmony. These very people are the ones who turn around and harass our people, because the minister thinks it is important to change the guards.

DR KAPKWOMU:  Mr Speaker, practice has shown that the management of these cattle raids in that area should actually be accompanied by the presence of LDUs to fight alongside the UPDF.  May I know as to how soon the Minister of Defence will implement what the President directed the Army Commander to do in order to curb the situation, by recruiting the LDUs to work with the UPDF in that area?  

And may I also know, after the voluntary handing in of the 763 guns, will the people of Kapchorwa who voluntarily surrendered their guns also enjoy the benefits? Will they be given ploughs, iron sheets and seeds for planting? 

Otherwise, my immediate request is that the LDUs be recruited. The Pokot and the Karimojong know that once they see a Sabiny LDU person, they are finished. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, don’t you think we should conclude this matter?

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, I was saying that the matter of security is very important.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, you make your point.

DR OKULO EPAK: The honourable minister is not around. I want to ask him for clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you make your point. Somebody else will pass it on to him.

DR OKULO EPAK: Thank you. First of all, I want to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs and the First Deputy Prime Minister for allowing us in the Lango sub region to recruit, train and deploy Special Police Constables.  

Secondly, we all realise that the situation in Acholi land is very severe, in fact much more severe than the situation in the Lango sub-region. But it will be terribly unfair for a minister responsible for defence, when talking about the security of Northern Region, to exclude the Lango sub-region from the North. 

We would like to get an explanation for this omission and urge him that next time he makes a report which excludes the Lango sub-region from the North, he will have to explain to us the implication.

Finally, the President and Commander in Chief last year directed that no Karimojong should be allowed to cross and graze their animals in the neighbouring areas with guns. What happened? Why were these directives not implemented, and what miracle will happen with a simple minister’s directive that they will not be allowed to cross with guns into Katakwi? I thank you.

MR AKISOFERI OGOLA (West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My people originally came from Bito, and I am a mubito. Therefore, I am entitled to take interest in what is taking place in the Northern region.  

First of all, I would like to express my personal gratification that on page 4, the Government states that it has shown willingness to talk peace. But then the last sentence of paragraph 5 says, “It appointed a team of political leaders to talk peace with the bandits and guidelines and terms of reference were also given.” 

Mr Speaker, it is not clear in this statement whether the ceasefire, which was given to the LRA, was actually a formal offer at a negotiating forum, or it was a political statement by the radio or it was in writing.  

Negotiation, Mr Speaker, is a serious matter that Government should enter into on equal terms If it is not on those terms, then the ceasefire offer that was given in paragraph 6 a, b, c, d ceases to be an offer. They are given to the opponent on the basis of “take it or leave it”.  Now, that is not negotiation.  

Negotiation, moreover, is not clear in this statement, although I know the head of the Government team in this negotiation is no other than the Rt hon. First Deputy Prime Minister of this country. But it is not clear, in this offer of negotiation, whether this team has plenipotentiary powers to commit Government or whether whatever they offer there is still subject to a veto of somebody else.  

If they were not given full powers, then their powers are at half measure, and therefore, they must come back. Yes, even with plenipotentiary powers they would still come back for negotiation. But how much power were they given to commit Government as the negotiator?

Thirdly, if indeed they have opened negotiations, there are stages of negotiations. Have they opened an agenda? Is there an agenda drawn with mutual participation of opponents? Or is it negotiation to talk about talks? Even that is a negotiable matter. You must negotiate on whether you two parties are agreed to talk. And when you have agreed to talk, then you draw up an agenda on which you are going to talk.  

This statement by the Minister of Defence is very nice - beautiful English - but it is not what is said here that is important. It is what is left unsaid, which we are interested in. How serious, therefore, is the Government in its offer to talk? Are you only offering to talk because you want to test the goodwill of the other side? Are you offering to talk because you want to humiliate the other side? You cannot afford, as a country, to prolong the negotiations by being ambivalent about what you are offering. I therefore request the Government to be more explicit. 

Has the Government demanded the Kony group to produce their political face? This is a political matter. Now the military is in the field, but when you go into negotiations, that is a political matter, and therefore, the Government team is a political team. This team in the bush fighting is not fighting just for military sake, it is fighting for political ends, and therefore, it must have political spokesmen. Has the Government team met the political spokesmen of the other side? It is up to the Government to find out. This is the question I am asking, and it is important.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable member holding the Floor, for giving way. I am a member of the government team, which was appointed to make contacts with Kony and his operatives.  

It is true that we have not yet made contacts with Kony, and for the simple reason that it was only recently that Mr Kony is reported to have said he has his political wing. That was the first time that we heard about a political wing. And according to him, some are in the U.K. and others he did not disclose. 

Some of our terms of reference included making contacts at personal level, but we found difficulties in finding who to make contacts with. We have tried, to the extent of even volunteering to give our mobile telephone numbers, if that would persuade Mr Kony to make contacts. Our colleague, hon. Betty Akech, also talked on Radio Mega to try and interest Mr Kony to make contact with us. That is how far we have gone.

MR OGOLA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can see the Government has moved quite a bit from calling Kony a bandit to calling him “Mr”. In negotiations, that itself is a lot. I appreciate that.

I am also glad with the paragraph on page 6, which hon. Baba Diri talked about. It reads as follows: “…Uganda will not train the SPLA…” This offer, Mr Speaker, is very good not only in improving our relations with Sudan, but it also proves the point that at one time we were doing it, something the Government had been reluctant to accept. 

We are glad that now Government accepts that the struggle against Kony was partly due to our support for SPLA. I really hope that the Government’s offer to Sudan would be a long time and full time quid pro quo, so that indeed Kony will no longer see Sudan as a place to hide and cause trouble.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Hon. Ogola, thank you for giving way.  The information I want to give you is that the statement that, “Uganda will not provide ground for training SPLA” is questionable, with reference to what I see in Lubaga South. In Lubaga South, there are many Sudanese without identity moving at large. They are not refugees; many of them drive very luxurious cars, including Pajeros.

THE SPEAKER: You mean Lubaga is a training ground?

MR LUKYAMUZI: In a place called Kabusu, Nabunya, we spotted one Sudanese driving a Land Rover with SPLA numbers, and he had a shotgun. We could not handle him because we had no military might. That is the information I wanted to give you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogola, could you please wind up.

MR OGOLA: Yes, I had only one small point to make with regard to the Karimojong relations with their neighbours. On page 11, under the way forward, in (c) it is stated that UPDF will guard the bona fide Karimojong who are grazing their herds in Katakwi. This statement leaves me wondering. I thought that the bona fide Karimojong going into Katakwi would not be a problem to the people of Katakwi. The problem is the Karimojong who go there with less friendly intentions than the bona fide Karimojong. 

So, I would like to ask, are you protecting the clean people and leaving the rough ones to pass through unopposed? The Government should change. The bona fide Karimojong should be protected by the people of Katakwi who know that when they go there, they do not cause problems The problem is those Karimojong who go there to cause problems Does the Government know them? 

Therefore, in my opinion, this leaves this problem fluid. I pray that Government will tighten the noose on those people who cause problems in this area and isolate them completely. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you for being patient with me.

THE SPEAKER: Hon Wambi, you can give your information. We will definitely conclude with the honourable lady, the Member for Kitgum.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: I am concerned, Mr Speaker, because the matter of Northern Uganda’s security and the issue of the Karimojong draws a lot of emotions and sentiments. So, it will not be fair for this House not to know that Sironko District neighbours Karamoja, and it is one of the areas, which has constantly been harassed by the Karimojong. Therefore, we also deserve to be mentioned, and action should be taken to see that we are also protected as citizens of this country.  

Lastly, is this intended to isolate the people of Sironko and leave them to the marauding Karimojong? Is that why the honourable minister has not even mentioned Sironko as a neighbouring district? This has also led to the exclusion of Sironko from the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Action Fund. They have not taken care of us, and this is a very serious matter- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean Sironko is part of Northern Uganda?

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: It is not, but it has to be north of somewhere, of course. But the truth is, when His Excellency was introducing the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Action Fund, he said this fund would also cater for neighbours of Karamoja who have had the misfortune to be tortured, raped, looted, et cetera. 

So, if I do not seek clarification from the minister as to what his intention was when he did not mention this important district of Bugisu, it will be a disservice to the people of my area.  

So, I seek clarification from you, honourable minister. I would like you to tell us why Sironko is not mentioned. Is this because you have people who are giving you wrong information? Or is it because the defence systems in this country have now failed to take care of the welfare of the people of Uganda? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We conclude with the honourable lady and then the First Deputy Prime Minister will say something.

MRS JANE AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for at last picking on me to speak on this issue of the security situation in the North. I would wish, first of all, to comment on the security situation in Karamoja and the disarmament exercise. 

Beginning with paragraph one, I wish to note with dismay the omission of Kitgum from the districts neighbouring Karamoja. I just wish to seek clarification as to whether Kitgum has already been designated as an operational area for the Karimojong. Or whether it has been given out as a grazing ground for the Karimojong herds. Otherwise, Kitgum still neighbours Karamoja. 

As we talk now, the Karimojong have been counted in big numbers in Rom sub-county, Namukola sub-county, Omianyima sub-county and part of Lagolu sub-county. This also leads me to the point that, maybe the minister next time should tally his report with what is happening on the ground.  

I wish to comment on paragraph two, on the current security arrangements to reverse the situation. It is true that armoured vehicles have been provided to escort the World Food Programme vehicles. But I take this opportunity, again, to reiterate the anguish, fear and state of hopelessness of the people of Kitgum, because time and again, they have been hit in ambushes on roads between Gulu and Kitgum. 

I wish also to take this opportunity to appeal to the Minister of Defence, the UPDF and the ministry set-up as a whole, to take the protection of lives as an issue that is equally important to the protection of the World Food Programme vehicles. 

To-date, Kitgum has lost 25 vehicles, and more than 100 lives have been lost on road ambushes in less than four months. There are convoys on the roads to Arua and Adjumani and it would only be imperative that a convoy system should also be introduced on the road to Kitgum, to protect the people. 

I also wish to comment on the issue of the formation of the 5th Division. It is true that the 5th Division is in place. We are also happy that the minister has told us that they have established 23 battalions of LDUs all over Northern Uganda.  

Last Thursday I was in Kitgum, in sub-counties called Lagoro and Matidi. Those sub-counties do not have LDUs. Where LDUs have volunteered or have been recruited, no guns have been given to them. It is erroneous to inform the whole of Parliament that all these LDUs have been recruited, trained and deployed. Sir, there is a lot to be done on the ground. You need to be a field-based minister. 

Mr Speaker, I also wish to make an appeal to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. We know that in the past they have visited the policemen and seen their plight. I think it is high time that this committee went to the North and saw the plight of the soldiers in the operational areas. Often we are just told how these soldiers operate and what missions they operate in. But it is about time that the committee went to the North and saw how our sons and daughters in the UPDF are working and in what conditions they are.  

Another issue of security, which should also have been spelt out, is the issue of the famine that has engulfed the whole of Acholi sub-region. In Kitgum right now, over 200,000 people are on the verge of starvation. It is true that World Food Programme has been giving out foodstuffs, but these foodstuffs have been given to people who are already in established camps in parts of Lamwo. The vast majority of the people in Kitgum, over 70 percent, which is about 197,000 people, are on the verge of starvation, and Government needs to intervene. With famine and starvation, we are surely entertaining another recipe for additional insecurity.

Last but not least, if there is already famine in that region and the soldiers are not given food, even if they are given money to buy food, what will they use that money for? I just appeal to you to give the soldiers who are in the North, in the operational zone, some food ration to cater for them. Right now they are also on the verge of starvation, like the population. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, taking into account the seriousness of this problem of the security in the North, I think we should have regular statements about the situation there. Maybe every fortnight, the minister, upon our request, should brief us on the situation. Because I really realise this is a serious problem. Now members would have taken the whole day debating this and making their points. 

So, I request the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us fortnightly statements about the situation. Now I would like to ask the First Deputy Prime Minister to make his comments and then the Minister of Defence will conclude.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a few remarks. As it were, this was a statement made by the Minister of Defence but there are some points that touch on the Ministry of Internal Affairs and I will comment on those. 

The first one was raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, about the situation in the North West, and he tried to give the impression that the North West is on fire. But I can assure you, Mr Speaker, there were few incidences on the border between DRC and Nebbi District - not the whole of West Nile - involving the Lendu. 

The Lendu were fighting and running into Uganda about two weeks ago. This morning, the report I have is that the Lendu have gone back to their country, and I do not have any insecurity problem on the border with Nebbi. So, West Nile is definitely peaceful.

There was a question about the peace committee and our work. I will deal with that one separately because it has been raised by a number of honourable members here.  

On the question of the Pokot from Kenya, yes we are aware of the problem. In fact, Mr Speaker, there is no way we can solve the disarmament of Karamoja as a whole without handling the problem of the people on the other borders - the Turkana, Pokot, the Topotha from Sudan and all those. We want now to have a comprehensive approach to the problem.

Those who read the newspaper this morning saw that there were two ministers from the new government of Kenya who visited Uganda and met His Excellency the President. One of the things we discussed was how we can jointly work out a programme with the Kenyan authorities so that they handle the Pokot on their side and we handle the Pokot on this side. 

The proposal is that we should have a team going to Kenya to discuss the details on how to work out a joint programme of disarming the Pokot and the Turkana on the Kenya side and the Karimojong here. In fact, we had a very good meeting in the evening between the minister from Turkana and the Pokot raiders from our side. We had a very good meeting to find out how they can solve the problem.

Hon. Chebrot also raised the question of disarming of the LDUs in Kapchorwa. That is true. There was voluntary disarmament of LDUs in Kapchorwa, partly because these LDUs were involved in partisan rival politics in the district. There are two camps in Kapchorwa that have been quarrelling amongst themselves. They were now using the LDUs in settling their political differences. So, we could not allow that situation to continue.

Mr Speaker, even when I went to meet the political leaders in Kapchorwa, they demanded for the re-arming of these LDUs, but we did not accept this proposal. We cannot arm LDUs who are politically divided, otherwise you would be causing more insecurity. But I think the matter is being handled. Once there is peace in the area, the question of making sure that the LDUs are armed will be revived as soon as possible.

Hon. Dombo raised the issue, that we should give a report on the insecurity in the west. There was one incident in the west that he talked about, in a place called Kaiso in Hoima District. Last week some armed people in uniforms attacked fishermen and took their fish and went back into Congo. So, I do not know whether we should report that because of that incident, there is insecurity in the whole region. It was just in a place called Kaiso in Hoima, and we are following it up to see whether it was connected with our internal security or it was just a raid from Congo.

Mr Speaker, let me come to the question of talking peace with the rebels. The subject is very dear to Lukyamuzi, who is a friend of donors and is threatening that they may take away 54 percent of our budget. I am not so sure about that, but I think this Government is determined to talk peace. For those who want to talk peace, the record is very clear. All along – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way, hon. First Deputy Prime Minister. Yes, I said I am a friend of donors. Is it a crime to be a friend of donors? 

MR KATEGAYA: I thought the honourable Member for Lubaga South could take a joke. I just said you are a friend. I did not say whether it was good or bad.  But I am just quoting you, anyway. 

To go back to what I was saying, Mr Speaker, Government has shown on many occasions, since we started in 1986, that we have been talking to all groups to bring them on board so that they can live in peace. This is not the first group that we are talking about. We have been talking to all of them.  

In practice, people who have been caught fighting when they are young, or if they just surrender, have always been absorbed in the Army, in the civil service, everywhere. So, there is nothing new in saying that you are urging Government to talk peace. We have been talking peace all along. 

On 24 December last year, we signed an agreement with UNRF II whom we had been talking to. You saw how many guns they surrendered. So, I do not think anybody should raise the question as to whether we are serious or not as a Government. 

We have been serious about solving this problem. In essence, anybody who has been to these areas of Kitgum, Acholi and Pader and has seen the people in the internally displaced camps, knows that you need to talk peace to end that problem. So, there is no question about that. Let me make that very clear.
 
What have we done about this exercise since the President announced the peace team?  First, we now have a complete peace team. When we met the first time, we found out that there had been an oversight. We had not nominated anyone from Kitgum and Pader districts. Now hon. Santa Okot is a member, and I have sent her a letter to that effect. Hon. Henry Okello, the Minister of State for Sports is also a member. So now we have representation from the whole area that is particularly affected. The first team was mainly from Gulu but now we have a full team. 

Secondly, I would like to report that we have set up administrative offices for this exercise. There is an office in Gulu with Internet services, telephone services, desks, everything.

In Kampala we are also setting up an office with an administrator at the level of Under Secretary, with a secretary, a telephone, Internet services – (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I think the hon. First Deputy Prime Minister is touching a very important point, and I think it is the crux of the matter. It is one thing to talk with rebels internally and you give them a lot of money, like Brig. Bamuze and his team were given Shs 4 billion. It is another thing, however, to address the war with Kony, which has lasted for so many years. Whether you give him money or not, he will never stop talking. The option is to talk to him or his agents outside Uganda. That option has been passed by a resolution of Parliament. What is Government saying about it in serious terms?

MR KATEGAYA: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you are just jumping the gun. I have not finished my statement on the question of peace. I was talking about what has been put in place, and I have said the team is complete.

Secondly, we have set up administrative structures to carry out the process. I think you should have waited to find out my views on whether we should talk inside Uganda or outside Uganda. I am going to comment on that, but we are not going to have too much flow of reasoning. So, Mr Speaker, I was saying we have set up an office in Gulu and one in Kampala. These are in place. 

What are the contacts we are using?  We are using church leaders and cultural leaders. We have also involved President Carter’s centre in Atlanta to help us, because they claim that there is a gentleman called Prof. Woofman who says he had a chance to talk to Kony as an individual, for some hours. We are trying to use him to see whether he can resume his contact with Kony and see whether he is interested in talking, what type of person he is and that type of thing.

The other thing is, we have contacts within the Government, contacts with MPs. We are also trying to build the profile of these people he works with. Who is Kony? Who is Vincent Otti? What type of people are they? We have to build profiles about them before we talk to them. For example, when I meet hon. Lukyamuzi, I know what type of person I am meeting. (Laughter and Applause). Now we have to also build up profiles of these very important people in the Kony group, and we are doing this slowly.  

Lastly, on this question of what are we are doing, the first thing we should do is to build confidence with this group. And to build confidence with them, we must have the discretion not to disclose everything we do with them. For example, I do not share the method of work my colleague Mao and company use. Everyday you talk to Kony, you come to the press, you go on Capital Radio, newspapers etc. If I am a rebel and everything I tell you is on the air, I will not come again.  

We have made certain points with them, but we are not going to go to the press before we build confidence measures between the rebels and ourselves. My view is that we should not go for press conferences. For sure, it will not work. You can go for a press conference after these people are on board and you have built confidence with each other. That is how I want to handle it. So, that is why – (Interruption)

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank you for giving way. I think that is a very important statement you have made - that you have a strategy for building confidence with these people and you do not want to go public with every piece of information you get. And you are critical of your colleagues in the team who are doing exactly the opposite. Why this divergence? Have you not adopted a common strategy as a team, so that you do not have these uncoordinated movements? The Movement is well co-ordinated, I could say, with uncoordinated behaviour.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, I think it is important that we also understand the working of the team that was appointed by the Government. Because two of the members of that team were reported to be in London, approaching Members of Parliament of the British Parliament, purportedly with conditions given to them by Kony. 

Now, why would the members go to London when they are part of a team? Why would they not bring these conditions to the team, of which you are chairperson, before they even go to London? So, what are we talking about? Are we going to have some discipline? Or are we having a subset of the peace team, which is a Kony team but we are not really interacting with them, not identifying them as the actual spokesperson of Kony.  

MR WACHA: Following Prof. Kabwegyere’s point about the action of these two members of your team, is it not an indicator that they do not feel very comfortable? That they are not satisfied with the speed with which you are handling this matter?  

MR HILARY ONEK: Along that line, I questioned one of the members as to why they should carry out independent activity from that committee. They said that they never met as a committee to map out how to carry out the business. So, I would like to ask the honourable minister whether that happened. And if it happened, whether you are making effort to see that you meet and map out a common strategy. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I happen to be among the team that went to London. The impression faintly being created that this team went to London to present Kony’s idea, is very unfortunate. That meeting in London with the various stakeholders - Members of Parliament, European Union and various groups - first of all, did not only involve MPs from the North. On the invitation list we had hon. Okupa Elijah, hon. Ben Wacha and hon. Okulo Epak. It was organised by a pressure group called Campaign for Political and Human Rights in Uganda. 

One of the issues raised by that particular delegation in London is that there is lukewarm attention being given by the Government towards resolving the conflict. So, let us not really try to assume that those two MPs are comfortable representing Kony’s view. 

The headline which was put in the Monitor newspaper, was a little unfortunate. Of all the addresses that we had for one hour, what was only written was, “MPs deliver Kony’s letter”. But we shocked the international community by saying that even this terrorist could write a letter. 

The President has a copy of the letter, and even the chairman could be having a copy. We said, “This is a letter from Kony. There is a belief that he can be talked to, why don’t you mount pressure on the Ugandan Government?” So, I thought I better make that clear.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the First Deputy Prime Minister on the matter of confidence building. It did not start yesterday. We have been at it. You recall that in this august House, during the 6th Parliament, we moved a motion to set up a committee to investigate the causes. 

You recall, Mr Minister, that we got information from various people. You recall - may be at that time you were not Minister of Internal Affairs - that one of the confidants of Kony who brought a message from Kony on how to settle the conflict came here. She was followed by ISO, she came with me to Jinja and subsequently she was arrested and taken to Luzira. After intervention, she was released. She went back home to Gulu, she was harassed, her brother was killed, her mother had to run away and her other relatives joined Kony out of desperation. I can assure you, she is no longer around. Confidence building! 

The other day, Mr Speaker, the honourable minister knows very well that a number of suspects were arrested and taken into custody by UPDF. They were taken to unknown places and eventually taken to the Police. One of them was taken out at night by Lt Col - you know him – Otema. Mr Oyumbe is no longer with us. He was killed at night in cold blood at a time we were about to set up a team to negotiate peace with Kony. 

Is this what you call “confidence building process”? When we are harassing suspects, we are killing people and you call that confidence building?

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, I want to start with the comment by hon. Wacha whom I respect very much. I have never had any of the members of this team coming to see me and saying, “we are not satisfied with the way the matter is being handled.” If somebody had come to me, I would have listened to why he is taking that decision and the action he has taken because he is dissatisfied with what we are doing. I have never heard that from anybody.

Secondly, the question that we have never met as a committee is not true. I heard it from hon. Mao on Capital Radio. It is not true. Honourable members are here, they can tell you. We met in the boardroom of Ministry of Internal Affairs, and we worked out what we should be doing. So, it is not true that we have never met and therefore people can go on their own. 

Mr Speaker, although I am in Ministry of Internal Affairs, I cannot police politicians over what they want to do. They are honourable members; they do anything they want to do, and my job is to protect them. If they want to be indisciplined, that is their business. I will go on doing what I think is correct to bring about the end to this insurgency in the North –(Interjections)- with others of course. 

But all the same, I do not think it is correct to disclose to the press any small contact with this group as a way of working out confidence building.

Hon. Awori, of course, is a product and a beneficiary of our policy. He was on the other side, now he is an MP. He is here right now and we have built confidence up to now. We are not changing.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable minister that when I was fighting, I was not fighting with Kony.

MR KATEGAYA: Fighting is fighting. I think the honourable member is on record to have said that yes, he killed people. So, I do not see what you are talking about. But he is a beneficiary of our policy from the beginning. That is why he is here in this House.

I want to mention the last point on this issue. There are times when I get a bit concerned. There is an impression created that Government should be put on pressure, as if Government is the bad guy in the whole exercise. That is the impression you want to give. You want to give the impression that we do not want to talk, we are only going to fight, we are not serious and we are not doing anything. 

Can I appeal to the honourable members who may have anything to contribute to this peace process, to come forward with proposals. I want anybody who has a proposal on how to end this problem to come forward, including hon. Lukyamuzi. I will even give you means to go and talk to Kony if you want to go there, because that will help us, rather than just making it a question of debate. It is not a question of debate; it is a serious matter! People are dying and we are wasting a lot of resources. 

I would like to ask, Mr Speaker, that anybody who has anything to contribute to bring about the end of this problem should be free to contact us. We shall listen, either in writing or by interview. Thank you very much. (Applause).

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank all the honourable members of this House who made contributions in response to my statement. I do appreciate your support, and I will attempt to answer the questions that were raised here, those for which I have answers. Those I cannot answer today, I will look for the answers and I will endeavour to give them to you. Some of the questions were repeated, so I will answer them as they arose but I will not repeat the answers. 

I want to start with hon. Aggrey Awori, who was asking for an exhaustive list. He asked whether the breakdown of the achievement in the six months I have presented in this document is exhaustive or not. He wondered why I did not include the anti-aircraft missiles, which I had earlier on said were in the possession of these terrorists.

Well, I would like to remind hon. Aggrey Awori that this is not the first time I am making a statement. And if he scrutinized this statement, he would see that it begins with September. I last made a statement, when I gave such a list, on 21 August and I did indeed talk about the missiles. 

With regard to the statement by hon. Aggrey Awori, that we are not flying because it is not safe to do so, it is true that we had taken the necessary precautions. We took all the necessary precautions. 

In that statement I said, first of all we were getting these missiles and we shall take count of all the missiles the Sudanese had given Kony. We were taking them one by one and at the time when I spoke, there was only one missile remaining in their possession. And I said that we had taken all the necessary precautions on our aircrafts to render that missile, even if it was fired at our aircrafts, ineffective. We had in our possession full counter measures against missile attack, and therefore, we are flying freely in the knowledge that even if they got missiles, we are safe.

The question of how many of the 2,227 abductees rescued are children and women is one of those I will get a breakdown for. I do not have that information off hand.  

Finally on the points raised by hon. Aggrey Awori, including the one he has just raised, I think the First Deputy Prime Minister answered the question about West Nile. I simply want to inform this Parliament that the reason Uganda is involved in the Ituri situation - apart from the request by the United Nations that we retain a force there to maintain the safety of the people until a solution has been reached - is because we have our own security to look at. 

It is a fact that we have these armed people who have crossed the border, especially in Nebbi District, and they have killed our people. It is our duty as a Government to protect all our people from all danger, from wherever it emanates. We have a military presence in Ituri, partly to handle that situation. And I do believe that if we did not have that presence, most probably the situation would be worse.  

Mr Speaker, I am happy to report to this Parliament that following the meeting in Dar-Es-salaam between President Museveni and President Kabila, there was an update and renewal of the agreement that had been reached in Angola in September last year. This agreement was extending the time for the establishment of the Ituri Pacification Commission. 

The timeline that had been anticipated by the Dar-Es-salaam agreement was not met initially because of opposition from some elements in Ituri, particularly a group calling itself “UPC”, under a gentleman called Lubanga. 

Inspite of that, I am happy to say that with the intervention of our team, led by Brig. Gen. Kale Kaihura, and the intervention of the MONUC, the United Nations in Congo, this process has been set in motion again. We expect that it will be successful and an administration will be established in Ituri. We hope a mechanism will be put in place to handle the question of insecurity of the people of Ituri and the people in the neighbourhood, especially in Uganda.  

MR AWORI: How does that impact on our internal security? Those problems you are talking about in Ituri are Congolese problems, not Ugandan problems  What are we doing there? They even asked us to leave. What are we doing there?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, Mr Speaker, if we had not deployed our forces outside our borders, the killings of local councillors and others in Busia, which had taken place for a long time, would never have stopped. As you know, we deployed all the forces at our disposal, not only in Busia and inside our borders but also outside. And I am happy to say that we have the exhibits of the success of that effort.

The last question hon. Aggrey Awori raised was whether the North is secure now for Members of Parliament to operate freely. I think the answer is in my statement. We still have these actions of insecurity, which we are pursuing. I hope it will be safe enough soon for the Members of Parliament to act freely.  

Hon. Ndeezi asked me which political leaders –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Pardon me, Mr Speaker. There was a question on escorts for international relief organisations. Why are you leaving it out? Do you still provide escort for the International Red Cross?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I am amazed. I kept quiet last time. He stood up and spoke when I had not given way and then he stands up and speaks again. I thought after so many years - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to respond and then subsequently, if you are not satisfied, you come in.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: One would think that wisdom comes with age.  Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am an experienced parliamentarian. I accept heckling, but insinuations that some of us are late developers mentally, I take that as an insult. Is the honourable minister in order to imply that I am a late developer mentally?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I did not read that from the statement. But I think he saying that as you develop, you also develop in other things.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ndeezi, I did not disclose these political leaders I talked about deliberately, because I did not think it was appropriate to do so. I only wanted to make clarification that these do not include political leaders from the region who operate at the national level. 

However, we are trying our best. These are the leaders in Karamoja whose actions are an impediment to the exercise of disarmament. But we are doing everything possible as Government, through persuasion and other means, to bring them in line so that they support the disarmament exercise.  

How many times shall we get deadlines from Sudan?  The protocol, which we have signed, extends the agreement from 31st January to 31st May. Really, this is not a deadline. I would like to repeat what I have told this Parliament and the public before - our understanding of the agreement we have reached with Sudan is that it will remain operational until the problem of terrorism against Uganda, by the Kony group, from Southern Sudan has been eliminated. 

The question of establishing dates like 31st May has something to do with the administrative management of the process. It simply means that the Minister of Defence of Sudan and I have to meet at some given time to review what is going on, to see whether we need to take other measures. That is the purpose. It is not intended to say, “the problem must be finished by this date, otherwise you get out”. That is not the intention, and that is not what will happen.  

The First Deputy Prime Minister talked about a point raised by hon. Ndeezi, about some MPs carrying messages from Kony to the UK. He asked the questions, “Did government know about it? Whom did they represent?” Well, I also first got this from the press. Of course I did not know, and I do believe that Government as a whole did not know.

However, shortly after their visit to London, I actually did visit London myself and I did speak to British ministers and some MPs. Because we were talking about negotiations, the impression given in some circles in the UK was that indeed these were representatives of Kony. So, they were asking if we have them in Parliament, why don’t we talk directly to them.  

Mr Speaker, I corrected this impression. I told them that I did not know that these MPs had gone there. When I was given the list of their names, I saw that, all these MPs - well, most of them - could not be representatives of Kony. That was a clear point that I made to them.

Hon. Alaso asked whether in my statement that the Karimojong will not be allowed into Katakwi now, I meant that they were allowed to go there previously. And others asked the same question, especially those from the Lango region, Acholi, Kitgum and Pader. They asked, “Does this mean the Karimojong are allowed there?”  

The answer to this question is that indeed, as you know and I have had occasion to tell this Parliament in the past, the policy was that for the Karimojong who are armed - at that time we had not started the disarmament exercise - they were required to initially report to the local leaders. 

In later stages we said they must leave their guns in the encampments in Karamoja, so that if they wanted to graze their cattle in other districts they would go without arms So, this term is used in that context. It is not used in the context that people with illegal arms are allowed into other areas to cause havoc.

Hon. Ben Wacha raised the question about -(Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MALLINGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. He has made it very clear that no Karimojong will be allowed into Katakwi with arms It is also pointed out here that the UPDF will guard the bona fide Karimojong who are grazing their herds in Katakwi. Does this imply that it is only in Katakwi where the Karimojong are allowed to graze?

Does it also imply that there is nowhere else the Karimojong can go and graze, other than Katakwi? Does this also imply that you are going against the decision of the district council of Katakwi to say that the Karimojong should be disarmed before they come to Katakwi?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I was in the process of answering that question. The impression created that the Karimojong will be allowed into Kumi, Lira, Kitgum or Sironko, is a very unfortunate impression. I want to make it categorically clear that they are not. This was an oversight in the statement, and I want to assure all members here, and the country at large, that the Karimojong are not allowed anywhere in Uganda with illegal guns.  

About the Katakwi District Council resolution, we will have to discuss that, because it has very profound implications. If a district is to say that the Karimojong are not supposed to come into their district as a tribe or as a people, it has very profound implications. It has constitutional implications. Perhaps when we get the resolution and see the text and its full meaning, then we can discuss it. 

At the moment we act on the clear understanding of our Constitution that any Ugandan within the boundaries of Uganda has and enjoys absolute free movement.

Hon. Ben Wacha raised the question of the concept of zonalisation. He cited Oyam North, and particularly two sub-counties, where there was an attack last Friday. “Isn’t it this area that should be covered by the policy of zonalisation? Why is it not favoured?” he asked. 

Zonalisation is mainly for areas where the LRA has tried to make a base from which they spring to attack other areas, like your area, hon. Ben Wacha. It is for areas where the LRA have a presence or where they intend to maintain some kind of permanent presence. 

If it is incursions into other areas, then that is a different thing. However, should we come to the conclusion that even your area is one where they plan to have a permanent presence like in the Zambia swamps, the concept of zonalisation will apply to those areas as well.

I hope that hon. Kategaya answered the question about his committee. The reason I did not state it is because it is not really in my field, and I was happy he was here to answer that.  

Dr Chebrot was answered in many ways, but there is only one question which I need to answer, that is on the report that a senior UPDF officer is recruiting youth from Kapchorwa and taking them to Mbarara. The honourable member did indeed raise this matter yesterday and I said I would investigate it. I actually instructed a senior officer of the UPDF yesterday and gave him your telephone number so that he could try and reach you directly, so that we could get the particulars you have. We want to follow it up. 

As I told you yesterday, we are not recruiting now. Certainly we are not recruiting anybody at the moment, whether officers or for general recruitment. And as you know, Mr Speaker, our policy of recruitment is that we do it openly. We advertise, go into public places and give out the schedule of recruitment. I am therefore immensely interested in the information you have, in order for us to follow it up and know exactly what is happening.

Hon. Margaret Ateng gave me information about the Deputy RDC of Lira being another source of insecurity in the area. I did not have that information and I am grateful for it. I hope I will get better particulars so that either the Ministry of Defence, or specifically the Minister of Internal Affairs, will be informed and they follow it up.

Hon. Otto Odonga made a long statement. I would be happy to receive more information from him and from my good friend, hon. Jane Odwong, which they have about the situation on the ground, which does not seem to be consistent with the statement I have made. 

My statement is a reflection of what is on the ground, in the sense that I do not sit in my office and produce it myself. This is a summary of reports from all the units in the area. However, in case these reports omitted some important occurrences in that area, I would be grateful to receive this information and act on it.  

With regard to the question of enrolling child soldiers, I would like to state very categorically that it is not the policy of the UPDF, or the Uganda Government, to enrol child soldiers. Certainly, we do not. 

The last time I heard of such a report - again from the North - I personally flew to Ngomoromo and called some of the people who were alleged to be young so that I could look at them. I am obviously not an expert, and I cannot tell the actual age just by looking at them. In any case, I am not a doctor, but from my own assessment of the young men who were brought, none of them was a child. 

At any rate, why should we recruit young children? We have all been talking about Karucunas. The hon. Member of Parliament for the Youth, Eastern Region very ably told us about the abundance of unutilised labour among the youth. So, why should we recruit children when we have adults who are willing to join the Army? We do not. We certainly do not recruit young children. 

But in case there is information about this, I will be happy to receive it. In case there is any specific information to that effect, I will be happy to receive it and we certainly will check it out. If it is true, we will take corrective measures.

Hon. Otto said that hon. Amama Mbabazi should be censured for incompetence. Well –(Laughter)- I think I have tremendous respect for hon. Otto. He is still young, and I trust that as he gets to discover more information about this country and who has played what role especially in bringing peace to areas like Busia, I am sure that he may not actually move the motion.

MR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, time and again we have urged each other to use parliamentary language. Hon. Otto is a representative of a county, elected by adult suffrage. Is it in order for the honourable minister holding the Floor to demean the contribution of that colleague and undermine him as being young, yet he was duly nominated and voted by adult suffrage. He is undermining his contribution and calling him young and therefore using non-parliamentary language. Is he in order, Mr Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is out of order for any member to demean another Member of Parliament. However, the tone that he used was in respect of hon. Otto as a person. Definitely hon. Otto represents a constituency and not the youth of the North. The minister was referring to his age. He is still in the bracket of 18 to 30 years. He is our youngest member here you know, but it was not derogatory. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did not intend to demean him, and I think he is proud of being the youngest Member of Parliament. 

Hon. Kidega talked about the problem of the 2,227 returnees and the danger that they may be HIV-infected. He was wondering whether Government could not test these people. And he suggested that if they are found sick, we should give them free and compulsory treatment before they go back to the population. I think this is a good point. I will discuss it with the relevant office, especially with the Minister of Health, because I fully support the proposition. 

Hon. Amuriat talked about statistics not showing the success of the exercise. He wanted to know for example what the total number of the enemy strength is. I would like to inform the House that Operation Iron Fist has really achieved a great deal, as you can see from those figures. 

One of the greatest achievements has been severing the links between Kony and the Sudan Government. Because, as you know, the strength of Kony, the power of that terrorist group, was the support they were getting from the Sudan Government. Now that it has stopped - Sudan is not willing to give them more territorial support - some of them have come back to Uganda. I do expect that at the rate at which they are losing, as shown by the figures, it will not be long before they are completely eliminated. All their capacity to wage war has been fully undermined. 

There was the question of 23 percent reduction of other votes of Government in favour of Defence. It is true that there was a reduction, but actually it was not by 23 percent. Originally it was meant to be 23 percent but we have since been discussing this. I think the reduction will be considerably lower than that as the Minister of Finance will in due course inform Parliament.

Hon. Dombo asked whether I would brief Parliament on the security situation in Western Uganda. Of course! Why not? I only happened to be addressing the security situation in Northern Uganda today. 

And to answer those who have asked why I left out West Nile, I perhaps made the statement already. You remember that last time when I briefed Parliament about the security situation in the North, I did talk about West Nile extensively. But because of the success story in the West Nile region, apart from that border problem in Nebbi, I did not think I had something new to inform you about. 

Another thing is that the Minister of Internal Affairs, who had been handling the question of UNRF II, either reported to Parliament or is due to report, because he handles that.

Hon. Baba Diri raised the issue that the UPDF’s support of the SPLA is the reason for Sudan supporting the LRA. I have repeatedly stated that this is not the case. As everyone knows, when the SPLA went into rebellion in 1983, we were still in the bush ourselves.  

Secondly, when the fight in Northern Uganda started on the 22nd of August 1986, when we were attacked from Sudan, the SPLA was nowhere near our borders at that time. Its operational base was Ethiopia, under President Mengistu. So, it is not correct to say that we have been attacked or that the LRA was supported by the Sudan because of our support to the SPLA. 

Be that as it may, however, I want to assure you that when we entered this agreement, it was because we were very anxious to help the Sudan situation stabilise. We are a mediator in the IGAAD mediation effort over Sudan, and we certainly cannot be a mediator on the one hand and give arms to one side on the other.

Let me briefly address what hon. Lukyamuzi was saying about peace talks held outside the country. Hon. Kategaya answered you, but I simply want to give information to this august House once again that actually, we have held peace talks with Kony’s group before. This is not the first time. 

As you know, the first time they were held with hon. Betty Bigombe and they were inside Uganda. Subsequently, we held peace talks in Rome, under the auspices of the St Judeo Community of Rome in the Vatican. I led the Ugandan delegation that went for those negotiations. So, it is not true to say that we oppose the idea of talking to these people anywhere.

However, our experience at that time was a fairly bitter one. A gentleman called Dr Obita led the delegation that came from Kony to Rome. Some of you may know him. When we met, we had a very successful session of negotiations and after that each side went back to report to their principals. When Obita went to Sudan to report to Kony, he is lucky he was not killed, because he was whipped and caned. It took the intervention of St Judeo Community priests and the Sudan Government to stop Kony from killing Dr Obita. Reason - we had agreed on all the issues that they had raised. 

So, we have made it a condition now that before we enter these talks, it is important for Kony to show evidence that he has mandated these people and given them the terms of reference for discussion.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for giving way. Mr Speaker, all I want to hear from the honourable minister is open acceptance that the Uganda Government is ready to talk to the rebels outside Uganda. Otherwise, which serious rebel, apart from Brig. Bamuze and his group whom you gave big money, would accept to talk meaningfully within Uganda? 

If the minister does not know, I beg him to revisit the Hansard because my motion included the option to talk to the rebels outside Uganda, and I repeat “outside Uganda”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the two sides could also set up certain terms and conditions for themselves. If Kony says he wants to talk outside Uganda, this is a matter that would be considered. Why don’t we leave this to the group? They can decide on the modalities and the venue, instead of us pre-empting this. 

MS TIPERU NUSURA: I rose on this point of order when hon. Lukyamuzi was still speaking. Is hon. Lukyamuzi in order to impute that the negotiations between Government and chairman Bamuze were held in Uganda because the rebels were given money? Is he in order, when actually the rebels or ex-combatants have a right to choose where they want the negotiations to be held? They could as well have been held in Nairobi, Sudan or within Uganda. 

We are aware of the fact that this Parliament put in place an amnesty law, stipulating how rebels can come back home. We also know that the rebels realised that there was goodwill of Government and of the people, so they felt secure enough to return. We also know that the Shs 4.2 billion, which is supposed to be given to the rebels, came as a result of the negotiations, not before. They came when they had been given nothing; they came on zero. 

Is he in order to impute that they came here and negotiated in the country because of the settlement, the Shs 4.2 billion, without considering the blood that would have been lost?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you raise a point of order that has to be determined on facts that have to be verified by the Chair, it becomes a very impossible mission. I am not conversant with the Bamuze issue. A ruling on this would tantamount to me accepting one of the two versions presented. So, I would rather leave this matter at that. I am not in position to rule on it because I am not conversant with the facts. Please, let us wind up this issue.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Epetait asked the question, “why give tokens of appreciation to criminals?” Well, as I said in my statement, this was a token of appreciation to those who voluntarily surrendered their weapons. I am sure hon. Epetait knows that this concept is universally practiced. It is pre-bargaining, and it is not only universally practiced but also logical. 

It was cheaper for us in every sense to gather these weapons, which were illegal, from the hands of the people when we encouraged them to voluntarily surrender. 

I have taken note of the point about the Mukura victims, and I am glad that you already have contact with the relevant authorities, that is the President’s office. I hope the matter will be sorted out.  

Hon. Okulo Epak asked me why I excluded Lango sub-region from the report. I did not, and I do not know what he means by saying that I excluded it. I have talked about it and its security concerns. 

I think I already answered hon. Ogola. He raised questions about the ceasefire negotiations, acceptance of Sudan and SPLA, and the LRA. I have answered those already.

I would like to assure hon. Wambi - I have answered you already but I would like to be specific - that obviously our intention is not to make Sironko a victim to Karamoja. I talked of all the districts, which I had not mentioned, that neighbour Karamoja and have been victims of that lawlessness. I am sorry, it was an oversight and I want to inform you that I am very aware of the suffering of the people of Sironko. We should have mentioned them - anyway this will be corrected.

I think it was hon. Jane Odwong who proposed that we should introduce a convoy system to protect civilian road users between Gulu and Kitgum. I have heard her. I heard you well hon. Odwong, and I will take it up with our security people. We shall see why in the first place it has not been done, and if it is necessary to do so, then certainly we will do so. 

Hon. Aggrey Awori raised a point on allegations that one of our senior officers, Lt Col Otema, murdered a prisoner in Gulu in cold blood. He asked whether this was confidence building. Mr Speaker, I would like to brief Parliament about the incident in Gulu when some 21 or 22 prisoners were taken out of the remand prison at night and taken to Gulu Military Barracks. 

What happened is that the army intelligence received reports that these 21 prisoners, most of whom had been arrested on suspicion of being collaborators of the LRA, were in danger of an attack from Kony. Credible information was received by the military saying that Kony had organised a force to rescue them –(Interjection)- yes, from the Government prison, yes. At that time the UPDF did not have adequate forces to go and protect the prison. So when this information was received, a decision was made by the division commander to remove those prisoners and put them where the UPDF would adequately take care of them. Lt Col Otema was instructed to execute that task. 

Lt Col Otema went to the prison at 7.30 p.m. He reported to the prison officer in charge, gave him this report, and he requested that the officer allows the army to take these 21 suspects to the military barracks. The prison officer did not feel that he had sufficient authority to make that decision and therefore asked for time to consult with his superiors in Kampala. Lt Col Otema left. 

When Otema went back at 9.30 p.m., the officer in charge of the prison did open the gates to the prison. It is not true to say that the army stormed the prison. That is a falsehood. He opened the cells and it was the prison guards who went to all these cells to get out the 21 prisoners. They were being taken one by one. As they were getting them out of their cells onto the truck that was outside the prison, one of these prisoners, I think it was Oloya, who had been held on suspicion of murdering the LC III chairman of Paboko, attempted to run away. 

He actually managed to pass by one guard. He found another guard ahead of him and he attempted to grab the gun from that guard. It was in the course of that scuffle that he got shot. It is not true therefore, as hon. Awori alleges, that Lt Col Otema killed or murdered a gentleman called Oloya in cold blood. 

This matter has been brought up in a petition by hon. Mao before. I think it is in the Court of Appeal and it is due for hearing. I understand the Attorney General has presented preliminary objections and it is due for hearing soon. 

So, apart from giving you the facts in response to what hon. Aggrey Awori is alleging, I do not think I should discuss it any further. I thank you very much, once more. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to stand and speak on a rare situation. A matter has arisen in the House on the question of Members of Parliament who went to the UK. I think it is only fair that I should give the House the authentic and genuine intentions and objectives of that visit, rather than the minister’s misinformation.  

Mr Speaker, a number of us –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to find out this from you; when honourable members of this House travel, either on official parliamentary business or private matters, how do they make official reports to this House?

THE SPEAKER: We are not discussing this in a vacuum. A point has arisen from the statement that was given by the Minister of Defence on the security situation in the North. It was said that when the minister travelled to London, he was asked, “why don’t you talk to the representatives of Kony who are Members of Parliament?” So, this is related to the matter that has come up. Is that not the case? 

As for reporting to the House on official visits, we intend to require the delegations to submit their reports here so that they can be discussed.  

DR OKULO EPAK: Surely, it would not even have been necessary for me to explain to the House if it had not come up on the Floor. As I said, I am rising on a very rare occasion. 

A number of Members of Parliament who hail from the areas directly affected by the Kony or LRA war had received invitations to go to Washington and to London on the question of peace in the Northern region. I was invited to visit both capitals. It was unfortunate that through some situations, which I got to learn of later, I was not able to travel to the USA, but I went to the UK. 

I think it is important, and I want to make it very clear, that I do not think it is the monopoly of the Government to go out in the quest for peace in Uganda. I think every citizen of this country, particularly those of us who have been directly affected by the LRA situation for 17 years, should make points outside the boundaries of Uganda in this respect. In fact, I believe the honourable minister was prompted to travel to go and counter the effect of our contact, and that was not very positive. 

I am therefore not surprised that he should come here and say, “Okulo Epak was supposed to be an agent of Kony.” It is very annoying. Of course, he explained later on that when he got the list, he said no, some of these could not certainly be agents of Kony. Since he has not explained whom the “some” represents, the situation remains in abeyance.  

The objectives were these. First, we were invited to go and make contacts to explain the situation to people who matter in policy decisions in those countries. This was on a matter of peace and also on humanitarian assistance. We had to explain all over the world, and here in Uganda, that we declared the LRA a terrorist organisation and yet we want to talk peace with the terrorists. I do not think the United States and Britain would agree that you could talk peace with organisations which are described as terrorist.

I would like to tell you that I do not think so, and from our own findings –(Interjection)– could hon. Kutesa learn how to be a bit orderly? Even after censoring him he has not become humble. (Laughter). He is heckling. I like heckling and I can also heckle back. 

I would like to inform him that it was difficult to convince those people that you could talk to Kony after declaring him a terrorist. It was also difficult for them to believe that Kony could talk. However, after some very genuine arguments supported by people like hon. Mao - who had talked to Kony – and supported by the Bishops who had made contacts with Kony, they were convinced that Kony is actually willing to talk. Mark you, these were very high-level officials and these people would not believe that Kony could talk.

We also managed to convince them that the majority of the fighters in Kony’s camp, whom anyone would wish to fight till the end, are children of very tender age who were kidnapped. These children were kidnapped in the first instance because the Government, whose duty it was to protect them, had not. They could not be condemned for a cause for which they are not responsible. 

That is why for us who are parents, we feel genuinely that peace talks would save those children. A settlement would save other children from such a scourge. With a lot of difficult explanations, it was possible for those people to understand us.  

We also were able to explain that in most peace talks, including those of Burundi, there has always been a third party - some inter-mediation- and that invariably they have taken place outside the belligerent areas. 

We were saying, what is unique with Uganda? President Museveni himself is a third party interventionist in Burundi, and he has been so in many other places. Why, in this particular case of Uganda, is it not possible to convince President Museveni and the donors that they could support a third party mediation and holding of these peace talks outside Uganda? 

I think we have succeeded tremendously in this regard. In fact, while we were still there, the United States Government sent people here. A message came here and the British High Commissioner went to Gulu, and you have heard recently that the European Union delegation is offering to support peace talks. It is willing to support a third party. They were only saying that they were not able to provide the inter-mediation arrangement but they would look around, and we gave them names of possible parties. 

I believe the impact of what we did came here, and that is why the whole Minister of Defence jumped onto a plane to London to find out that there were Kony agents in London! Not only that, Sir - (Interruption)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I want to inform the hon. Okulo Epak that when I went to London, I had absolutely no idea that they had been there. In fact, I did not jump onto a plane to go to London for that purpose. I went to London because I had planned to do so many months before, and it happened to be a stopover from a longer journey. I stayed out of the country for more than two weeks. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: I would have been surprised if you had admitted it. Then you may have to explain why that information came your way. 

Anyway, we reported to the Uganda High Commissioner. In fact he gave us very good tips and advice on how to approach the situation. We really appreciated his approach.  

We were also aware that there could be some Ugandans in London, Washington or elsewhere who could be supporting the LRA in the Kony war. We tried and wanted to make contact with them. In case they had failed to express themselves, we wanted to convince them in a public meeting, which was arranged, that it pays no dividends whatsoever to support the LRA and to support the genocide that is going on in the northern parts of Uganda. 

We thought it was counter-productive and highly negative. Any Ugandan supporting such a situation, particularly on the war in the North, deserves to be condemned. Actually, we carried a resolution passed by Lango and Acholi leaders in a meeting of 12 November 2002, in which Kony was severely condemned. 

In the same resolution, the people of Lango and Acholi condemned any military approach to resolution of political differences. They said they would not want to turn their area into a battlefield and will not support any part of Uganda being turned into a battlefield due to political reasons. 

So, if the honourable minister’s agents were honest, they should have given him better and more positive information. They would have given this House information that would support such initiatives in the quest for peace. I do not think it is a monopoly of the honourable minister, or of the President, or of the Cabinet or the whole lot of war merchants to advocate for peace. We have that right as well. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, people are anxious about our Order Paper. I note that yesterday there was a statement which was made by the Minister for Gender, and I understand that copies were not given out to members, and therefore, they were not able to contribute to the statement. It was decided that this statement would be debated today, but we have other items pending. 

We have questions on the Order Paper. However, I note that the first question was supposed to be asked by hon. Ekanya, but he is not here. Then I see another question supposed to be answered by the Minister of Internal Affairs. He was here earlier but he is not here now. So, I think that item will not be dealt with today.  

From the minutes, I note that some kind of debate was made in respect of the statement made by the Minister for Gender. I imagine that whatever debate we have must be very limited, because it will just be supplementing what was said yesterday. 

There is a very important item on the Order Paper, namely the on-going debate on UCBL. According to a decision made by the Business Committee sometime back as we started this Session, this issue was supposed to be given two days. However, it has dragged on. It has to be concluded soon because there is other business which cannot come here until this matter is disposed of. 

After the debate on the gender issue, I propose that next week when we continue with the UCBL debate, we should start in the morning, be it on Monday or Tuesday, and we do not allow any other business to be included on the Order Paper. That way we shall concentrate on the UCBL debate for the whole day, morning and afternoon, so that we conclude it. 

Honourable members, I am proposing we do this in the morning and afternoon and no other business. Should it be Monday or Tuesday?  

HON. MEMBERS: Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall deal with it on Tuesday from 10.00 a.m. and again in the afternoon. For now, let us have a debate on this statement by the Minister for Gender. I understand it affects events of next week, namely the Women’s Day. So, we go to item 3(1) and proceed with the debate.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT FROM THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT

(Debate continued.)

MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Women’s Day celebrations are a recognition of the important role women play in our society –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps before some members go away, I want to announce some sad news I received. Our fellow member, hon. Mike Mukula, lost a brother, the late Odeke. Vigil is at hon. Mukula’s house in Bugolobi, and there will be a church service tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. at All Saints Church.

MR HILLARY ONEK: Mr Speaker, among the contributions to this statement yesterday, one lady said that it is only women who can best mobilize women. I would like to say that I am going to mobilize Kitgum women and they will come in large numbers.

I welcome the statement by the minister. I would only like to ask one or two questions in relation to the celebrations in Gulu. Gulu is currently in an environment of war and the safety of women there is greatly affected by that environment. An environment of war is so harsh that the only treasurable thing most men do is just go in for women, sometimes even forcefully. And that violates the norms and the cultural behaviour of our society. 

I suggest, before I ask the minister a question, that they put peace in that sub-region as one of the major issues to be addressed. Women should express their desire for peace, in order to live safely in an environment where their rights are not violated.  

Then, honourable minister, I want to know what measures you put in place to address the cultural and psychological difficulties that have created a situation where men regard women as the weaker sex, and they are taken advantage of and marginalized. Some of these problems are really psychological. The way children grow up in their homes and the schools they go to in most cases do not address these problems 

I suggest that the Minister of Gender does something together with the Minister of Education, to ensure that our children are brought up to think as equals. In that vein, I suggest that we abolish single-sex boarding schools. We must have mixed schools so that the children grow up together and they do not get an archaic attitude and develop behaviour that is not favourable to women.

I have seen this. I have been to both single-sex and mixed schools. Sometimes you find children not knowing how to behave when they are in a mixed environment. Some of these handicaps are some of the reasons why men violate women’s rights.

I support the minister for moving these celebrations to Gulu, and I would like to appreciate that move. Our people in the Northern region will feel that they are being thought of and their problems are being taken care of by the Government. Thank you.

MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for bringing this information to this august House. I want to encourage him to keep up this practice, which he has started. This has not been very common. At times, the 7th of March reaches when we do not know the theme for 8th March. 

I want to also congratulate him and his ministry for choosing to go to Gulu. In this particular respect, I am encouraging all my colleagues to join our sisters in Gulu in celebrating this day.

However, I would like to get some clarification from the honourable minister. More often than not we have statements from the ministry stating that we should not encourage districts to put off these celebrations, but encourage them to, as much as they can, celebrate on 8th. I do not know whether this position has changed within the ministry. If it has not changed, we wish that the minister clarifies on it. 

Some districts have taken advantage of that to actually suffocate the women’s celebrations, saying that since the 8th has passed so we should not celebrate it at all. In view of the fact that there still exists wide marginalization even at the local councils, we should try to help them by re-echoing that even if the day is not celebrated on the 8th, it should still be marked some other day.

In fact, some districts can say, “We are going to send a delegation to Gulu and there are no funds, so we are not going to celebrate.” And the day passes without being recognised in particular districts. So, the minister should help and clarify this so that the whole country gets to know. I will be even happier if after the district celebrations, we go to the divisional celebrations or the zones or villages, to make an impact. Thank you very much.

MR KADDUNABBI LUBEGA (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for telling us about the Women’s Day celebrations. 

However, my concern is about the theme selected to mark the day. As you read the minister’s statement, it says that last year the theme was “Break the silence, stop violence against women”, and this year it is, “Act now, say no to violence against women.” I think that these are somewhat serious, if not hard themes, which are provocative. They have contributed somewhat to the break-up of marriages in many cases.

Mr Speaker, when you say “break silence”, it means one is going to confess, just like someone who gets saved and he confesses. When someone tells you that, “I went out with your wife”, even if both of you are saved, definitely you will get annoyed. So, the ministry should think of better themes, which bring us all together, men and women. We would like to make the marriages better. 

I would also like to know whether the ministry has assessed the successes and failures since the inception of the ministry, and since we started celebrating Women’s Day. 

My appeal to the women would be that they should be careful in their struggle against the exploitation and injustice done towards them, so that they do not get many casualties in the struggle. They compare themselves to other women elsewhere, but the Ugandan women have special qualities and different societal backgrounds, which we need to carefully consider and take care of.  

I have seen the targets, which they need to achieve by the year 2015. May I know from the minister how far they have gone since 1990? Should we take it that come 2015, we should not have women emancipation? If we shall continue to have it, should we at any one time think that perhaps by the year 2020 we shall have men emancipation? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR FRANCIS MUKAMA (Kigulu North, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement he has given us. I also agree with him that his ministry is that of helping the women to fight for social change. 

In this social change, we also include looking after the children that these women bear. Mr Speaker, today I was touched. As I was caught up in a traffic jam at Speke Hotel, I was approached by two little children - girls. One was four and a half and the other one was six. Each one of them was holding something. Immediately thereafter, an adult also came to the window of my vehicle. They were begging for money. 

This lady, who was in ragged clothes, was the mother of the children who were in rags too. And she had younger children, who were triplets. Each of the older ones was holding a younger child. Of course I pulled out something and gave to them. But then a question came to my mind, we are talking of social change and we are talking about emancipation, but what do we do for cases like these? 

Definitely, Mr Speaker, when a “bullet” is released for fertilization, nobody knows whether it will make one child, two or three children. These poor people tend to have triplets and even quadruplets. 

So, I want to seek clarification from the minister. As we go into these celebrations, what is in place in the ministry to help people who produce three children plus at a go, and against their will? What arrangement do they have? Do we cater for them? You go to Speke Road and you will find these people. They are still parading across the street. 

My proposal to the minister and to all of us is, let us now take this as a moral, national and social obligation. Let us make it policy that whoever produces more than two children at a go, the state should come up and assist them. That would be the best, because there are very few of such cases, so we can really cater for them. 

I want to appeal to companies and church organizations to help such people. Really, it was pathetic. How am I to sit here and also attend the coming celebrations when these people are languishing with their little poor children who are malnourished? I thank you.

MR BEN WACHA (Oyam North, Apac): Thank you, Sir. I want to thank the minister for this statement, and I want to congratulate him in advance for a successful day in Gulu. 

I notice, Sir, that the theme for this year is “Act now, say no to violence against Women” and that last year it was “Breaking the Silence on Violence against Women.” These are very nice slogans, but they are just slogans! Is this what you are taking with you to Gulu; only this sloganeering? Is that what your ministry is doing? What else are you going to tell the people in Gulu that the ministry has done to further this slogan? 

I notice that in our Constitution, Articles 31 and 32, there are a number of things that are stated: one, on the rights of the women; and two, things that should not be done in respect to women. What has the ministry done to translate these constitutional provisions into law, to protect the women, their rights and protect them against certain customs and cultures, which demean them? This Constitution has been there since 1995 and the ministry has always been there too. What have they done? 

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. I confirm what you say, that some of these things are just slogans. I will give evidence. I think even Government is part of the people who mete out violence against women.
 
In the Ministry of Gender, His Excellency, Mr Museveni, established the Department of Entandikwa. When hon. Kiryapawo - a man - was the minister, funds were going directly to Entandikwa. That was until 1997, the time when Grace Akello – a woman - took over the department. Then the funds were transferred from the Ministry of Gender to the Prime Minister’s office, which is headed by a man. Are we supporting women? 

Hon. Akello nearly lost her seat because women were asking, “Where is the entandikwa?” and she said she had no funds. The title was just violating her power as a woman to mobilise. Thank you.

MR WACHA: I thank you my brother Malinga for that information. That is the sort of thing we are talking about. A number of us have gone abroad to conferences and Uganda is hailed as being in the forefront in matters of affirmative action. Some of us say we are proud because we are being hailed, but inside we know we have not done enough. 

We have the numbers; we have this concept of one-third women representation in political offices. But what about the village woman who is being battered by the husband almost daily after the man comes back drunk? What are we doing about it? 

What about the issue of wife inheritance, which is a cultural practice in some of our local places? Is the ministry trying to do something to translate this fundamental constitutional provision into law, which will protect our women? Is it? Or are we still going along? Next year we will have another slogan. When we go to Kabale, we shall have something about women but all these are slogans, slogans. I thank you, Sir.

MOTION WITHOUT NOTICE

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Mr Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers the following motion without notice, under rule 41(k). The motion reads as follows: 

Having received and listened to the Ministerial Statement of the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on International Women’s Day, March 8th 2003;

Taking cognisance of the importance of women’s contributions and roles in society;

Noting that the theme for this year’s International Women’s Day is “Act now, say no to violence against women,” Parliament resolves as follows: 

(i)  urges Government to urgently bring before this House bills relating to operationalisation of Article 31 and Article 33 of the Constitution - Article 31 talks about rights of the family and Article 33 talks about rights of women; 

In particular, urges Government to bring before this House bills that relate to:
 
(a the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission;
(b) domestic relations;
(c) domestic violence; 
(d) sexual harassment in the workplace; 
(e) outlawing customs and cultures that undermine the dignity of women, such as female genital mutilation.  

(ii) urges Government to report to Parliament on steps taken in respect to the above within a period of six months. I beg to move, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Well, the motion is seconded and I think it is necessary to bring it here, in view of the Women’s Day celebrations and the policy of Government. Can you proceed and speak to the motion.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, as noted, Uganda has the task of translating what is in theory into practice. We as parliamentarians are mandated by Article 79 of the Constitution to make laws. In this particular regard, Article 31 is one of those laws that have not been enacted. This is on the rights of the family. It talks about marriage age, the right to marry, equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at dissolution. It also talks about the rights of widows and widowers to inherit -(Interruption)

MR BITANGARO: Mr Speaker, I have read the provisions of Article 93(a)(ii) and I do not think we are competent enough to debate this motion now.

THE SPEAKER: Why?

MR BITANGARO: The Article says,

 “Parliament shall not, unless the bill or motion is introduced on behalf of the Government – 
(a) proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following-
(ii) the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction.” 

Given this provision, is it in order for her to move this motion?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I am surprised that the Minister in charge of Gender should resist this kind of motion, which is intended to facilitate his work. I see nothing here that could impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund. We just resolve on something and then Government reports to Parliament the steps taken in respect of the above. Is this a charge on the Consolidated Fund?  

HON. MEMBERS:  No!

THE SPEAKER: For example, when you look at, “establish the Equal Opportunities Commission”, this is exactly in the Constitution. Is enacting a law on domestic relations a charge on the Consolidated Fund? Is domestic violence being charged on the Consolidated Fund? Is stopping sexual harassment at the workplace charging the Consolidated Fund? I see nothing here that is offensive to Article 93. You can proceed with the motion.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Before I proceed, I want to highlight one particular issue that is taking Government backwards, and this is suspicion and lack of respect for Members of Parliament. We are all serving the same Government, whether in the Legislature, Judiciary or in Cabinet, and we are partners. 

Tomorrow when they refer to the government of the day, they will not be referring to the Executive alone, they will be referring to all of us together. That is why we say we are the arms of government. We are part of the same body. 

Indeed, I want to assure the minister that we are partners in the task. This is the spirit that has been going on, even in the UCBL issue. Nevertheless, I will stop here and continue with what I have to say.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly I think what you have said is correct. We are working together for a mission. Therefore, we should complement each other and work together.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, the most important issue here is that we are urging Government. Nevertheless, it will not stop us backbenchers from presenting bills. Previously Parliament has presented bills, for example, the Budget Bill and the Administration of Parliament Bill. 

Therefore, we expect the minister to be supportive of this effort if it comes along, because we shall be helping him to implement what he is supposed to do. I will not dwell on that any further.

The main reason why this motion was moved was to urge Government to put into practice what is in theory. And as noted, we have had a Constitution for almost seven years, and it is one of the most progressive constitutions in the world. 

Article 32 provides for affirmative action, including the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission. I want to report to this House that other commissions are in place, except this very important commission. We urge the minister to take on this task with all speed, because we cannot see any justification as to why it cannot be put in place. 

When you look at Article 33 on rights of women, there are so many aspects. For example, the fact that laws and cultures that are against the dignity of women still exist and are respected.  I gave one example of female genitalia mutilation. 

Again in Article 33, when we talk about equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities, we still have the task of reviewing the affirmative action principle in sub-clause (5). Therefore, we need the Government to help us turn the theory into practice, and show all Ugandans that we need to continue with affirmative action in politics.  

We have one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the world. Therefore, we are pleading with the Government to ensure that the maternal function of the woman is respected. I know of cases where women have gone to look for jobs but because they are pregnant, they are not given jobs. And yet when a man walks in, no one asks him whether he has a pregnant wife. This discriminates against women.

Mr Speaker, a very important phenomenon which is increasing, is domestic violence. There is an assumption that there is more domestic violence within poor homes because poor women cannot defend themselves. But there is also domestic violence in homes of women with power, because they challenge the status quo. Therefore, we urge this Government to enact a specific law on domestic violence, to put in place shelter homes to which these women can go for refuge.  

There is a lot of sexual harassment at work, and women face a very big hurdle when it comes to this. They either have to give in to sexual demands of bosses or they may have to leave their jobs. Mr Speaker, I could go on, but permit me to allow other members to debate this motion. Thank you for your indulgence.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Dora Byamukama for this motion and to thank the minister for his statement, which has prompted this motion.  

Often times women have suffered a lot in the hands of either men or other women, simply because they are incapable of talking for themselves. I want to thank the ministry for choosing this theme for the Women’s Day Celebrations this year, “Act now, say no to violence against Women.”  

Mr Speaker, I do not know if it is cultural, or people just developed the culture of discriminating against women in places of work.  Women qualify, sometimes they are even better qualified than men, but when they go looking for a job, they are not given the job. Sometimes the men are preferred over women for those jobs. It is a very painful experience. 

For instance, when I completed my course in education in 1993, I was looking for a school to teach in. I went to a school and found a woman who was a deputy head teacher and she kept on dodging me for three months. A woman! When I went back on the date she had told me to go for an interview, she told me “we are sorry we cannot give you the job”. When I insisted and asked her why, she told me, “it is because you are a woman. You are a very young woman; you will get married and family responsibilities will affect your performance as a teacher.”

THE SPEAKER: This was a woman? A headmistress?

MS ERIYO: A woman, Mr Speaker, but I will not mention who this woman is. So, these kind of things are happening to so many women out there. I therefore think that when we have laws in place to ensure that women’s rights are respected, then such people should actually be taken to courts. 

Women have suffered so much because of wars and other social problems And the issue of sexual harassment at work places and elsewhere makes women feel helpless. Sometimes this originates from the powers that society has given men. A man with the same qualification as a woman is even given a higher position at the place of work. A woman working under him may have to bow down, because she may have to receive benefits for the services that he is offering. So many women are suffering due to this problem.

Mr Speaker, certain professions have been considered professions for women.  Professions like nursing and maybe teaching, although now there are many men who are teachers. Yesterday I was with nurses who had a seminar at Agha Khan University. Out of about 56 participants, there were only five male nurses. 

Maybe because it is women who are nurses, we do not even consider increasing the salaries for nurses. I do not know. But I know that there are many people who are in the nursing profession. And without the services of nurses, many other activities may not take place, because people would always be sick. Doctors cannot operate when the nurses are not there, and the majority of the health workers who are doctors are men. 

When it comes to increasing salaries, we think of increasing those of doctors at the expense of the nurses who do the donkey-work. The nurses are the ones that are in the hospitals and health centres most of the time. The doctors come and go away after a short while. 

Mr Speaker, since time has gone, I would like to appeal to everybody to respect the rights of women and to be conscious of women’s rights at all times. 

Maybe we are lucky that we are having the celebrations in Gulu this year. We would like members to come. If they cannot come personally, they should at least send representatives from their districts to come and witness the suffering of the women of Gulu and Northern Uganda in general. 

I am sure that at these celebrations, there will be a lot of activities to depict the suffering of women and to urge everybody to respect the rights of women. Therefore, I call upon everybody to support this motion and also come to Gulu for the celebrations.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Violation of women’s rights is violation of human rights. (Applause). It is a very serious allegation. I want to put it to women; who is violating your rights? Who is violating people’s rights? 

I support this motion. It is moved by the vice-chairperson of my committee, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I have no option but to support it.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you are supporting it reluctantly?

MR KIBANZANGA: No, no. I cannot be threatened. You know that. 

Mr Speaker, violation of human rights is a very, very serious issue, and I do not know what means women are using to fight this violation of people’s rights in the 21st century. This is an issue that touches people’s freedom.

Since time immemorial, women have used revolutionary methods of championing this cause. It is not yielding any results.  I think today you are trying to use a reformist theory and it is not working. Why don’t you mobilise us to use a revolutionary method to fight these people who are oppressing you? Unless you are pretending, but if you are using the words “violation of your rights as a section of this society”, use revolutionary methods to fight this. (Applause).  

For instance, whom are you sending to establish an equal opportunities commission? The minister who is resisting you here? You have seen it. You are appealing to the Speaker, the one you say who is violating your rights like you are. He has supported you, but you have said “those men are violating our rights”. Whom are you sending, really?  

I think a revolutionary method will work. If at all your rights are being violated in the right sense of the words “violation of people’s rights”, it is a very serious thing. You do not have to sit here and look at men violating your rights, unless you are not very serious. I want the Maamas, if you are really serious, to properly define the enemy, define the method to fight this violation of your rights and deploy your cadres. Who is doing what? 

You have had the Vice President for almost nine years, looking at the rights of women being violated left and right. You are not being serious. Recruit some of us who know revolutionary methods of work. (Applause). You are the majority in this country. If you are not my girlfriend, you are my Maama. If you are not my Maama, you are my sister. Can I simply watch when your rights are being violated? Definitely not! 

Now, where is the problem? You have not defined the method to fight this violation of people’s rights.  You have not deployed your cadres properly. Those you look at as your cadres - the vices or the deputies - are being handpicked, and when they are co-opted, they dump you. I am being sincere to you. 

In this country, since the NRM came here, if you were serious that your rights were being violated, you would be talking of even fuelling the President. But here you are, 65 per cent, sending Kibanzanga to look at your rights and yet I am the enemy! It is really very interesting. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, I sincerely request my Maamas to identify, isolate and then defeat the enemy. Deploy your cadres. A cadre has been occupying the vice post for eight years and yet your rights continue to be violated! 

By the way, you have double talk. When we attend some of your public rallies you say, “today we have a Vice-President”, but when you are here, violation continues. 

If we are really violating your rights, I want to see an end to women consenting to the oppressors every Saturday. Every Saturday whenever I am in town, I see women consenting to the oppressors – getting married. How do you get married to the oppressors? How! Are you being sincere? 

The themes you are using are scaring some of us who would be your allies. The enemies you have identified are scaring some of us who would be your allies. If you are sincerely serious, you better deploy some of us who know the revolutionary methods of work, and then we move forward. You should stop making these statements for political expedience. You should go to the ground to tell people what the problem really is. Educate your children about the biggest solution in this struggle. 

I am sincerely very surprised at some of your themes. In 2002 it was, “Stop the violence against women.” What about your children who are being battered and sacrificed in rituals in Mukono? (Laughter) This year it is, “Act now, Say no to violence against women”. Include your children! You will not be there tomorrow. Do not be selfish.  Children are really suffering behind there. 

I always tour hon. Zziwa's constituency in Kifumbira, Makerere Kivulu where your children are really suffering. For me, my struggle is very general. When things come to the worst, I use revolutionary methods of work, and I have defined the enemy properly. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of this motion, and I want to thank hon. Byamukama for initiating it. 

I think the minister should be careful with the way he handles matters, especially matters concerning disadvantaged people, because he can be misunderstood. He could be seen as being discriminative. Even yesterday he made a statement that did not go down well with the committee whose support he needs for his policies in this House. 

The committee was complaining why he brought a statement here when he did not even have the courtesy to share it with the Committee on Social Services. I think his response was that it was not necessary. The chairperson was not very pleased. She is not here but when she was leaving, she said if she were here, she would voice her concern about this matter. 

But coming to the motion, I think the Equal Opportunities Commission is long overdue. Something must be done -(Interjections) - I hear that something is being done to put this commission in place. It is a constitutional commission, provided for in the Constitution. I am glad that Parliament is ahead of the Executive by putting up a Committee on Equal Opportunities. I hope that this committee will put more fire into the establishment of the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

On domestic relations, I am surprised it has taken so long to come up with a law on this one. Many countries, even in Africa, have laws on domestic relations. I would imagine that one law would cover not only domestic relations but also domestic violence and maybe sexual harassment at the work place. I do not know, but I was just proposing. 

I hope you come to sexual harassment at the work place, because sometimes indeed we get sexual harassment at the work place. I am also a signatory to the worldwide campaign against circumcision of women. I think we better join hands in this country and fight this vice. 

But looking at what Government is doing, it has created the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development basically to provide for the disadvantaged groups in our society. They created this ministry and marginalized it. It is the least funded of all ministries, and programmes for women, youth and the disabled persons end up not being adequately funded because the mother ministry is marginalized, like the people for people for whom it is intended to look after. 

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you hon. Mwandha for giving way.  I want to supplement on the fact that issues concerning women, persons with disability and other marginalized people are marginalized. Women councils are not in place, and that goes further to tell the level of importance or the significance of these councils in relation to other administrative structures.  

MR MWANDHA: Thank you. I did not realise that even councils are not in place. I think this is a challenge to Government. Government should not be talking one language and acting differently. I would like to challenge women. There are a number of issues which I think women should join together with men and Government to fight. 

There are social misdeeds in our society - I am talking specifically about sex workers. As honourable members, it is extremely degrading for a human being to parade on the streets and actually sell her body. It is most unfortunate. I do not know whether the ministry has taken trouble to carry out research and establish the real concrete causes of this problem, and whether the problem can be reduced or even eliminated –(Interjection)- somebody is saying that this is the oldest trade of all, but I think in this modern world something could be done about it.  

The other challenge I see is the abuse of the girl child. Almost everyday in the press, you hear about children who have been defiled. These are small children and girls who are under age, and somehow the culprits get away with it. I think this is a challenge which women leaders have got to address together with the supporters and Government.

I am not sure whether women are really united; I am not very sure. An example was given by the honourable member who qualified in her own right to be a teacher. She went for a job and no other person but a fellow woman discriminated against her. I do not know whether that shows real consideration of women for women. 

As a matter of fact, when I was representing Bugweri County in this Parliament, I took a women activist to address my rural women in Bugweri. The first thing she said was that the biggest problem we have as women is women. I got extremely worried, because I thought that there would be no problem. But she went on to explain that there are problems within women themselves, which makes it impossible for them to be united and fight for their cause. I think this is also a challenge, especially to women leaders.

Mr Speaker, as I said here the other time, I think when women are implementing their programmes, they should create some space for disabled women. While women are marginalised, disabled women are more marginalised. They are marginalised as women and they are marginalised again as disabled people. So they suffer a double disadvantage, and they need your support. 

It is sometimes a great pity when a disabled woman, for instance, goes to give birth in hospital and the nurses are the ones who start pitying her - “Oh, bambi abasaja nabo tebasasira. Oba bamunonyako ki ono?” This is Luganda meaning, “Men are not really fair, what did they look for in this disabled woman?” You must remember that having sex is a right, and a disabled woman also has a right to have sex and to have a child. 

I think there is need for women, especially the medical workers, to be sensitised about the rights of women and not to utter such statements, which really undermine their very cause.  

Mr Speaker, I want to end by wishing all Ugandans, men and women, a very enjoyable day on the 8th March. Thank you for listening to me.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion and also to report that the six months that have been given to Government are reasonable. Why? Because work has been done on the Equal Opportunities Commission as far as I know, and NGOs - plus now I understand Parliament - have taken interest in it. But the ministry has got a working document, and I think they will be finalising on the Equal Opportunities Commission. 

The reason why the Equal Opportunities Commission delayed was that in countries where the Equal Opportunities Commission stands alone, they do not have institutions like the Human Rights Commission, Persons with the Disabilities Council and so on. So the ministry - at that time I was a minister there - was trying to work out those issues that have not been handled, which will remain with the Equal Opportunities Commission. But I think the Government will set up the Equal Opportunities Commission.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, there is the Domestic Relations Bill and also the Domestic Violence and Sexual Harassment Bill. We will look at sexual harassment not only in work places but all sexual offences. We are going to have a comprehensive sexual offences bill. This was a result of research that was conducted by the Law Reform Commission, and it is a voluminous book. 

The Law Reform Commission has completed proposing to Government the principles and drafts both on the Domestic Relations Bill and the Domestic Violence and Sexual Offences Bill. I am about to bring the Domestic Relations Bill before the committee. After that one, I will handle the Domestic Violence and Sexual Offences Bill. I will handle them in that order. 

However, on (e), I think we should give our thanks to UNFPA. I remember when hon. Mpanga was the Minister of Women in Development, she took this line and – (Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: I apologise, but I want to get some clarification from the honourable minister. Many of the women who lose husbands, particularly when they die intestate, are referred to the office of the Administrator General. This is an office which is regarded as very incompetent by many women because they suffer so much, and others term it as very corrupt. When is this going to be addressed?

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: This office of the Administrator General is only found in Kampala. Which means when a women in Kyenjojo, Kisoro, Nakapiripit losses a husband who has not left a will and she has no money to go to Kampala, her rights get abused. Most times she is thrown out of the home. The Constitution provides for decentralisation. I would like to know from the minister when this decentralisation will take place. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are aware of this, or it is a policy in the Administrator General’s office. At one time I lost my brother and sister-in-law as well and I also went to the Administrator General’s office. But the clarification I want to seek from you is, is it a policy that when the money is paid, after all the haggling the Administrator General retains some percentage for administrative purposes?

MRS MUKWAYA: Because these are totally new issues, let me finish with (e). 

I was telling the House that I think the call on (e) is ripe now because in the past when hon. Mpanga was the Minister for Women in Development, she took the line of criminalising female circumcision and we really burnt our fingers as Government. But using UNFPA to address the cultural issues and to move with the community, I think the results are paying off. So, this is the opportune time that the ministry can undertake this activity. Now the time is ripe.  

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you, madam minister, for giving way. On circumcision, we visited Kapchorwa and there were women who are disabled as a result of circumcision. Those women do not have anybody looking after them, and they have no source of income. What is the ministry going to do for them? Thank you.

MRS MUKWAYA: The quickest answer would have been that if Government caused that disability, they would ask for compensation. But as a Minister for Justice, I would say, if a doctor was working on this particular woman and in the process she got damaged, then compensation would be the issue. But this was a result of culture. 

So, probably when the ministry is handling this law, what you have just said and other issues will be provided for. I hope so. The minister can respond to that. 

To go on to the Administrator General, my colleague asked, “is it true or is it legal for the Administrator General to charge fees?” Yes, by law he does charge a fee. It was in recognition of that that there was a feeling that the Administrator General should act as a money-making agency. There was that view, and I think a law was proposed. But then before the law was brought to Parliament, Government thought that these are poor orphaned people,e so why do you have to make them pay a fee. So, that law was halted.  

So, we are in the process of trying to amend the Administrator General’s law, and Government is still debating on how best the Administrator General can render a service and be efficient without charging a fee.

In the same vein, it is true that the Administrator General should decentralise, but it must be restructured to reflect how the centre will link up with decentralised offices. The Ministry of Public Service is soon finalising the restructuring. First of all, they are creating the structure and then restructuring the Administrator General’s office alongside the Registrar General’s office in order to recruit personnel. I cannot give a timeframe, but we are working.  

I would advise Members of Parliament to try to use our lawyers here, or FIDA, or the Law Council to educate your people so that they make wills. That is the best that one can do. But even Members of Parliament who think they will make a will tomorrow and die intestate, definitely your property will be distributed by the Administrator General. 

Let me also add that I think the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should distribute the action plan for women, because this is a new Parliament. We did that with the 6th Parliament. 

The women of Uganda sat down and decided on the priorities that they thought were critical, which Government could address. These were: water, education for the girl child and HIV/AIDs. Those are the three that I can remember, but we picked four and we gave ourselves a timeframe of five years.  After five years, we should review those four critical areas and pick on others.  

Mr Speaker, as a woman activist, I think the women do not know how to talk for themselves. But I think there is a lot that has been achieved within such a short time. One of them is, we have very effective women legislators (Applause).  Yes, this is a credit – (Mr Sebaggala rose_) The Speaker says time is running out. 

These women legislators have chaired, and are chairing, very serious committees, like the Committee on the Economy, the Budget Committee. Has hon. Kiraso failed in any way to influence the Budget? This is an achievement. If you can have people who can influence the Legislature and can be listened to, what more do you want? 

The few women who are in the Executive – we cannot blow our own trumpet - but I think we have tried our best to do what we can within our powers. (Applause). I have not seen women Judges failing us. I have not seen policewomen failing us, and I have not seen women teachers failing us.  

Yesterday I was reading about a woman doctor who ventured into a male dominated field and she is superb. Really, my dear brothers and sisters, I think we are making headway. (Applause).

In my constituency alone, because of identifying safe water as a critical area, people are accessing clean water. It is not yet going to their houses but it is somewhere. That is it.

On immunisation alone, do you see crooked children now being born? All the beautiful girls and handsome boys are there because of the programme of immunisation.

Yesterday we were being told that 7.3 million children are in school, though under trees, but they are in school. Those girls who are there are going to be great. The sky is the limit! So, we can only push that having brought these children in UPE, give them senior secondary education. This is it.  

Recently girls’ schools were doing badly. Are we doing badly any more? Mathematics was an issue but mathematics is no longer an issue. Our girls are going for engineering courses and so on. So, I think I can end here, but I am saying that we are on the way - little by little - and consistency is the issue. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the point has been made and I should put the question now.

MRS ATIM OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have heard arguments on this motion, and I really appreciate the points that have been raised and the urgency of the matters that have been raised. I am also conscious of the point that the minister made earlier - that whatever proposal for bills comes up, we should be conscious of the financial provision. 

I wish to move a very minor amendment to this motion, that instead of giving a period of six months, we should give three months, so that we look at the financial implications of this before we read the Budget in June. Because if we give these people six months, they will be giving us a report in August or July, after we have finalised the process of budget making. They will then tell us that all those laws we have made will be useless until the next Budget, which will be in 2004. So, I wish to move this amendment in that spirit, Mr Speaker, if that could be allowed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. There is a motion that instead of six months we put three months. I want to put the question on the amended motion.

MRS MUKWAYA: I just want to inform hon. Cecilia Ogwal that because of the Budget Act, for any bill that comes to the House, the minister must have satisfied himself or herself that there are resources. We are working for the same group. Giving us a tight programme would not do us any good. I beg that you leave it at six months, because the money will be there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at the motion itself, it would say, “Government reports to Parliament on steps taken in respect to the above within a period of three months.” It means progressive reporting on what is being done. So, you might have finalised but not yet done it. So there is no harm. I put the question.

MR SAM BITANGARO: Mr Speaker, I have no objection to her motion.  

MS BYAMUKAMA DORA: I heard hon. Cecilia Ogwal very clearly. There is one aspect, which we have to learn as women, the aspect of gender budgeting. We as Parliament pass the budget and make laws. If we are going to have a report, which the minister is calling a mere report, it will be of no consequence.  

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not a mere report. In fact, within the theme, they may have completed or may not have completed. After that, you consider the next action to take. But as far as I know, as from next month we start our participation in the budget process, because we shall receive reports. So, the committee concerned may also make suggestions. But this is to report. I think I should put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I think this should be a message to be delivered at the occasion on 8th March.

MRS MUKWAYA: Yesterday during the debate I was requested to inform the House about the electoral process. I just want to give the dates for the different levels, with your permission, Mr Speaker. 

There has been concern about the delay in the election of women councils, youth councils, the people with disabilities and the rest. I am trying to plead with you, because we have been handling six deadlines constitutionally. Once we finish with Lira and Rakai, hopefully we shall go straight to the election of the village women committees, starting the process of electing women councils. 

The polling day for the village women committees will be 6 May 2003. For the parish, it will be Tuesday, 13 May 2003. Then the sub-county committees will be elected on Wednesday 21 May. The counties will be Monday 3 June.

THE SPEAKER: The 3rd of June will be a public holiday.

MRS MUKWAYA: Okay, then I will have to advise the Electoral Commission. Probably they were not mindful of that day. For those villages where there are vacancies - and these are 168 villages in the entire country - polling day will be on 10 April 2003. Nominations, campaigns and voting will be on the same day, using symbols. 

Elections for parish local council executive committees will be on 9 June 2003. The programme for the Movement committees will be out as soon as the national conference and the National Executive Committee meet. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MRS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, just a small clarification.  According to the Women Councils Act that we passed, we eliminated the issue of having committees of women councils at county level. But the minister is telling us that counties are to have elections on the 3rd. Are we going to have elections according to the old Act or the recent Act?

THE SPEAKER: If the Act was amended and that was dropped, I think it will be dealt with.

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, this implies that the district women councils’ and the national women council executives’ dates have not been set. I am seeking clarification from the honourable minister whether she has them in her schedule.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker and honourable members, if you look at the Statute, it is very clear. If I remember it very well, it is the chairperson of the district that goes up, joined by people from different components. Isn’t it? I am calling them “components” because I do not have the law here.  

But what I know is that the district chairperson who is elected forms the top executive joined by other people from different components. So, we want to elect up to the sub-county level, because these women councils are required to form part of the local government structures. That is why we are not addressing the national youth council, because already the youth elected their people up to a certain level. We want to elect the women councils and people with disabilities to that level, so that the Electoral Commission can move from that level up to the district in unison.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I am talking about the election of the district women councils, because these are the councils that are supposed to implement some of the women programmes at the district level. 

The national executive women councils are the women councils at national level, which are supposed to ensure that programmes drawn from up reach down. Even if we elect them from women council I up to the sub-county, I wonder how the women will make their input in the sub-county budget. So, I am seeking more clarification, because they have to be in existence.  

As we talk now, even the women councillors are just there without work, and yet we need accountability from them.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think this part should be studied by looking at the law itself? Maybe next week on Wednesday the minister can come with an answer after scrutinising the relevant provisions. Maybe she did not come prepared with the Act. I think it is better that way, so that we leave this answer to next week.  

MRS MUKWAYA: What honourable members should know is that the women councils were extended part-time. So, they are legal and should be operating, and this timeframe is working within the deadline of when that Statutory Instrument will expire.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for your time and contributions. We have sat here for six hours, but I think we have done some work, especially on the security problem in the North and other related matters. We have agreed to complete the debate on Uganda Commercial Bank Limited (UCBL) on Tuesday starting at 10.00 a.m. No other business will be entertained then, unless it is of an emergency nature, so that this matter can be completed. 

MR MUKAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to be informed by the honourable minister when he will answer some of our concerns, like the one I had about couples that produce children more than –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The point has been taken and I think it will be addressed. We have come to the end of today’s work. The House is adjourned until Tuesday at 10 a.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 7.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 March 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)












