Tuesday, 27 February 2007

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you from the weekend and thank you for coming for this sitting. In the visitors’ gallery, we have a group of visitors from Sweden comprising of teachers and one Member of Parliament. They have particular interest in women politics and wish to witness how we perform our work. You are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. (Applause) 

Honourable members, today you are the headline in The New Vision about your welfare. I want to confirm to you that the decision to facilitate you with your vehicles is irreversible and it is being processed. But there are rumours, which people get from here and there, which are caused by people contacting people who have no information, with half-truths and then they coin it and panel beat it in order to get a story. 

The money for your transport is going to be paid. I want to confirm to you that as far as the Minister of Finance is concerned, he has done what he is supposed to do. There is nothing more I demand from him apart from a balance for a few members of Parliament. But we have settled that one.

The hiccup, which you have heard from rumours, has been solved. It was a misinterpretation of the Budget Act and this was not the cause of the Ministry of Finance but somewhere - I need not mention it. So, do not get worried, continue to be dignified as honourable members of Parliament and continue with your work.

I want to welcome the Prime Minister from leave. (Applause)

2.58
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. An issue of right shall not turn out to be an issue of privilege. I want to state here that the headline today in The New Vision by one journalist, Joyce Namutebi, deserves better attention than that statement which you have made because the fact is clear and the writing is on the wall that no single Member of Parliament - maybe I speak for myself - has got any kind of money to the sum of Ugshs 35 million on their account. Now, to see a parliamentary press person coming out with such outrageous statements, quoting a Member of Parliament, which to me is also a lie - because the High Court ruled that the media houses have a right to market lies in the names of quoting an anonymous source. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that you would allow the public relations of Parliament to issue a formal and concrete statement to that effect because the headline of today is propelling further unfounded rumours. I would suggest that the issue of right must not in any way be mixed up with an issue of privilege and must be attended to sooner than later, lest it will create a fertile ground for many of such rumours to emerge. Those are the comments I wanted to make.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I agree with you that a statement be made by the public relations office, but I have made a position. The position is that, you are going to be given Ugshs 35 million as was decided and it is not in hiding. We are not doing this in secret. But the problem is everybody turning himself into a public relations officer. You should leave communication to those who are supposed to communicate to the public. But if each Member speaks for Parliament, it can cause a problem.  Please leave these matters to us. We shall effectively handle them and you will see the results very soon. 

3.01
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, thank you for welcoming me from my annual leave. I missed Parliament very much and during my leave, I reflected on inhibitors and facilitators of good governance and I look forward to working together with frontbenchers, backbenchers and Members of the opposition. I am delighted to note that the opposition Members have come back to Parliament. We should work together to enhance good governance. I thank you.

3.02
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. I had indicated to your Chambers a matter that has been pertaining for the last one week in Kampala, that is, to do with the closure of the Avemar Shopping Arcade. I am concerned not just about Avemar, but about the way the Uganda Revenue Authority handled their duty of getting their tax dues from the proprietor of Avemar. 

But I learnt yesterday that the shopping arcade had been re-opened. But throughout last week, we read stories and we watched on televisions business people - I am told over 800 of them occupy those premises - that are in a very desperate situation because their businesses had been curtailed for a period of over one week. I would like to be helped this afternoon to appreciate a number of things:  

One, I look at the Income Tax Act Cap 340 Section 106 where the law provides for recovery of tax from a person owing money to the tax payer and it says, (1) “Where a tax payer fails to pay income tax on the date on which it becomes due and payable, the tax payable is not the subject of a dispute. The commissioner may by notice in writing require any person –
(a) owing or who may owe money to the tax payer…” In this case, I imagine a person who should have owed money to the owners of Avemar. 

And then (b) “Holding or who may subsequently hold money for on account of the taxpayer.” I imagine any person who has proceeds due or who will be keeping money like the banker of Avemar. I understand this to mean that the tax authority had power to go ahead and issue what they call a third party agency notice.

In this case, Mr Speaker, the ordinary people, those women and men we saw crying because they had lost business for one week would not have been subjected to harassment. I know that URA has done this before. Recently we read in the newspapers that they did it for Lira District Local Administration and they were able to recover taxes. Actually it paralysed work in the district. They did it for our neighbours here in KCC and also did it for Jinja Municipality at one point and they actually went for a UPE account. Now, the clarification I am seeking is, what was so exceptional about the proprietors of Avemar to the extent that the tenants were made to pay the price for the indiscipline of the proprietor of the premises? 

I heard the commissioner in charge of taxes saying that they have reached a memorandum of understanding. Now hoping that the proprietors will be able to honour their tax obligation, what is going to be done? Is there a compensatory arrangement to the victims of this bad procedure for the last one-week? They lost out on business, they lost out on their contracts and they have suffered the pain. Is there some compensation?

The other thing I would like to know from the minister is, why would URA fail to collect taxes from the year 2002 to 2007? They knew that the taxes were due but waited all that long and then abruptly wanted to collect them and ended up subjecting people to harassment? Mr Speaker, I would be happy to get this clarification. Thank you.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Dr Ezra Suruma): Mr Speaker, the Uganda Revenue Authority generally gives clients warning, it issues warnings and notices to them to pay their due taxes. As the honourable member has indicated, these people had got notices over many years and had not complied. So, it is absolutely necessary that when some members of the public fail to pay their taxes, something must be done so that they comply otherwise the tax paying citizens would be discouraged from paying when they see others not paying and getting away scot-free.  

So, the Uganda Revenue Authority has been doing a very good job of enforcing the tax law and I believe it is the duty of the owners of the shopping complex to compensate their tenants because they failed to fulfil their obligations. It is not the fault of the government that this complex had to be closed. So, the owners of the shopping centre should be the ones to compensate these people rather than the government. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No, as I understand the position, was is it the best way to recover the unpaid tax in view of the fact that now it affects the innocent people who are using the premises? Couldn’t they have used other methods that would not inflict damage on others? That was her complaint.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, this is not the only case. For example, last week we had a problem concerning Grain Milling Traders, which is a complex of 16 other companies and they had failed to pay. They had goods in there of various customers but because they had persistently over many years failed to pay, URA had to close that warehouse.  They came to me and I sympathised but still we had to make sure that they pay before we could open it. So, if there is a persistent failure, not a one-time failure, but a persistent failure, over many years, we have to take strong action.

THE SPEAKER: Suppose Avemar had sold it to Ssekandi the day before, without the knowledge of URA, what would have happened? 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What the honourable colleague from the left hand side needs to know is the type of tax URA is demanding. Because if it is VAT and it is demanded for so many days then the commissioner general has a section where he acts. If it is withholding tax, we need to know. Mr Minister, we would like to know the type of tax that has taken many years without being paid? For I know that if any company does not submit in a year then there are other measures rather than the measures which were taken by URA, which affect the people within the arcade.

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the minister in the case of Jinja Municipality where the UPE account was frozen. Who compensates the pupils who missed out because the money was not available for the school to operate? If you go to Lira Municipality where all the accounts were frozen, who is being punished? Is it the people who benefit from the services or the chief administrator or the CAO in this case?

THE SPEAKER: Let us get him then we close the matter. Yes, honourable member for Makindye.

3.11
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. All of us will have to agree that the proprietors of Avemar Shopping Centre are not the operators of all the shopping units within it. Now, the moment you close while demanding money from one individual for whatever description you want to give the tax, the owners of the shopping units had cleared because they pay rent and that is all. For the rest they deal with Government directly including licences and certificates if you like. So, we would like this matter to be clearly explained and I would have been comfortable if the minister was capable of guiding the public on how they are going to recover their losses.

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, clearly the owners of the premises are responsible for ensuring that their legal obligations, including tax obligations, are met and if they fail, then we cannot go to the tenants because we do not have a relationship with them. If the tenants are not paying their individual taxes then we shall go to them. But if it is the owner of the complex who has failed to comply then we have to make sure that he complies, and the only way we can do that is by affecting his source of income. It is not that we are wilfully trying to hurt somebody but taxes must be collected and as far as I have been advised, there has been no breach of law in the process of collecting the tax. 

What type of tax? I do not believe that the action of URA is based on the type of tax. Any breach of tax payment must be enforced, whether it is income tax or VAT. If they fail to pay a legal tax, then something must be done to ensure that they pay and that is precisely what URA has done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could there be for instance a mechanism where the Uganda Revenue Authority could collect money by the tenants to Avemar and directly pay it to them to deflect the taxes due? Would that not be better? Actually think what they are questioning is whether that was the best way of collecting the tax?  

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I really meant to get a clarification as to why a provision in the law was not exploited, which would not have hurt the tenants. The law provides that URA can use a third party agency to recover this money. It could go for the bank accounts of the proprietors, like it did for Jinja Municipality and Lira. It could also, in the event that it dragged on for so long, issue what they call a distrait recover something. It is provided for in the law here. 

What I am wondering about is why was the preference made that all this should be avoided and inflict harm on the people? Does the minister know that this will kill initiative from those 800 small traders? Does the minister know it affected the children when they were supposed to go to school? They failed their orders when they were supposed to supply. These are business people with small capital and you are avoiding catching the real person who owes you the money and you know you could have got him. That is what I am looking for. Why is this the preferred mechanism: torment them and leave the real tax defaulter free?  

Then I am also not getting a response as to why URA will sit there and wait for five years instead of asking for annual tax returns they wait for taxes to accumulate to Shs 1.6 or Shs 1.7 billion and then they come and inflict harm on unsuspecting retail women in Avemar. That is my concern.

THE SPEAKER: I think we leave this. The minister will discuss with Uganda Revenue Authority.  

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I do appreciate the honourable member’s concern for members of our public who are trying to do business. Indeed, it is our policy to encourage private initiatives and private businesses. The URA, as she has clearly indicated, has been extremely patient with this owner up to five years and indeed perhaps we could say the URA should not have waited for so long to take action. But they have been extremely patient.  If we try to say that because someone may be hurt in the process so we should not collect taxes, I believe –(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. You have given your guidance, which requested the minister to make relevant consultations with the URA officials to ensure that something concrete is done. Is the minister in order to persistently give the information we have rejected to consume as an explanation for justification of closing the bonna bagaggawale shops in town? Is he in order?  

THE SPEAKER: It is true, I just advised. But I think the minister is trying his best to make the point so that you appreciate it.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the honourable minister should not really waste time on this matter here. I worked with Uganda Revenue Authority for six years; I was in charge of the properties in Kampala in tax collection. But the method adopted this time by Uganda Revenue Authority was a wrong one and crude. The easiest way is as the honourable Speaker rightly put it, like we had a problem with the owner of Ruth Towers. We only directed the tenants to remit the monthly rent payments to Uganda Revenue Authority and there was no problem. This is exactly what Uganda Revenue Authority should have done with Avemar. However much you try to make explanations here, honourable minister, we shall not accept, you will not help us. Just apologise and direct URA to adopt a more civil way of collecting taxes other than inconveniencing taxpayers and so many people in this country.  

DR SURUMA: Mr Speaker, I wish to state in the strongest terms that Uganda Revenue Authority is doing its job and is doing a wonderful job. There has been a huge backlog of premises, which have gone for many years without paying taxes, and URA is now tackling this and making sure that the payments are done and this is in line with the law. We shall continue to encourage them to act within the law to make sure that the taxes are collected. Thank you very much.

3.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion under Rule 46 (1)(b), which is an adjournment motion for purposes of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance and the motion is for a resolution of Parliament urging the government of Uganda and the Lord’s Resistance Army to abide by the spirit of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, which they signed on 26 August 2006 as they explore avenues to resume the peace talks in Juba.  

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

MS AMONGI: Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Why do you make it without notice?

MS AMONGI: That is what I am coming to now that the motion has been seconded.

THE SPEAKER: No, you first read the basis and then make the motion. Can you read the rules?

MS AMONGI: I read the rules before I moved the motion. I am now reading the motion. Mr Speaker, I am moving the motion -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think the basis should have been that you are moving a motion under rule so and so which provides as follows, and you think your motion falls in that category. That is the kind of thing we want and then you can proceed.

MS AMONGI: Rule 46, “Motions without notices. (1) The following motions may be moved without notice-
(a)	any motion by way of amendment to a question already proposed by the Speaker;
(b)	an adjournment motion for purposes of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance;”

I move under (1)(b) on the issue of urgent importance because the government of Uganda and the LRA have been negotiating in Juba, Southern Sudan, under the chief mediation of the Vice President, Dr Riek Machar. They signed a Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and later an addendum to that. The main Cessation of Hostilities Agreement was signed on 26 August 2006; the addendum was subsequently renewed but it will expire tomorrow, 28 February 2007. 

At the moment, the peace talks have stalled and the parties are exploring mechanisms to resume the peace talks. Already there is a plan to have a meeting in Juba where leaders from Northern Uganda will go and have a meeting between 1st to 5th March to try and get avenues to bring back the peace talks to the expeditious conclusion. 

But during this period, as LRA moved to two designated assembly areas - one of the assembly areas was Owiny-Kibul - it facilitated the LRA from Northern Uganda to move outside Northern Uganda. Since that time, the hope for peace in Northern Uganda has been reassured; the resettlement programme under the Office of the Prime Minister is on going. At the moment, the process of the peace talks is not very clear and the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement, which facilitated the two parties not to fight and the LRA to move out expires tomorrow. 

As it expires, the people of Northern Uganda are asking the leaders what will happen now that Government and the LRA are not sitting to renew the agreement. Can you reassure us that the resettlement programme will continue and that these people will not resume hostile propaganda and fighting? Do we really continue to go back and resettle and plant crops? The spirit of the motion is really to urge that although the parties are still exploring avenues to resume the talks, we reassure the people of Northern Uganda that the resettlement programme will continue and the spirit of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement will continue although they will not sign. 

I say this because both parties have consistently said even if the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement will expire tomorrow they will not fight again. This is to support the content of their commitment; this is to support the spirit within which the cessation of hostilities has been signed and that is why I move under this rule. Thank you.

3.26
ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion that has been moved by hon. Betty Amongi. As you recall, the last few months have given a lot of hope to the affected communities in the Acholi, Lango, Teso and the West Nile regions of this country where the LRA had been fighting. People have started the process of going back to their homes; Government programmes have picked up in some parts where people have been able to go back and we think that it is only proper that the Uganda Government and the LRA will be able to hold fire, keep it off while they explore the question of the venue and other mishaps and difficulties that have stalled the peace process. It is our hope and it is the hope of the affected communities that this will find favour in the eyes of both the government of Uganda and the LRA and also even the peace mediator. 

There is growing fear on, what if fighting resumes tomorrow? It is only prudent that Government comes out to provide that assurance and that the LRA is urged to stay off and not to attack the communities. This will go a long way in helping the resettlement process. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion has been moved under Rule 46 (1) (b) that is without a notice for purposes which are in the last paragraph of the motion intended to maintain the status quo even if the agreement to end hostility is expiring tomorrow so that people can continue with their activities as they have been doing while the agreement has been continuing. That is the essence of this motion and it is addressed to both Government and to the other group, which have been involved in the trade. We can now start the debate.

3.29
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This motion has been made in good faith but we have been ambushed. So, Government will be in a position to answer tomorrow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We can say that this is not a question of ambush. The rules provide for this kind of a motion because as the background has been given, the agreement is expiring tomorrow. Therefore, if there is no such motion to urge the parties, people may say that the agreement has expired and we can do what we can. Thus, the moving of the motion under Rule 46 (1) (b), which is provided for in our rules! Otherwise, not ambushing would have meant a notice but she is saying the thing is ending tomorrow, thus the motion.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Betty Amongi for her efforts. Government has been aware of the 28th February as the day when the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement expires. The Cessation of Hostilities Agreement is a negotiated venture between three: the government of Uganda, the LRA and the mediator as a witness. When the government realised that the LRA started moving away, the government sent hon. Rugunda with a written text to the mediator re-emphasising Government’s commitment towards peace talks in Juba. 

Today, we are going to have a meeting with the Commander-in-Chief who has been pursuing his counterpart, His Excellency Salvir Kiir and Riek Machar to find a way forward. The public is going to be informed officially by the government of Uganda tomorrow when the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement has expired. I do not know, therefore, whether we can start debating this. I would like to give this information first of all for my colleagues to know that Government has been aware about the expiry of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement and that you never know tonight those who are in Central African Republic could be in Juba tomorrow. So, we wait for the 28th and then give –(Interruption)

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, the Minister of State for Defence. I am a little bit puzzled. I thought the Prime Minister in his open remarks did agree to the fact that this is a motion in good faith. We all, for the last few months, have cherished the peace that has been prevailing in Northern Uganda. I wonder what is so special that should only be kept to the knowledge of the front bench of Government. Why should they keep us waiting up to tomorrow in order to disclose when in actual fact Members of Parliament here who are representatives of the people are closer to the people who sent them here?

In any case, all we are trying to urge you is to support so that we are able in one voice to appeal to our people and console them that things are still being considered. We do not want them to have the fear of either beginning to pack their belongings and run out of the IDPs or fear going back to their homes as the government resettlement programme is going on. The clarification I am therefore seeking is, what is so special that Parliament cannot be kept in the know, that it has to be only kept hideously to your hearts until tomorrow when the powers will come and announce either for IDP residents to pack their things and go or continue to live in fear?

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the issue is just procedural. There is nothing special. We are aware of the 28th of February, which is tomorrow. There is nothing hidden. We are saying if the COH is expiring tomorrow, we expect Government to give us a statement either tomorrow upon the expiry or the following day because we have to guide the people.  So, there is nothing special. You would go further and ask why the leaders who are going to meet in Juba next week do not meet before the expiry of the cessation of hostilities to urge the two parties to come back to table. So, really the issue is procedural. We are aware of the 28th February and that is what we were waiting for so that we come with a statement reading upon the expiry of the cessation of hostilities agreement. This is what Government has planned to do. It is just procedure, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the essence of this motion as I see it is on page 2 of this document. It is an appeal to all parties concerned that even though the agreement is expiring tomorrow, let the prevailing peace continue. That is all. There is nothing else. It is just an appeal by Parliament to both parties to allow the resettlement, which is going on to continue even if there is no written –(Interruption)

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I think it is fair to this House and in order to build consensus on the issues that have been raised on this motion, that the chief Government negotiator comes here tomorrow and makes a statement so that even if this motion were to be moved, this House is given sufficient information on the basis of which we can discuss. So, I think hon. Amongi’s motion is at the moment premature and I would kindly request here to stay it and wait for the statement from the chief Government negotiator so that we all debate from a point of information.

MS AMONGI: I would like to inform the minister that at the moment there are two parties in the talks and that is the LRA and the government of Uganda.  At the moment, we cannot expect a miracle in between today and tomorrow midnight for them to sit and extend the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement.  That is why I think this House has a right to move a motion to urge both parties that, “Although you cannot sit in between now to midnight tomorrow please, hold your fire for the sake of the people of Northern Uganda.” The statement we will get tomorrow is from one side. It will not be from LRA but we are going to urge both parties to hold fire until they resume talks. That is the essence.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, cessation for hostility please –(Laughter) I think on the issue of peace, this House should speak with one voice and I want to emphasise to my colleagues that for those who suffered all these years in the North (and my constituency of Otuke are one of them), we are looking at Juba peace talks as one of the most effective ways to realise permanent peace. When it comes to issues of stability and peace in this House, you are aware we have done our best and spoken with one voice. We should not send wrong signals to anybody including the LRA, our partners, the negotiating team or even our enemies for that matter. Therefore, what is important in this House now is to find the method where both our colleagues on the other side and ourselves do appreciate that this message on the cessation of hostility is coming from both. 

I am aware that the 28th of this month, which was the deadline, was known to the government and known to my sister hon. Amongi who has been very active and I want to appreciate her role here. But the way the motion has been brought has put the side of the government in a way that if it is rejected it will appear as if we are against the cessation of hostility. What the Prime Minister is saying is that, this motion is brought in good faith - and it is true it is brought in good faith although if it was brought early also I would have signed it myself and I would have wished that hon. Betty Amongi would have circulated this and both the government side and the opposition side would have been party to it. However, it is not yet too late.

So, I am urging my colleagues that we give the government time so that instead of debating and the government objecting to it and appear as if we are going to defeat the motion and therefore send a wrong signal, we accept that the motion is on the floor, we sleep over it and then we have it fully debated and we speak with one voice. That is all I am saying. If we do not do that, we are going to enter into a situation in which the motion may not be carried and therefore a wrong signal is going to be sent to the other side. I would urge my colleagues, the movers of this motion, to accept the advice of the Prime Minister - and 24 hours is not too much!

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, we have a motion on the floor, properly moved, duly seconded. You have given your guidance. This motion does not contradict any position whether of Government or of LRA. It is complementary and supplementary to the efforts that are being made. I really do not see any reason for any well meaning Ugandan to oppose this motion. It is just urging both parties by Parliament. I will request that we debate the motion that is already on the floor. We are just meandering doing something else. The motion is before us. (Laughter)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. I know that the people in the North really need total peace to settle down. 20 years is too many years for a suffering person. They were seeing some ray of hope in this agreement for cessation of hostilities and tomorrow is a day when this agreement is ending. The Government has not given us up to this time any information about what is going to happen. We do not know.

I think the honourable member who moved this motion wanted us to move in the direction of the known, but not to behave like witchdoctors. (Laughter) I would want us to strongly support this motion because the people of the North think that their only way of living and settling down is through this agreement and the last element of the motion which was urging the people involved in the peace talks to resume. 

Last week, I raised this issue. I had even urged Government that if the LRA are finding it difficult to accept the mediator, even the place, let us humble ourselves for the sake of having peace in this area and look for an alternative! I even said we have so many people in this world and so many good places that are willing to host this to make sure that we proceed. 

I would beg honourable members that we strongly support this motion today and we move in the direction of the known. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not started debating the motion but we have been dealing with the preliminaries. You heard the Prime Minister say that they want to make a statement. I suggest that we can proceed debating this motion but we do not pronounce ourselves on it and tomorrow –(Interjections)- yes, because the government is one of the parties affected with this motion. But for those who want to debate the motion debate it and tomorrow we hear a statement by Dr Ruhakana Rugunda and then we pronounce ourselves so that we start the work today.

MS ALICE ALASO: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your clarification. You have just said we can proceed with the debate. Is there any harm - because our Rules of Procedure provide for amending a motion - if we amended the motion just to provide for a statement tomorrow and then we pronounce ourselves today?

THE SPEAKER: It is not clear. That we want to do what?

MS ALASO: The Rules of Procedure here provide for amendment of motions. Is there any harm if we proceeded in such a way that we include the fears of Government, that we urge Government to bring in a statement tomorrow as part of this –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is no need to amend. You just debate but at some stage we stop awaiting the statement from the government. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, the fear we have is what is not probably getting captured. The fear is that, we have up to midnight to urge the parties. How do you –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the parties are two in this case: one is Government, which is here and it can make its case. Another one is in Central Africa Republic, which we cannot hear. And the one here says they want to make a statement tomorrow. But for us as Members of Parliament we can contribute to the motion and just tomorrow we wait for a statement and conclude. What is wrong with that?


MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are involved in a debate that is concerning a deadline and this deadline is well known both by the government and the LRA, and we are equally in the know of this deadline that could be midnight tonight. I fear a situation where by daybreak tomorrow, we have a hundred deaths as a result of our inconclusiveness on this matter. Can you, Mr Speaker, help me and guide this House?

THE SPEAKER: You see the people we are with here are the government and certainly Government will have heard your opinions here. Therefore, let us direct it to those people in Central Africa. Debate if you want to debate.

3.51
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank hon. Amongi for tabling the motion on the Floor. It is very unfortunate that the talks stalled the way they did today and that we are looking at just a few hours ahead to salvage whatever there is that can be salvaged. 

My concern is that we can even think of options when the only option to the total breakdown of the talks is reverting to hostilities and yet that should not be an option to this House at all. 

I, therefore, wish to enforce hon. Betty’s motion that we must urge all parties in this conflict to bend backwards and look at only one option, that is talking until we agree to completely end hostilities.

Mr Speaker, I am a bit uncomfortable listening to the voices from the government side particularly those from the ministers who have stood up to talk. Minister Omara Atubo even intimated that there could be opposition to the motion, which surprises me. Who would oppose a motion to appeal to all parties to ensure peace? Why am I hearing voices from Government that there could be such an option? Many times we have heard the President of Uganda saying that in case we do not come to an agreement –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Thank you for giving way. I never said there would be opposition to a motion of this kind. I even added that although colleagues who have signed here are on the opposition side, we on this side would also have been ready to sign if we were approached in time. Therefore, there should be no option of opposition. If there is no option of opposition then therefore you should create conditions for both sides to support this motion. 

The Prime Minister is adding that for such a condition to exist where both sides of the House support this motion, you should give this side time so that after the statement tomorrow we can all support this motion. That is all; not that there would be an opposition; rather you should create a condition where there is no opposition.

MR OTTO: Thank you hon. Kamya for giving way. The honourable minister Omara Atubo in seeking clarification made a statement to the effect that they from the other side should have also been given an opportunity to sign. I just don’t make sense from that statement because I imagined he was an independent Member of Parliament. I just want him to throw some light in relation to that, and that was just to remind him.

MR TOSKIN: Thank you honourable member for giving way. I just want some clarification from the member on the Floor. I am getting a bit disturbed. We are urging two parties to come together. As far as I am concerned, one party is in Juba waiting for the other side to come and talk. Why is the motion treating the case as if the two parties are at par? Why don’t we clearly say, we urge the LRA to come to the talks because the government has been waiting? This has to be made clear. 

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Betty Kamya. I can appreciate the concerns of members that if this statement is made it might sound like an insinuation that one of the parties to the talks has expressed commitment and is being wrongly accused. When you look at it that way, this raises concerns yet you should actually be positively concerned. 

I believe that members yesterday read a statement attributed to the Fifth Division Commander citing incidences where they intercepted the LRA coming back to Uganda, and where the Army is taking measures. Anybody who is familiar with issues related to this conflict will tell you that once a Fifth Division Commander and not a political leader is making a statement, some military approach to the issue is a result. 

I believe that the members who brought out this motion on hearing what the Fifth Division Commander whose troops are in Sudan is saying, and then those who heard Otti on BBC ridiculing the cessation of hostilities as useless must be concerned and urge all the parties. 

It is not an accusation that any of the parties is less committed but where there are difficulties, even the committed must be urged. That is the basis, and maybe people did not read what the Fifth Division Commander said and what Otti speak on BBC. These are the cardinal parties to this conflict. I think that is the basis of this Motion.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I am beginning to think that the cause of the vibes I hear from the government side is the President himself who has been heard on several occasions saying that if this does not work out, the UPDF is well equipped as we now have enough capacity to deal with any insurgency. That sounds like the option is always there of getting back to war. I am urging this House that we should not wilfully look at that as an option. 

We are urging this Government and both parties to bend backwards and look at only one option. I know that we have a lot of capacity to handle that but that capacity does not take away the pain, suffering and disruption that goes with the process of containing any insurgency.

Mr Speaker, it is not because of lack of capacity that the insurgency in Iran is still going on. It is not because of lack of money or support or capacity that all these wars around the world are going on. It is because of the will of the parties involved to stop the war. That is why the bigger responsibility is with the government of Uganda and much more than Kony to bend backwards and agree to shift the venue to wherever, because another 20 years – 

Some of us may sit here in the comforts of Kampala and think that we can postpone the debate to tomorrow but there are people who are sleepless in the North who do not know what tomorrow will bring. What will give them some hope and sleep is to hear this House saying that both parties must be urged to ensure that we do not see this war again. Thank you.

4.00
MR JOHN OTEKAT (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand up to support the motion because hon. Betty Amongi has moved it in good faith. I also stand to support the Prime Minister who is representing Government.  I am supporting the motion in that, first of all, I come from Eastern Uganda in Teso. Just two weeks ago, there were leaflets being distributed in some parts of Teso threatening that LRA rebels would be coming back to Teso. That caused a lot of panic among the people of Teso with some people even packing their belongings and moving to town again, particularly in Amuria District.  

Mr Speaker, this was as a result of the breaking down of the negotiations between the two parties that is Government and LRA. Because of this, some people are taking advantage of that to write leaflets and threaten people who were returning to their homes, that you are going back home but because –(Interruption)

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on this particular issue. The reason why we made the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is to abide by them when debating or handling national issues. Ten minutes ago, you ruled that this matter be differed to tomorrow, and according to our Rules of Procedure, the Speaker’s ruling is final. If we go by this assumption then I am failing to understand why we are still debating the same matter yet you have already ruled that the matter be differed to tomorrow.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the position was that people can start contributing to the motion but we shall not pronounce ourselves on it until tomorrow when we have received the statement from Dr Rugunda who is the minister leading the negotiating team in Juba tomorrow. This means that people can start contributing and then we shall adjourn it to tomorrow.  

MR OTEKAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank my colleague for the clarification. The leaflets that were being distributed in Teso were causing another big problem. We have also been reading papers in the media, hearing on radio and even on television that there is now fighting between some LRA rebels who are retreating back to Uganda.  That of course sends a lot of shivers in the spines of many people of Uganda especially in Teso Region that suffered a lot.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I fully support the motion. Tomorrow after hearing from hon. Rugunda who is representing Government, we should be able to resolve as Parliament that the cessation of hostilities between Government and LRA should continue so that people live peacefully. 

Furthermore, since the Leader of Opposition has already stated that Otti was on BBC, even the LRA should make a pronouncement wherever they are that they accept the cessation of hostilities as resolved by Parliament so that people in Northern Uganda and people elsewhere in Uganda know what is happening as far as this war is concerned.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I support the motion and also what the Prime Minister has said.

4.06
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to believe the fact that both parties are committed to the peace talks. This has been demonstrated and there are actions, which have showed that both parties are committed. 

However, from the recent press reports, we seem to have picked that there are some conditions that have been set up by LRA in order to resume or continue with the peace talks.  It is just fair that we should also listen to Government and see under what terms and conditions they are going to resume or continue with the peace talks. Then, if the terms are a bit outrageous, it is our duty to say, look we do not agree with those terms –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, you have just ruled that we are going to pronounce ourselves tomorrow. Is the Member in order to pre-empt your ruling?

THE SPEAKER: Certainly the Member cannot be in order to pre-empt my ruling.  

MR WASIKE: Mr Speaker, I was just emphasising the fact that there is need, and it is okay to listen and give advice on the terms. What I was emphasising is the fact that we cannot just urge Government or the parties to resume talks unconditionally, or tie up one side when we have heard that already one side has set conditions for moving ahead.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, I wish to support the motion and I will also give some input on the terms and conditions of resumption.

4.08
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I feel very emotional when I am debating the subject of peace in the North because I come from that area.  This debate is being aired live and my people in Dokolo and many people from the North are attending and listening to us debating this motion. 

The way we debate this motion will affect seriously the feelings of our people.  Right now our people are waiting for the results of the peace talks in Juba. And for us to sit here and seem to disagree with the process of the peace talks that are taking place in Juba is going to portray a very bad image to our people. 

Our people want peace and nothing but peace.  They have suffered for long and it is time we end the suffering of our people. We cannot continue suffering when other people are developing.  The people in the North want peace. 

The other time, the Prime Minister went to my constituency, and through my people, I asked him to carry the bag of peace and come with it from Juba. I told him, do not leave that bag in Juba because they want the Prime Minister to come with a big bag to announce the presence of peace. I do not know how my mother in the village would feel when she learns that the peace talks have collapsed. That is the very day I am going to burry my mother because she cannot imagine leaving her home and going to the camps again. 

The children - how about my children in Dokolo and Lira, they have been sleeping in the rain, they have been tormented by mosquitoes, and for us to stand here and seem to think that the people in the North are not suffering, we are not being serious; we should start being serious now.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I have been in this House since the Fifth Parliament.  We have witnessed members of Parliament moving resolutions in support of the settlement of the suffering people of Northern Uganda. I have not heard anybody even today insinuating lack of seriousness and support of the efforts that are bringing the peace in Northern Uganda. 

Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that this Parliament has got Members who do not support the settlement of the conflict in Northern Uganda, when we have passed so many resolutions here in support of it? Is he serious himself; is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okot Ogong, has somebody come to you and said that we do not want to support this process, or you are implying - because some people are feeling uneasy that they may be -(Interruption)
 
MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am a very conscious man and my brain is very clear.  What I meant is that for Government to say that we differ the debate and they come up with their statement and we support it, shows that some of us are not serious -(Laughter)- So, you are making an influence, you are interpreting what has been said as meaning that –(Interruptions) - may be, Mr Speaker, the minister did not get me properly.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, so you did not say what you said?

MR OKOT:  No -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, let me now talk about the motion. It is important that we understand the content of this motion before we can debate it.  

Mr Speaker, if I can refer especially to the resolution urging that this House expresses its full support for the spirit and content of the Cessation of Hostility Agreement signed between the two parties, it says that we support the content of the agreement, which was signed by both Government and LRA. So, is there any harm in such a statement? 

What we are saying is that we re-affirm our support that we want to support and back you up so that when you go back to Juba, you have the support of Parliament, Government, my mother and everybody else supporting you. That is what we want.

Then the second issue, which is so clear, is that this House urges the parties to abide by the spirit of the Cecession of Hostility Agreement. The spirit in which it was signed by Government was one of peace. Is there another spirit in which we are? We are for the same spirit and that is the spirit of bringing peace to Northern Uganda. 

So, if you do not have that spirit, then you do not have to sign this agreement. But I believe that Government has the spirit to bring peace so that Northern Uganda can develop.

Mr Speaker, let me refer to the third one, which is actually the final resolution of Parliament. It says that the House urges the parties to resume the talks, and I have really listened to Government, they say that they are willing to resume the talks. We are now urging the LRA in very strong terms to please resume talks with Government. We want peace, and I want to use this opportunity on behalf of my people from Dokolo to urge the LRA to return to Juba and negotiate peace because it is what we want.  

I want to talk on behalf of Dokolo that there is nothing more we need; we do not need handouts, and we have never lived on handouts. We want peace, and then we can go and do our own things because we are capable of working. We are capable of working, because even when you plant a tail of a pig, it will grow in the North. So, we have no problem with work, all we want is peace and everything else will continue normally.

Mr Speaker, let me conclude my presentation by making a very small summary. Sometime back, I went to Balonyo, LRA had just killed our people there. I went with hon. Angiro who was a Member of Parliament. We went when people were scattered and dogs were eating bones and bodies of dead people. There was a man who had buried his child; we went with him because we picked him from where they had taken refugees. We went with him to the place; when the man saw the body of his child devoured by dogs, the man collapsed to my feet and that is the day I developed high blood pressure. That is the day I got mad. 

One day I cried while I was there; you saw the newspaper. Six people were tied and their heads were totally shattered, you saw me crying tears. We need peace, and I am standing to urge you members of Parliament –(Interjections)- there is no politics here, and whenever you put politics in this, you spoil the process in Northern Uganda. 

Peace, we must all come out with one voice, there must be no descending voices anywhere, we must come out with one spirit that we need peace in Northern Uganda and that peace will come. But when we have people descending and making unnecessary statements that means some people want us to continue suffering.  Mr Speaker, I thank you.

4.18
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much. I would like to submit this.  The soldiers in the field need moral justification to fight. The essence of the end of the Cessation of Hostility Agreement is that fighting can resume.  

So, the soldiers were restrained in this process of the Cessation – the duration of time in that agreement. The fact that, that agreement ends and that we are silent as Parliament means that we have given them the moral justification to continue fighting.  Do we want our soldiers to start fighting or not? We should support the motion and pronounce ourselves on it today. 

The role of that motion will be provision of moral restrain, so that the soldiers will feel that even if the Cessation of Hostility Agreement has ended, morally they are restrained from fighting by the Parliament; this is the meaning. 

So, for you honourable members, particularly the ministers, the risk we have here is that if we pronounce ourselves today that despite the end of the Cessation of Hostility Agreement, there should be no fighting, the risk for you is that if you bring a massage, which says that resume fighting, you would have been denied the blessing of this Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, that is the only basis of referring this pronunciation to tomorrow, because it is going to deny you the moral justification to say that the Cessation of Hostility Agreement has ended, resume fighting. 

In my opinion, as a member of Parliament representing the people of Obongi in Moyo District, people who have suffered in the hands of more than two wars in this regime; the war of the West Nile Front of the LRA - we feel that whether the negotiations are going on or not, there should be no fighting. Therefore, I support the motion and I urge everybody in this House to request the Speaker to allow us to pronounce ourselves on this motion today. Thank you.

4.20
MS AGNES AKIROR (FDC, District Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. However, I would like to make two statements. One, is in form of information. Earlier on, the honourable members said that Members who are invited to meet in Juba next week have not yet talked about this Cessation of Hostility Agreement in advance. What are they doing about it? I am one of them. 

I want to inform the honourable members that every effort is being made to see that these peace talks do resume. As we talk, it is so passionate and personal to all of us here. I can read it from our faces that we all want to see the process back on track.

We, Members from the area were invited by our paramount Chief in Gulu. We were trying to discuss on what we are talking about today in Parliament. I would like to inform my colleagues that it is the world-over; it is not only people from Northern Uganda that are worried. And the motion today was meant to ease this worry in good faith. 

Therefore, I do not think that it should cause us much friction, and let me believe that it has not caused so much friction already because I do appreciate my honourable colleagues over there for all your support. We cannot talk of the government side because the issue of peace cuts across – its life. Today, it is me, tomorrow someone else. And we appreciate that you stand with us all the time. I have said this over and over again. Probably, what I can say is that the honourable ministers, as part of the People negotiating in the spirit of the motion need more reassurance, more support and appreciation. 

 We should not think that the worst would come out of the reactions tonight. We are only going to continue urging that our response is being watched by the world; the people in Northern Uganda are watching us. Let us sober up and be responsible citizens, to ease the pain and tension of our people in the North.

I would not like to put our people on what they call “Obunkenke,” from now to tomorrow. I don’t know how to translate it, but they are now not sure of what is going to happen between now and tomorrow –(Interruptions)- Mr Speaker, my honourable colleagues, should not also be on “Bunkenke.” 

Take a for example, when you have a patient in your house, and you as the head of the family fails to show that there is hope that that patient will be taken to hospital; the means may not be there that day, but that patient would sleep hopefully. But when you leave a person on “Bunkenke,” he might even collapse. 

So, I am urging my honourable colleagues to give hope to the people in the North as we debate this motion. I only pray that by tomorrow, having exhausted all this, it will not be like – Mr Speaker you know a bit of Luganda – “Amawolu,” I don’t know how to say it. I hope that the issues that we have discussed are not like “Amawolu” by the time a decision is reached tomorrow. 

Let us keep it warm, and make every effort to bring peace. All we need is to encourage each other. I don’t want a situation of friction to the extent that even the government side losses hope, or be like we are not in partnership with them. 

So, this is my humble request and argument that we think about the people you have put on “Bunkenke” by not concluding this motion tonight to let them prepare their rugs in preparation to take off. This is my request honourable members and I thank you for listening to me.

4.28
MR MATHIUS B. NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but also to urge my honourable members of this august House to be sober when debating anything to do with peace. 

Mr Speaker, as you said, this motion was moved in good faith. Indeed, the honourable Minister emphasised this. In a process where you are negotiating peace, you are bound to have ups and downs. 

I remember very well in 1985 when the NRM Government was negotiating with the Lutwa Government, conditions were always set for resumption of talks.  I remember very well when the government side was led by the late Col Toko, the Movement side put conditions and indeed Toko had to be dropped from leading the delegation in order for the peace talks to resume. Dr Semogerere was asked to lead the government side.  I am bringing this up to elaborate the fact that even though LRA has set conditions, if Government is interested in peace, we have sometimes to relent.  

The second example, Mr Speaker, is when the late Serwanga Lwanga was arrested at the border. Hon. Jim Muhwezi can bear witness, or hon. Kiyonga. I saw him there when coming to Kenya. Conditions were set in order to resume peace talks because that was very crucial. In fact, a Uganda Airlines plane was hijacked and it landed in Kasese with passengers aboard. Conditions were set in order to resume the peace talks because people were interested in peace. I am bringing this up so that you are aware that when we are talking peace, you have to relent sometimes. 

If LRA has said that it wants this, let us consider it for peace sake. Sometimes we have to accept these conditions. Indeed, Serwanga Lwanga was set free and we talked. If I am telling lies to this House, somebody can stand up and challenge me on this.  Peace is very paramount.

I want Members to read Resolution No.2. It says: “That this House urges the parties to abide by the spirit of the COHA and reassures the people of Northern Uganda by whatever means, that they will not resume hostilities…” What if tonight we just let things go like this and tomorrow the hostilities start? I am sure the LRA and the government of Uganda are listening to this debate in this House. 

We represent the people of Uganda, whether they are part of LRA or they are in the government here. As long as you are a Ugandan, you are represented by this Parliament. We are asking both sides to please cease hostilities tomorrow even though the agreement is expiring tomorrow, so that the people who have started resettling in Northern Uganda can have hope that even though there are still conditions for peace talks to resume, they are assured of peace.  

Mr Speaker, we are not saying that Government has no statement to make. We know Government has a statement to make, but we want cessation of hostilities to be adopted by this House. We shall then know if it is the LRA or the government that started hostilities after Parliament of Uganda, the representatives of the people, has pronounced itself on this. 

Mr Speaker, in Resolution No.2, we should give hope to the people of Northern Uganda. We should give hope to the people who have started coming back. We should give hope to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister who is resettling the people of Uganda. You will have done some job, people will have resettled today and then you hear tomorrow that they have started running away because hostilities have started. Your job will be in jeopardy, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister.  

Honourable members, let us be sober and support this motion. We are not saying that Government has no conditions to set, or that Government should take wholesale the conditions given by LRA. We are saying hostilities should cease and then we move in the spirit of resumption of peace talks. 

As I have mentioned, these are not the first peace talks that this Government has had.  They have had peace talks with Bamuze, they have had peace talks with so and so, but in the end peace has come.  Mr Speaker, let us be sober and pass this motion. Thank you very much.

4.35
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to add my voice in support to the motion. I am doing so because what we say here will be taken seriously further than here. I want to thank you for having allowed the House an opportunity to debate this motion, in spite of the initial encumbrances. 

Mr Speaker, as a leader from Acholi, I would also want to appreciate the attitude of the national Parliament of Uganda towards the conflict in Northern Uganda. This was not the same kind of attitude in 1996, where all those who were agitating for peace talks were called rebel collaborators. I think the National Parliament has played its role to ensure that the LRA, specifically, sees that tonight the national Parliament of Uganda has resolved that all the generals who are trigger hungry should not start reorganising for an attack any time tomorrow.

In Acholi and specifically in my constituency, Aruu, there are 53 new camps, in spite of the 47 old ones. We have got close to 100 camps in the last five months, which is an indicator that people are leaving the major ones and going towards their traditional areas of settlement.  Now an ugly scene will happen sometime tonight or tomorrow. We already have reliable information that some people are carrying their luggage from their homes and returning to the main camps because they are not sure what tomorrow will be like.  

I think it is very timely for this Parliament, whose proceedings are covered live on all the local radio stations, to be heard saying that we wish those who are involved in the peace process well.  I think it does not hurt. For those of you who have sat multiple examinations, a success card will not help you pass the exams. It will just say, ‘we wish you well, or we wish you success in the forthcoming exams’. The moment you get a success card, you do not jump around as if you are through because the Chief Whip has sent you a success card so you cannot fail the exams. What we are doing tonight is to soften the hearts of those who will go and sit in Cabinet tomorrow and say, what do we do; shouldn’t we blow the whistle and begin the fight?’ 

We are glad we have got an opportunity to allow you pre-test the statement you will make in Parliament tomorrow. For any serious politician, it would be very risky business to come and make a statement tomorrow as if the members of Parliament who are talking here were out of their mind. 

Mr Speaker, recently I was in Sudan, in Yei. This motion would serve beyond the borders of Uganda. The people of Southern Sudan are more interested in these peace talks than we Ugandans, if I may guess. On a private mission in Yei, in the Sudan Parliament, we almost ended up in a session asking whether the peace talks would succeed or fail. This is an opportunity as a National Parliament to show people in Sudan that as Uganda, we are committed to the peace process. 

Mr Speaker, we have a difficult situation. We have those who have sworn to protect Ugandans and their property, at the same time we have the national Parliament of Uganda giving an olive branch. What I foresee happening is that this Parliament must make a special appeal, and I want to begin it now, to the Lord’s Resistance Army. We must tell them that unless they get back to Juba, it may not be easy to renew this Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. I want to appeal passionately, even if you want to have the talks in Kenya or South Africa, we still need to get back to the drawing table, renew this agreement and design avenues that can facilitate having the talks somewhere else. 

If that is the spirit, I want to appeal to the Minister of Defence, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, my OG, Makerere University. She asked why the leaders who are going to Juba on Thursday did not make a decision to go to Juba before the expiry of the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement. We are not in charge. We the politicians, we are not the organisers of that meeting that begins in Juba on Thursday. It would be prudent, as a member of Acholi Parliamentary Group, to say such questions can insinuate that other people are seeing more than what you are seeing. We have Ndugu Rugunda –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU REAGAN: The information I want to give is that the organisers of the meeting in Juba have been meeting the LRA delegation in Nairobi. At the same time the same group have met the government negotiating team led by the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs several times. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The point I want to pass on is that people should not start asking why you are meeting in Juba after the Cessation of Hostilities Agreement has expired. The meeting in Juba may just galvanise all these informal meetings, which hon. Reagan has just been talking about, and your ministry should be well aware of these kinds of developments. 

As I sit down, I want to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for choosing cool headed people. From the manner in which some ministers have responded to the motion by hon. Betty Amongi, if these ministers where in Juba, I do not know where the talks would be -(Laughter)-of course, I appreciate the fact that the Prime Minister is from leave, so he is excluded from my list of the ministers I am referring to -(Laughter)

We thank the President for appointing Ndugu Rugunda and we are so proud of him. If we could have ten Ugandans with his kind of temper, I think Kony would have just walked back home without signing any document. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

4.43
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of the motion for the concern and for urging Parliament to give moral support to the teams negotiating. 

A speaker here said that we should not politicise this, and indeed we should not. It is always sad when I hear comments and statements from some leaders trying to insinuate that other people do not care about the concerns in the North. 

People in the North are our brothers and sisters. The soldiers fighting and dying are our daughters and sons. It is, therefore not a problem for the North alone. If we look at this as a universal problem, then we should not narrow it. Of course they say that those who know it feel it better, people from the North feel it, but the other people also appreciate it. 

We all remember how these peace talks started. When our President, in consultation with the government of Southern Sudan, initiated the peace talks, we had many sceptics here. Some people said, ‘is Museveni serious; why is he abandoning the line of the UN?’ Some people made comments, I remember, but the government insisted. We have actually moved to where we are now because of that bold step our Government took. These peace talks that started in Juba were not even as a consequence of a resolution of Parliament. We should not politicise the matter. We want to come here and be sober. 

We are now talking to Government. The leader of Government is here; the Minister of Defence is here; they are taking note of everything we are raising, who is taking note of the –(Interruption)  

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, we have been in this House and this Parliament has consistently urged Government to take the peace option. In the Sixth Parliament it happened, in the Seventh Parliament, it happened many times. Is the honourable member in order to portray Government as adamant to parliamentary resolutions, as if when we talk here we waste time and Government just ignores us? 

THE SPEAKER: As far as my records are concern, he is a new Member in the Eighth Parliament. (Laughter)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your ruling. I did not say that Government is adamant. I made it clear that it was Government that emphatically initiated the peace talks in Juba. That has nothing to do with Parliament not pronouncing itself. I want to continue my point. I was saying that we are taking all these notes and urging Government –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, the talks that have stalled and that have gone on in Juba for six months were not initiated by Government. The talks were initiated from outside, even before the late John Garang had died, by some political leaders of LRA and not by Government. The Government was brought in much later. Is the honourable member on the Floor in order to misinform the House? 

THE SPEAKER: I think your position is that the facilitators are the ones who initiated or they persuaded. There is really semantics here. The talks have been started by the side in Uganda, that is Uganda Government, and the other side in Central Africa and Sudan is just facilitating them. It does not make much difference.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for continuously guiding those who deliberately misunderstand others. I was coming to the end of my point. I was saying that Government is taking note –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Do not provoke other points of order!

MR TUMWEBAZE: Government is taking note of what we are discussing as Parliament, but who is taking note for the other side, the LRA? We are only sending messages in the air. Who is going to give us safeguards? Who is going to give us guarantees that they will not attack the following day? Have they not set this precedent in the past? We are talking peace, we are not talking politics, so let us be sincere. You are saying that we pass it now; my prayer to this Parliament is that we be consistent. Do not hurry any resolution –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Honourable member, thank you very much for giving way. We have just received information from hon. Okumu Reagan that there is an effort by some leaders, including hon. Okumu Reagan, to talk with the LRA representatives who were discussing in Juba and are now in Nairobi. Since hon. Okumu Reagan is a Member of this House, I assume that he would efficiently and effectively deliver the message to the other side, the LRA.

MR TUMWEBAZE: That, Mr Speaker, tells us that we should not hurry if someone here is to send the message the other side. We should listen to the government negotiator so that he guides us on how the peace talks have progressed, so that at the end of it all if this House is to make a pronouncement, we do so from an informed position rather than from politically motivated intentions. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems everybody who has made a contribution supports the motion. I already ruled that we shall listen to Dr Rugunda or another person tomorrow to give us their side. I do not really think we should continue with this debate now. Let us adjourn the debate to tomorrow when we can get the other side and then we can pronounce ourselves on the motion. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO SECURE FUNDING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: I think we dealt with this. Debate continues.

4.52
MR ODONGA OTTO, FDC (Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, last week you said you will allow limited debate this week on the same subject. I have some few areas of concern that I would want the Minister of Finance or the minister in charge of transport to make some clarifications on.  

Firstly, I participated in the launch of the railway network in Eastern Uganda some time in 2005 with the hon. Minister, John Nasasira. We were about 30 Members of Parliament. We noticed a very historical event, the train moving in Eastern Uganda through Mukura. All the MPs, ministers and local leaders were in the train. The local people in the village were flagging, clapping and very happy that finally the train is back. I was so happy on this initiative by the government then and the board of Uganda Railways Corporation. 

Three years down the road, however, the train has not gone back there. We were the last. I have got reliable information. The Minister for Works then, who is the current one, hon. Nasasira, told people that they did not have to use expensive lorries to bring their products to Kampala, now they could use the train. However, he cautioned that they would not bring the train unless the people had goods already at the railway terminals. I have now realised that grass has grown on that railway line, up to the level of this microphone. 

The same railway line extends freely up to Pakwach. So now what are we talking about? What we launched is not working. In fact, we need to employ people every month to weed the railway line and to tell them that the train will come back. What is this loan meant to achieve when we are not capable of utilising the resources that we have already invested in this country? I hope I am not being so technical in this particular aspect. 

Secondly, I would want the Minister of Finance, a great economist in this country, to tell me whether Government is committed to losing all the taxes they get from fuel, so that we start using cheaper means of transport, the train. I want the Minister of Finance to tell me if that is the political way. As we talk now, Government of Uganda taxes over Shs 800 per litre of petrol, and about Shs 760 per litre of diesel. For every vehicle you see moving, Government takes more than 60 percent in taxes. The fuel that passes through Uganda to Rwanda is still cheaper than the price of fuel in Uganda by Shs 500, and yet the fuel transits through Uganda. 

I want the Minister of Finance to tell us that the launch of this railway network does not mean that some experts and laptop warriors are waiting to eat the money in the name of consultancy, and yet we have not made up our minds that we are ready to lose all these billions in taxes from fuel, vehicles and roads. We shall be ready to pass that money and change to rail mode of transport but what implication would it have to the micro-economic stability of Uganda?

Lastly, the report of the committee did not come out clearly on whether this transport would also entail transport of human beings. When some of us were growing up, we were very comfortable sleeping at railway terminals waiting to be transported by the train. We used to go and wait and when the train hoots, we ran to get first class or any class. Now we are spending a lot of money educating our children in schools on how trains work. So, are we committed, because those of us who own buses will lose tremendously? People coming from Pader would rather board the train, travel at night and get to Kampala at a fee of almost Shs 2,000 contrary to the current Shs 15,000 being charged per person. 

This may also help to solve the problem of wear and tear on the road. If we have few buses on the roads, we will have less wear and tear and we shall also save money in the other sectors. Hon. Minister of Finance, could you clarify on that before I say, “yes” when the Speaker puts the question to this motion? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.57
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for the report they have given about the loan. I stand to support the loan from the International Development Association of the World Bank.

I support the loan because anything to do with trade and transport is an investment. If we invest this money well, definitely we shall make money. This money is going to fund the repair of Pakwach Bridge, which is a gateway to West Nile. Pakwach Bridge was built around 1965. Time has passed and it has become very weak. Now that we are going to pass a railway over it, definitely it needs to be checked and improved so that it is strong and able to stand the weight of the railway and the buses.

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the issue of extending the railway from – improving first the one of Gulu to Pakwach, and then later extend it to Juba. That means that the railway line will pass via Arua and Koboko up to Sudan. Railway transport is definitely cheaper than bus and air transport, so trade will increase in the region.

Furthermore, the committee anticipates trade. I would like to inform this House that business is already booming between Uganda and Sudan. You find very heavy vehicles passing every now and then carrying goods across the border to Sudan. Therefore, that is investment and everybody must support this loan to see that it becomes a reality to serve our people of Uganda, West Nile and even Sudan.

Mr Speaker, I am happy that you are going to repair border posts and you have mentioned some. But one border post, which is very important, is Oraba border post in Koboko. This is actually not a border post at all. What we have is just a small room where the policemen stand to watch the vehicles pass. They don’t even have the equipment to weigh how heavy these vehicles are and to know what is inside them. I would like for Oraba border post to be included in this funding so that it is improved. At least the others have something, but for Oraba, there is nothing. So I support this loan, which is very important.

As we are talking about the railway, which is going to be built, the road, which is still left untarmacked from Arua to Raba is raising a lot of dust for the people of Maracha and Koboko. Most people there now have chest pain because of the dust raised by vehicles. So the first thing that Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication should do is to tarmac this road as quickly as possible. I hear it is going to be tarmacked. I would like to know from the minister today, when are they going to tarmac this road? This road is a continuation from Kampala to Karuma, from Karuma to Arua, and from Arua to Oraba. Why leave this part for so long?

So, please I beg that this money should also be used to tarmac that road first before the railway line. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.02
MR STEPHEN WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to draw the attention of the House to page 5 of the report of the committee, and give some advice to the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development.

On page 5, the first bullet, it is stated that Busia alone collects a tax of about Shs 30 billion per month. But when you go to the parking yard, they have to jump over very big potholes to go and collect the Shs 30 billion. I would advise the Ministry of Finance that they prioritise this and start with Busia, which is in line with the amount of money that is being collected. And also to emphasise that point – related to that aspect - the people who collect this money in Busia, when they fall sick, they have to be transported 33 kilometres to Tororo in order to get the slightest of theatre attention. So it would just be prudent, if we are providing infrastructure for revenue collection, to think also about the people. Busia is the only town where we do not have an operational hospital. Now how do the people collecting the Shs 30 billion get treated when they fall sick? 

This is similar to another scenario – very ironical, the only sub-county in Uganda, which is Busitema, which has a gold factory, is the one without a single secondary school. It is to that type of contradiction that I wish to draw the attention of this House. I wish to support the motion and advise that priority should be given to the justified areas.

5.04
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Finance before I support this motion. 

Indeed this loan is to finance the East African Trade and Transport Facility. I realise that the committee interacted with the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Works and the Uganda Revenue Authority. However, I have not seen where this committee interacted with the Minister for East African Affairs yet when I look at the problems, there are non-tariff barriers, which this loan is seeking to facilitate, but I do not see any input for the Minister for East African Affairs. For example, there are problems with clearing agents. As I speak, about 4,500 containers belonging to Ugandans are to be auctioned in Mombasa Port because of some non-tariff barriers that were incurred and you find that the importer cannot take out the container. 

Mr Speaker, last year 2,500 cars destined for Uganda were impounded in the Port of Mombasa and in fact they were later given as a gift to a neighbouring country. I have brought this up because the Minister for East African Affairs should be able to tell this House what is going to happen to the non-tariff barriers that have been there and which include the convoy system in Kenya, when we approve this loan. This is because this problem with the convoy system delays the timely delivery of goods because of the way bridges, roadblocks and documentation is handled.

Our clearing agents here in Uganda are not allowed to do any job in Kenya. When you import your container or goods you have to send the documents to a clearing agent in Kenya and I have evidence that the clearing agents sometimes use your money to do business while the importer is incurring damage charges and in the end his goods are auctioned in the Port of Mombasa. Therefore, Mr Speaker, what are we going to do with these non-tariff barriers even after we approve this loan?

The charges on Ugandan registered vehicles in the Port of Mombasa and elsewhere in Kenya upon delivery are higher than the Kenya registered ones. What does this mean? It means that a Ugandan truck will be there waiting to be loaded only to be loaded last yet we are approving this loan to facilitate trade and transportation in East Africa. That is why I wanted input from the Minister for Regional Affairs or the Minister for East African Affairs to assure us because this loan is for East African trade and transport.  

Furthermore, if you have a passport and you are a businessman or businesswoman going to Tanzania and they see that on your passport there is the word “businessman” or businesswoman”, you are charged US $50 because you are going as a businessperson. Since we are trying to promote regional integration of East Africa, are we going to remove these barriers because it is not a matter of just approving a loan and we say, “Yes, we have removed these barriers”?

Lastly, can the Minister of Finance tell this House why we are using a Kenyan insurance firm? I realize that this is not the first World Bank loan we are getting yet you have opted to get a Kenyan insurance company for this loan. Are we being patriotic? Don’t we want to promote our own companies? Why should a Kenyan company go ahead to give the insurance for this fund?

Before I also support this loan, I realize also that the performance bond for this loan is going to expire on the 31st of October 2009, which is in just three years. What will happen? Because in most cases you find that once a performance bond has expired, the contractors swindle the money. I would like the Minister to explain this because the concession period is 25 years. Can he assure this House that even when the performance bond expires the contractors will not swindle our money?

Lastly, I would like the Minister for Trade and also the Minister for Internal Affairs in charge of Immigration to tell us what is going to happen to the Ugandan companies that do clearing work because when you look at the economy in this country most of the investments we have are run by Kenyans. Go to any hotel here; you can challenge me but most of the big hotels here have Kenyans as the marketing managers yet even a Ugandan clearing agent in Mombasa cannot be allowed to handle a clearing job and we are talking about facilitation of trade and transportation in East Africa! Thank you.

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday in The Daily Monitor newspaper there was a page advert that I think the honourable minister should say something about because it is related to the loan that we are being asked to pass. The advert is on the Joint Kenya-Uganda Railways Concession that is the Rift Valley Railways Consortium. This was Prime Fuels Kenya Limited, Prime Fuels and Milambo Holdings Limited. Milambo remains a member of the RVR Consortium and their Managing Director, Mr Roy Pofets, signed the advertisement. This was published in The East African of 13th to 19th February 2006. 

Sheltam Railway PTY Limited stated among other things, and I quote, “’Prime Fuels and Milambo had forfeited the right to participate as shareholders in the Rift Valley Railways Concession pursuant to the consortium agreement to which they were parties.’ This statement is false. As a result of the recent legal proceedings Sheltam has been compelled to accept that neither Prime Fuels nor Milambo are precluded from participating as shareholders in the Rift Valley Railways Concession Company, RVR Investment PTY Limited, pursuant to the consortium agreement to which they have always been and remain parties.”  This is signed by Hassifa Abdallah, Managing Director Prime Fuels Kenya Limited and Richard Rhinos, Director, Milambo Holdings Limited.  

I just brought this to the attention of the Minister and the House because it means that there is already a struggle within the group that is supposed to implement the Rift Valley Railways Concession and that means that if the matter is not sorted out –(Interruption)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
MR OKUPA: The information reaching us is that one of the shareholders of the Rift Valley Railway line has withdrawn. That is why this statement is very irrelevant.
 
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you. My concern, Mr Speaker, is that we do not want to end up passing a loan to support a consortium where we will run in two or three years of litigation and the money is waiting for the matter to be resolved in courts. So, I seek the minister’s clarification on this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, wind up please.

DR SURUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. First of all I would like to thank the Members for the important contributions to this debate. The credit, which we have brought to this House, is certainly one of the most important credits for supporting trade within the East African region and it is brought in the spirit of facilitating trade and increasing the speed of movement of our goods from Mombasa, which is one of our most important economic problems. It is, therefore, important that we see it in that light that we need to speed up the movement of our cargo and also to reduce the costs, not just the speed, as hon. Otto correctly put it. 

We need to reduce the wear and tear on the roads and to move the cargo to be more on the railways, which are cheaper per unit mile than on the roads. So definitely it is our hope that as soon as this is concluded by combining the processing on borders, by rehabilitating the railways, by making this concession to work that we should see some improvement in the movement of cargo and in the cost of moving our cargo from Mombasa and to Mombasa as well as within our country.

The issue of Pakwach and the extension of the railway not being acted on, I hope that now this can be acted on once the feasibility study is done and it determines that it is indeed feasible to do so. So, I request that you support it so this work can be done.

There is political will to save fuel by using the railway because there is political will to reduce costs. I want to give you my assurance that we will do everything possible and this is the purpose of this credit.

The issue of passengers, my understanding is that passenger movement on railways has to be subsidized. It is not cost effective. So the spirit of this credit is mainly on cargo, rather than on passengers. But at some other point we can consider whether it would be viable for us to subsidise passenger movement on the railways.

The issue of using the money from this credit to tarmac roads, I think is not possible. You will have to find other funds - as we have been doing - for the tarmacking of roads.

As for East African consultations, this is indeed an East African project, honourable members. This was also somehow anticipated in Rwanda, even before they had joined. But now of course they have joined the East African Community so this is truly an East African project and indeed it is us who are holding it behind. Other countries like Kenya and Tanzania have already approved their portion of this credit and I appeal to you to support it in the East African spirit so that we can move together. If Uganda does not agree to combining say the processing at Malaba, then it means we will remain as we are and slow speed will continue but if we agree, then efforts can now begin for bringing together the processing at the border points.

Why are we using the Kenyan insurance firm? First of all the Solicitor-General has advised that this is perfect. The bidding was done, the small successful company was a Kenyan firm and I think it would be wrong to say we are using firms from Europe and from other countries. It will be against the East African spirit for us to say we would not accept the firm because it is a Kenyan firm.

About the issue of the struggle within the concessionaire, I think that we have put some protections so that in case the concessionaire fails, then we would find someone else. This is really the issue of the bond, which has been rising a great deal, that in case the concessionaire is not able to perform and has to be removed, then we would find another concessionaire. The amount of money, which has been put there, Shs 3 million, is not related to the assets because the assets still belong to Uganda Railways Corporation. The Shs 3 million is simply what we think would be necessary to clear the legal and other processes and get a new concessionaire in place. It is not intended as some kind of security for our assets or anything of the kind. The agreement provides for the renewal of this bond when it has been terminated.  

The other major issue, Mr Speaker, has been the Partial Risk Guarantee. The Partial Risk Guarantee is intended as an assurance to the concessionaire, that should the government of Uganda, for one reason or another, be unable to fulfil its side, then the concessionaires would be protected against any appropriation; against any political risk, and I think this is a common operation. This is a common requirement. Most people who come to do large investments require some assurance that in case there is a problem in a country, a change of Government or there is instability or something of this kind, that they will be protected. 

So I would appeal to the honourable members that it is in our interest to pass this PRG in order to facilitate the railway concession. Because if we delay the work there, it is not in our interest. We would like the railway to start functioning immediately; we would like the concessionaire to get on the job.  But if we do not allow the World Bank to provide this Partial Risk Guarantee, in my opinion, we are delaying the very process we are so keen to see happen, which is our railway to start functioning effectively and efficiently. 

I would like to make a special appeal to you, honourable members, that please, let us accept the Partial Risk Guarantee along with the rest of the credit so that it can become effective. 

There were some concerns about the costs of the administrative costs; the consultancy costs are not 37 percent as somebody had quoted, but 17 percent. I think it is not as big as it was made to appear.  

The transit parking yard in Tororo is not connected with this and its cost have nothing to do with what we are doing. We should not be concerned that the money that we are passing here would be used in that connection. 

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I want a clarification from the honourable minister in respect of non-tariff barriers. Yes, this is the East African spirit but I want you to assure this House that when this loan is approved indeed the facilitation of trade in terms of these non-tariff barriers like I said the convoys - I said, the documentation procedures; I said the Ugandan clearing agents to be able - because you can imagine if you have imported things from abroad and you are here sending even your papers to somebody you do not know and yet we are talking about the East African spirit, can our clearing agents go and document my papers so that I do not incur charges in Mombasa?

DR SURUMA: Thank you very much, honourable member.  Mr Speaker, indeed this credit is concerned with the removal or reduction of non-tariff barriers. The waiting at the borders is one such barrier; the introduction of scanners and tracking is another attempt to speed up the movement of cargo. It will not solve all the problems of non-tariff barriers but we are working consistently to reduce these barriers. So, it removes some very important barriers on the borders and in the Port of Mombasa. 

There are of course many other barriers, which as we meet with our brothers in the community in Arusha we will discuss and attempt to reduce. We know they are many; you will find that for example when our vehicles try to deliver things in Kenya, they find a lot of problems and yet Kenyan trucks bring goods here and we do not give them problems. We are aware of such problems and we have been bringing them up to the attention of our brothers in Kenya and sometimes threatening to stop their trucks from coming unless they reciprocate. So, we are aware of the existence of these barriers and I want to assure you that we will continue to struggle to be fair.  

For example, the issue of employment; the fact that you find more Kenyans being employed here than Ugandans employed in Kenya - in fact when we were working on the East Africa Community fast tracking matter, Tanzania was even more sensitive about this issue because it was experiencing and feeling that there were more employees or workers from Kenya coming to Tanzania and they felt we had to look at these hard issues. But, also I think we have to do it in a spirit of co-operation not of breaking up the community. 

I want to assure you that the issue of non-tariff barriers is important and part of the East African Customs Union is an attempt to deal with these barriers. I would like to deal with these issues and leave the honourable chairman of the committee to deal with the other issues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that we make a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to secure financing of Special Drawing Rights of SDR 18.2 million or US $26.4 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank for purposes of financing the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $37 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AS A SUPPLEMENTARY LOAN FOR FINANCING KABALE/KISORO/BUNAGANA/KYANIKE ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we should deal with that item or we deal with the item on rules about the ministerial statement. Don’t you think it is better we deal with the rules other than this one; we shall deal with it tomorrow.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 56(3) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

5.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, STATNDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, our report is being circulated but it is a brief report of only two pages. 

THE SPEAKER: What you can do is to explain to us really the gist of it, and the conclusion.

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, this report arises out of a directive from this House to the Committee on Rules to consider rule 40 of the Rules of Procedure. Rule 40(1) provides that when a Minister makes a statement to this House, that statement is not debatable. Members are only required to ask or put questions with the permission of the Speaker. This is a rule, which was introduced in amendment of rule 35 in the old Rules of Procedure. It was categorical and stated all statements made by Ministers shall be debated. 

When the committee met, we were informed that the reasons for amending the rule not to allow debate or that the old rule was being abused in many instances. We were informed that instead of Members focusing on the statement, which the Minister had made or was making, there was a tendency to introduce new issues and the debate getting “wild”, if I may use the word. So the amendment sought to constrain debate to asking questions of clarification or supplementary questions as such.

Our committee has met and deliberated on the matter and we have found that actually the rule as amended is not meeting the ends that probably the House wished to achieve by adopting the amendment. The experience we have in this House is that instead of enabling orderly conduct of parliamentary debate and empowering Parliament to execute its oversight role of holding the Executive accountable, the rule has been disabling. On a number of cases, the ministers have made fairly lengthy statements, which Members expressed the desire to debate, only to be met by the constraint imposed by rule 40(2) that disallows debate and restricts Members to asking elucidatory questions.

Mr Speaker, it is the committee’s view, therefore, that where a ministerial statement makes assertions that in view of any Member are not satisfactory, the Member should be free to refute or challenge those assertions in a substantive manner other than restricting the Member to putting some few elucidatory questions. For orderly debate and proper use of the House’s time, however, it may be necessary to limit the time which should be spent on debating a ministerial statement.

It is, therefore, recommended that Rule 40(2) of our Rules of Procedure be deleted and replaced with the following: “All statements made by Ministers shall be debated. Debate on a ministerial statement shall be restricted to the issues raised in the Minister’s statement and shall not exceed one hour.”   I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for expeditiously dealing with our request to review this rule. Honourable members, you have heard the report. It is clear. Should I put the question?

5.37
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I first of all want to thank the members of the committee for handling this report in an expeditious manner. 

Secondly, I would want to set the record right. Whereas there may have been some weaknesses in the past as observed, but to impute that the House abused the previous rules would be to imagine that the office of the Chairperson of the House or the Speaker, failed to guide the House in the midst of the rules that we had. That could have been over zealousness on the part of the person who gave the information. It was not a fair representation of what actually occurred.
 
The clarification I want to seek is that the proposal by the committee, “shall not exceed one hour,” would it be possible to give it a rejoinder to say, “except where the Speaker deems necessary”? Because they are going to arise circumstances under which the issues raised in the minister’s statement are very critical and they would take the whole evening. It would be to the discretion of the Speaker to weigh and see whether according to the mood in the House and the gravity of the issue we are debating it becomes necessary to extend the debate. In such circumstances, wouldn’t this be limiting? I am seeking clarification from the chairperson whether he would wish to make such modifications so as to make it possible for this House in future to debate in a more –(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: But is that lacking? You mean the Speaker has no such discretion? What do you mean? I thought the Speaker has that discretion. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very supportive of this proposal by the committee. I only have a little procedural concern for the future. I read from the committee’s presentation that they held appropriate consultations and deliberated on the matter. Matters of rules and procedure of the House are a very important matter to the extent that in future we should be able to list whom we consulted, the methodology, et cetera, just for the records of this House. Thank you.

5.40
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (FDC, Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In large measure, ministers who come here and make long winding statements, which throw the whole House into fracas, have brought this problem and then new issues start to come up. I vividly remember the Minister of State for Health who came here and said the Meningitis situation in West Nile was under control whereas it was not. So, it is now incumbent upon ministers to come here and be brief and to the point so that Members do not also get into a winding path. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is built in the report, which the chairperson has read. Should I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Rule 40(2) amended.)

THE SPEAKER: The other one is a long one. We shall deal with it tomorrow. Honourable members, I was happy that you turned up in spite of the rumours you received (Laughter).  I am happy to tell you that what I told you was being cleared has now been cleared, and there is no other hurdle. So, you can go and “till your gardens.” (Laughter). This brings us to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.42 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)




