Tuesday, 20 February 2007

Parliament met at 2.48 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a series of communication to make to the House. However, I have received a notification from the Leader of the Opposition that they are returning to the House today, and since I want them to listen to my entire Communication, I would now like to invite the Members of the Opposition to enter to the House and take their seats. 

The Hon. Members of the Opposition thereupon entered the Chamber and took their seats. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Leader of the Opposition, please resume your seat.

Honourable members, please join me in welcoming some guests from the Commonwealth Press Association seated up there. They are here to facilitate training for the Parliamentary Press Association under the theme, “Reporting on politics under multiparty politics.” We have Mr Andy Martin, the lead trainer; we have Charmeela Bhaghowat, assistant trainer for the course. She is a pointer-trained newsroom coach. I do not know what that means, but she is an expert and is a former foreign editor of the South African Broadcasting Corporation. 

We have a few foreign correspondents: Mr Mulenga Kasuba, a senior reporter with Daily Mail in Zambia; Mr Chella George, senior political reporter with the Post newspaper of Zambia; Mr Gumbo Perege, parliamentary reporter with The Guardian newspaper of Tanzania and Mr Francis Murithi Muruiki, a political reporter with The Nation newspaper of Kenya.

Secondly, honourable members, on Friday this week, we are going to host the 79th US Attorney General, Mr John David Ashcroft, he is here as guest speaker at the prayer breakfast of that morning. He will be with us from 8.00 a.m. to 9.30 a.m. 

The former Attorney General, John David Ashcroft, served as a Governor of Missouri State from 1985 to 1993. Thereafter, he was elected to the Senate of the US to represent the State of Missouri in 1995 to 2001. He will be accompanied by the former State Court Chief, Justice Robertson, Bob Goff, and Dick Foth from Restore International.

So, honourable members, you are informed about this visit and you are invited to the prayer breakfast so that we can interact with Mr John Ashcroft. He is one of the most respected and outstanding politicians in the US and we are delighted really to have him in the country. Please, take note of that and attend the prayer breakfast.

I also would like to inform the honourable members that fasting will begin on Wednesday. This coming Wednesday is Ash Wednesday. The Catholic Parliamentary Chaplaincy is organising a High Mass in the Members’ Lounge on Wednesday 21 February 2007 (tomorrow) at 5.00 p.m. Bishop Kakooza assisted by Chaplain Binta will officiate celebrating the mass. You will have to start fasting. 

Honourable members, since our colleagues have been away, I would like to ask the Leader of the Opposition to make a brief statement to the House.

STATEMENT

2.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. As I was coming in, I slipped and it was a very good reminder that even when we occupy seats in this House, we are just ordinary mortals. 

I would like on behalf of my colleagues to make a statement upon our return to Parliament today.  Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament and fellow Ugandans. On 30 January 2007, exactly three weeks ago today, I stood before this august House to make a brief statement on the deep concerns that we in the Opposition saw the Executive breach; like the fundamental tenancy of freedom and good governance and its obligation and duty under our Constitution to uphold human rights, respect for the rule of law and the principle of separation of powers between the Legislature, Executive and the Judiciary. 

In my statement, I outlined how arising from the above Executive breaches helpless Ugandans were suffering needlessly in safe houses and in the hands of security agencies; how so many have needlessly chocked in teargas and red pepper sprays in the name of law and order; how so many are being incarcerated in jails and have been denied justice for too long; how the neutrality and independence of the prisons service and objectivity and severity of the Uganda Police Force are being compromised; and how rulings of our courts of judicature are being disregarded with impunity and the dignity and authority of courts consequently undermined. I also pointed out that these were grave signs for our country.

Madam Speaker, given Uganda’s turbulent past and our oversight obligation and duty as the Opposition, we are to act urgently and be very bold, loud and clear about it. Accordingly, we the Opposition in Parliament temporarily withdrew our participation in the plenary of the House. On that eventful day, I led a walkout of the entire Opposition from the House. Today, I am again most privileged to lead the entire Opposition back into the House. 

As we return to the House, allow me to briefly address the various issues that arose following our walkout and in particular the merits or demerits of our action and what we have learnt from and achieved or failed to achieve by our action. 

Before I do so, however, the Opposition would like to register our deep and most sincere appreciation to the whole country for the support we received. Our walkout caught the entire country by complete surprise, although we made the decision to do so two days earlier. Even President Yoweri Museveni, the guerrilla leader, proud believer in his intelligence system, was caught by complete surprise. 

Let me, therefore, take the first opportunity to thank and applaud the Opposition in Parliament for the seriousness and maturity demonstrated in strict confidentiality to our decisions in acting as one and for the trust you put in us your leaders. To our Independent Members, to our CP Member, to our JEEMA Member, to our DP Members, to our UPC Members and to our FDC Members I say, “webale nnyo nnyo”, “yalama noi”, “awadifo tui”, “webale inho”, “wanyala nyabi”, “ma anzo okposi”, “wasinja”, “apwoyo matek”. Yes, colleagues thank you so much and let us keep up the good work.

Madam Speaker, allow me to convey my sincere thanks and respect to you and our honourable colleagues who sit on the government side and in particular those who saw our walkout from a nationalistic and patriotic standpoint. At the risk of being misunderstood, you respectfully urged your Government to address the issues that led to our walkout. You held out and urged us to return to the House so that we, as a national Parliament, may decide issues that concern our country collectively. We thank you all from the bottom of our hearts. I assure you that in being there at our time of need, you are friends indeed and we shall never forget.

Beyond our partisan beliefs, we are as Parliament enjoined and commanded by our Constitution in Article 79 (3) that, “Parliament shall protect this Constitution and promote the democratic governance of Uganda.” Let no one amongst us forget that command and betray the Constitution, democracy and our beloved country.

Allow me also to convey the appreciation of the entire Opposition to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker for the understanding and support shown to us. We recognise that our sudden walkout momentarily unbalanced the Speaker, but you have since assured us of Parliament’s concern. You have also urged us to return to the House so that we may execute our constitutional obligations together as one.  

While outside the House, we attempted to visit Luzira prison; we held various public rallies around Kampala; we met the Uganda Human rights Commission; we also met the heads of our courts of judicature; the Chief Justice of Uganda, Justice Benjamin Odoki; the Deputy Chief Justice, Justice Leticia Kikonyogo and the Principal Judge, Justice James Ogola. In these interactions, positive engagement was established. I acknowledge in particular the cooperation of the Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda (Ndugu) and of the Inspector General of Police, Maj. Gen. Kale Kaihura, who kept their teargas throwers out of our way.

Leaders and supporters of our various political parties, the Uganda Law Society, the media and the entire Ugandan population expressed various concerns on the issues that led to our walkout from the House. As parliamentarians, we merely carried out our duties. It is you all who went beyond the call of duty to support and encourage us. We pray to the Almighty to protect and reward you all abundantly.

Madam Speaker, when we walked out of the House, we were not acting against Parliament; neither did we neglect our responsibilities to our country. For the record, our Members continued to lead and participate in crucial activities of Parliament. Proceedings of the committees of Public Accounts, Local Government Accounts and on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises that are led by the Opposition bear us out. 

The primary objective of our walk out was very specific: to act against and express our extreme displeasure at the conduct of the Executive that threatened constitutionalism, freedom, democracy, rule of law, good governance and the stability of our country. For those who did not realise, our act of walking out in itself fulfilled the very objective. 

It is so easy for Ugandans, most of whom are preoccupied with basic survival and some with excessive self aggrandizement, to dismiss the threat to our stability that the said conduct of the Executive poses and thus to trivialise our walk out. But then our country is composed of various ethnicities with diverse social values and cultural norms. We have cultures that value loyalty to traditional rulers and kings; we have cultures that allowed murder for honour; we have cultures that exalt corruption and even treachery as smartness. 

We must also contend with our tragic history where past leaders who were so praised and adored as they assumed power but, who once raw power went into their heads and we the people refused to sanction their excesses, turned against us, incarcerated us, brutalised us, and murdered us. We must truly contend with our own fatalistic tendency to gravitate towards that past.

In spite of our diversity and disjointed pull, we were brought together as a country, and remained stable and progressive by the steadfast will and institutional mindset of the colonialists. As long as our institutions work and the excesses of individuals are kept under check, our country shall remain stable and shall prosper. When the authority of the state is undermined in favour of the whims and command of individuals, we must all be very afraid indeed. We, then have no option but to act together and resolutely. 

Honourable members, many questions have been asked as to whether in our walk out we achieved anything, and whether the walk out had any impact on the Executive. At a lighter and personal level, the Opposition walk out earned me positive, albeit mischievous, mention in John Nagenda’s Saturday column in the New Vision newspaper. Even our poet Judge, Justice James Ogola, was inspired to christen walkouts as, “Doing a Latigo.”  Of course, like all good politicians, I love the free publicity! 

More importantly, however, the walk out was visibly most compelling. The sight of our Parliament in session, with the government side of the House full of Members, struggling for space, while the Opposition side remained completely empty, was like the sight of a decent man walking out of his house in the morning with only one leg of the trousers worn. Even the idlest minds, watching this daily spectacle, wonder what the matter was. Surely, which a thousand words spoken on the Floor of the House would have beaten that picture and more effectively conveyed our concerns to the people of Uganda and the whole world?

Madam Speaker and honourable Members, beyond Parliament, our walk out revealed dangerous fears and potential scion in some of the key national institutions and also refreshing hope among our people. After our attempts to visit Luzira prisons, our first institutional call was to the Uganda Human Rights Commission on Tuesday, 6 February 2007. Our mission was to deliver a letter of appreciation, encouragement and support to the commission in view of the pro-people and objective positions on human rights that it has consistently taken and courageously held.  

Except for one-woman commissioner who wanted to attack our very mission of support to the commission, our visit went on well and we were very well received. We thank the Chairperson of the Commission, Mrs Margaret Ssekajja, for her civility and courage. Unfortunately, the woman commissioner not satisfied with what transpired during our visit, again went to the New Vision newspaper and waving her “I am a lawyer” credential published, on 12 February 2007, an article in the paper titled “Human Rights Commissioner speaks on PRA suspects.”  The article was supposedly a response to the media, but was in fact intended to counter our visit to the commission.  

In that sycophancy and fear for her job, where was the commissioner’s law to advise her on her collective obligation as a commissioner to defend human rights? If she felt so out of step with the commission, why didn’t she take only a honourable thing and resign rather than bringing the old institution of the Uganda Human Rights Commission into disrespect and expose it to ridicule?

Madam Speaker, our next institutional call was to the honourable Chief Justice of Uganda on Friday, 9 February 2007. Although the justices in their wisdom may term it institutional caution, we again witnessed institutional fear that must concern all Ugandans. Our first attempt to meet the Chief Justice on 5 February 2007 failed, but the following day the acting Chief Registrar, Mr Lawrence Gidudu, informed us that we would be received that Friday. Unfortunately and undoubtedly, out of fear and in near contempt, he threw caution and decorum to the winds and wrote to us as follows: “The honourable Chief Justice has agreed to receive your letter in person provided it is presented to him by you in the company of two other Members in a diplomatic and quiet atmosphere.  For this reason, the honourable Chief Justice shall not meet large numbers of members mobbed by the press in a demonstration mood.” 

Maintaining our objectivity and dignity, we wrote back to him as follows: “Let me also take this opportunity to let you know that we took great exception to the paragraph in your letter that said, ‘For this reason, the honourable Chief Justice shall not meet large numbers of members mobbed by the press in a demonstration mood.’ After the preceding paragraph, this statement was without basis, presumptuous, highly discourteous and almost disrespectful of us as Members of Parliament; for we never requested that the press be present at the meeting with the Chief Justice. We are not responsible for the conduct of the press, but recognise their rights under our laws to report events. Management of the press in the precincts of courts is not our responsibility. 

As much as we are coming to demonstrate our support for the dignity and authority of our courts of judicature, we equally expect officers of the courts, regardless of their political inclinations, to treat all Members of Parliament with some respect and with the honour bestowed upon them by our laws.”

Following this response, the acting chief registrar on early Friday, telephoned me to let us know that the parliamentary reporters could accompany us.  Clearly our judicial officers were initially scared as to how the powers that be would react if they received us openly and with the dignity that we deserve.  

Honourable members, the other matter that otherwise would have been positive development in this human rights and law and justice saga is the application for amnesty by some of the PRA suspects. We have indisputable information that the President’s assertion that the PRA suspects will never come out unless they ask for amnesty, clearly intended to undermine their faith in the court processes. That was later absurdly denied and then also asserted by the Minister of Security, hon. Amama Mbabazi. He is now being used as the stick to force the suspects to ask for amnesty. Most unfortunately, some legal officers of the Amnesty Commission and prisons officers are reportedly involved in this exercise contrary to the law. Surely, what kind of people are we who take pleasure in driving suspects to obtain amnesty under duress? Where is our sense of humanity, forgiveness and reconciliation upon which the Amnesty Act was premised? 

To make matters worse, these prisoners are even being enticed with the suggestion that they write proposals for Government to fund their resettlement upon their release. (Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure under Rule 22 (3).  Under this rule, the statement should not be more than 15 minutes. I realise the Leader of the Opposition has taken close to more than 30 minutes. Two, the statement must be non-controversial. I have been detecting a lot of controversial statements within this statement. Madam Speaker, we need your guidance so that the statement conforms to Rule 22. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately this morning we had a very long commission meeting so neither the Speaker nor I had the opportunity to look at this statement. However, as the Leader of Opposition was submitting, I saw areas which, if I had had the time, I would have asked him to expunge, for instance, that relating to the commissioner of the Human Rights Commission. She cannot come here; matters relating to the Chief Justice, I am really disappointed that they have been brought here because he cannot come to testify here.

I think, please, you made this statement under Rule 41 (1), the statement should relate to something you are saying about the functions of the House. But these other things you are doing outside the House I think you should really leave them. Concentrate on things related to the functions of the House.

MR WOPUWA: There are copies for only the other side of the House. We do not have any copies this side. This is unfair.

PROF. LATIGO: The copies are being made. Some Members have. (Laughter)

Thank you, madam Speaker. It was not in any way my intention to challenge those who cannot be in the House to defend themselves. But we thought that it would be important to put on record our experiences outside the House. I will proceed and try to finish. It is not long any more. 

It is often said that every dark cloud has a silver lining. Indeed, positive things also have emerged out of the walk out. During our time outside the House, we held various rallies throughout Kampala where the public participated actively and peacefully, although with very heavy hearts. True to the commitment made by both the Inspector General of Police and the Minister of Internal Affairs, no teargas-wielding policemen were deployed against us. 

Those peaceful rallies were the most glaring evidence that the Opposition mean well for this country and that without recourse to strong-arm tactics, we can still do our things and enjoy being Ugandans together. We hope and pray that in spite of the President’s pronouncements on teargas, this new trend will continue. 

Madam Speaker, we have also been reliably informed that on the day of our visit to Luzira prisons, prisoners assembled in the yard awaiting our arrival. When they were told that we were no longer coming, a near riot situation developed. While this was disappointing and painful, it was most gratifying that the prisoners, for whom we walked out of Parliament, appreciated our action. More importantly, they still recognised their rights to meet us even when they are in prisons. Surely, must we not all stand up for our rights, no matter the circumstances? For our brothers and sisters in the prisons, we promise to make up for the lost opportunity and the Good Lord protect you all! 

As I end my statement, allow me to briefly respond to the question as to whether our walk out had an impact on the Executive and to address those who, following the President’s assertion on the PRA suspects and use of teargas, asserted blindly that, “The Opposition will never intimidate or blackmail our Government.” As a matter of fact, given the all-powerful and all-knowing attitude of some leaders in the NRM Government, we never considered for a moment that we would objectively influence their decisions. On the contrary, we would have been most pleasantly surprised if during our walk out Government invited us to discuss our concerns. We would even have been much more surprised if the President and his ministers did not respond defiantly they way they did.
 
We draw our convictions from the events since the advent of the NRM Government in 1986 - (Interruption)

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition made a statement that implied that during the time they chose to be away, there was support from this side encouraging them in their act. Right now he is saying that he did not expect this side of the House to appreciate why they walked out. Is that not a contradiction we are seeing from the Leader of the Opposition and can he stop playing double standards because the message is not clear. Is it in order, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you explain the context in which you are talking? (Laughter)

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I can assure the honourable minister that I never had him in my mind when I mentioned the attitude of some of the leaders.

On 29 January 1986, before the steps of this very Parliament, Yoweri Museveni, upon being sworn-in as the President of Uganda, solemnly stated: “This is not a mere change of guards. This is a fundamental change. Never again shall Ugandans…” and repeated many things. With that pronouncement, Ugandans received the NRM regime with such emotion, hope and love and they put all their trust in it. Yoweri Museveni became a cult hero; loved, adored, and imitated by many. Hope for democracy and freedom filled the air.

As we look back now, can someone tell Ugandans what happened since? What went wrong and where that hope and love went? Is the incarceration of individuals, torture, tear-gassing of opponents and even killings by state agents the freedom and the “never again” that was promised to Ugandans in 1986?

Will intimidation, violence, police brutality, abuse of due processes and all that we are talking against bring back the love and trust that we were so freely given in 1986?  Will ill-gotten wealth, oil money or even fear, buy long-term support and security for those now despised and hated by their victims? When will it be time to stop, reflect, and say no, not again?  

For us, we are but just like the Roman soothsayer who told Julius Caesar, the great emperor, that: “Beware the ides of March.” We are also merely following the great Ugandan actor and playwright from the President’s own district, Mr Mwiine, who in his one-man prophetic play entitled “Mwerinde Biro” warned our dear leaders to “Beware of time!”  Yes -(Interruption)

PROF. SEMAKULA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition.  Madam Speaker, is the honourable member of the Opposition in order to be quoting Shakespeare and threatening the head of state?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, Leader of the Opposition, Rule 41 says you should not introduce controversial matters because someone will ask what you are anticipating. Can you please, just conclude and we end this matter.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I mean no harm to anybody.  

Yes! We may, like Field Marshal Mobutu of Zaire, enjoy maximum protection and treat state resources as if it were our own. We may, like Jean Bedel Bokasa of Central Africa, crown ourselves emperors; we may, like Idi Amin falsely believing in our powers and immortality, declare ourselves life presidents. We may, even like Saddam Hussein build formidable armies, “win” rigged elections and build monuments to glorify our deeds. But nay, history and time will surely march on. If we continue in false-belief and we do not pull back, we will certainly end up in the same dung-heap of history where we consigned others in 1986.  

Having done what we did and said what we said, our job is done - upendi hau usipendi - Take or leave it. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I indicated that this statement is made under Rule 41. It does not attract debate.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity on behalf of Government to thank the Opposition who upon reflection have reconsidered their position and chose to return where they belong.  

Madam Speaker, like the Leader of the Opposition did state in his paper, the walkout was indeed a surprise to Government and to the country. I do not think it is a good parliamentary practice for partners in parliamentary democracy, representing a distinguished opposition, to surprise Government and the country. The walkout, therefore, in our view was not only unfortunate but also unwarranted and for lack of better words, a dishonourable act. 

I have just received the statement of the Leader of the Opposition. So, I have not perused it. It raises a number of issues, and most of them offend the rules. But Government will at an appropriate time sooner than later make a comprehensive response to the issues that have been raised in this paper.

I would like from the outset to say that some of the statements made in this statement are clearly very unfortunate. Allegations of killings by the state agents without elaboration; comparing this Government to Field Marshal Mobutu, Idi Amin and Saddam are statements I least expected from the distinguished Leader of the Opposition. These statements are not only inaccurate but also wrong. The Leader of the Opposition knows that because he has been here long enough to know that this Government restored democracy, abolished extra judicial killings, which are alleged at page 9 of the report –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Adolf Mwesige. You have just told this House that this Government brought the rule of law and removed extra-judicial killings, but 39 people were roasted in a wagon in Mukura, what was that? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.

MR MWESIGE: The Mukura incident can be explained -(Interjections)- and Government has explained it before, and we are not afraid of explaining it. As I said, Madam Speaker, we are going to prepare a comprehensive response to this statement. (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure, hon. Sebaggala.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has just informed us that at an appropriate time, the government will come out with an official response to this statement. Is it procedurally right for the minister to continue giving us his own official statement when we are waiting for the official Government statement? (Applause)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is giving the preamble, and then the other one will come. (Laughter)
 
MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for defending my role as Leader of Government Business. (Applause) Let me conclude by saying that the practice of walkouts – and I would like my brothers and sisters in the Opposition to reflect more objectively about it - is really not an honourable act.

I would like to thank them for having re-thought and reconsidered the decision they took and came back to the House. I wish them a good stay. There is no issue that cannot be discussed on the Floor of this House. Therefore, I would urge them to stay and stay forever so that we engage in a more constructive and civil manner like all parliaments do. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are not going to debate this matter now. You are coming with a statement in response to all the issues. I think let us wait for the main debate when it comes.

MRS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, mine is a concern where somebody makes a statement on the Floor of the House, brings in a woman commissioner who cannot come here to defend herself. So, as a woman Member of Parliament, I want to say, this one should be expunged from the Hansard because these members they have talked about cannot come here to defend themselves. Let us be fair to each other, the way they want everybody to be fair to them.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I also indicated in giving my guidance that if I had read the statement in advance, I would have expunged that part and the matters dealing with the Chief Justice. 

Hon. Latigo, Leader of the Opposition, we do not have the Chief Justice’s letters here; we shall never have a chance to discuss them and we do not know when this commissioner will come here. 

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, as I said earlier, the references to these elements were merely to illustrate –(Interjections)- yes. Please, let me make my statement and finish. I made it even clear in the statement that we found fears and potential scion in these institutions. That is how I perceived it. If I perceived it wrongly, it can be a mistake. But given your request and for the facts that I had meant no ill intention, I am prepared to go and review what is in the statement -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it is already in the Hansard.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Because now if, Madam Speaker, you say withdraw, what specific thing do I withdraw? Can an ordinary Member help us with any portion of that statement that should be withdrawn and I will gladly withdraw it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of the Opposition, I have indicated that the matters concerning the unnamed woman commissioner and the Chief Justice should be deleted from the Hansard. I am really appealing to you.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Actually there is no matter that concerns the Chief Justice other than the fact that we met him. If you look at the statement again, you will see that there is no matter that makes specific reference to the Chief Justice. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Latigo. You made a general statement that you saw fear and intimidation and, therefore, those letters followed. That is what you are saying, Mr Ogenga.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business has undertaken to give a response to this statement. I seek your guidance because Members seem to express a wish to debate this statement -[Hon. Members: “No”]- hold on -(Laughter) Madam Speaker, now that the Members desire to debate the statement, I am seeking your guidance that when the Leader of Government Business -whom I congratulate very much -brings a response - by the way I am very happy to see that our own generation is now in charge. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order Members!

MR BANYENZAKI: So, Madam Speaker, would it not be prudent that we discuss this statement and those statements, which Members are wishing to be expunged when the Leader of Government Business comes with a statement? Then we expunge those statements that are not desirous to be in the Hansard.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the very fact that you want people to keep referring to those issues is not right. Are you going to tell the Chief Justice to come here to a committee and explain how he wrote the letters? Hon. Ogenga, I am appealing to you. I have only mentioned two areas: the Chief Justice of this country and the unnamed woman commissioner, please.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, there is a precedent in this House. If something is controversial and you would like it to be expunged, I have always heard it done here, the Member is asked to substantiate or withdraw. Since this is a statement from all of us in the Opposition, I would be happy if Prof. Latigo, the Leader of the Opposition, is given the opportunity to substantiate what he is saying before getting recourse from all of us and expunging it. We are being put into a very tight corner and being forced to recall a statement when it could just be a grammatical error that needs to be corrected. Madam Speaker, that is my plea.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we have Rules of Procedure. Can the minister read the Rules of Procedure on that particular issue?

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Rules of Procedure are very clear specifically Rule 53(2) in respect to contents of speeches: “It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any member or to make personal allusions”. Specifically sub-rule (5) states that: “The conduct of the Speaker, Members, the Chief Justice and judges of the courts of judicature shall not be raised except upon a substantive motion and in any amendment, question to a member or remarks….” Therefore, the mere fact that the statement of the Leader of the Opposition raised issues in respect of those persons means that the speech did not conform with the Rules of Procedure and therefore he should withdraw it. 

MS ALASO: Point of information, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Information on what? On the rules?

MS ALASO: Yes, Madam Speaker. I would like to re-read the paragraph. “Our first attempt to meet the honourable Chief Justice on 5th February 2007 failed but the following day, the Acting Chief Registrar, Mr Lawrence Gidudu, informed us that we would be received that Friday. Unfortunately and undoubtedly, out of fear and in mere contempt he threw caution and decorum to the wind.” The reference here is not about the Chief Justice but about the acting chief registrar who wrote the letter –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, I do not know why you are pursuing this matter. You know that the statement, which you have made, indicates that the judiciary including its head, the Chief Justice, was afraid and intimidated hence that letter. Hon. Ogenga, please withdraw.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the matter at hand has become very contentious both on the side of Government and the Opposition. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that you allow us caucus and consult and be back within five minutes. I beg to move. (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the Leader of the Opposition very attentively and his statement is loaded with a number of things. To me, there is a lot of false imagination, fantasy and the implication of people who are not in the House in this report. I would like to appeal to this House that this report, which is very loaded and has far-reaching implications, be withdrawn from the Floor of the House. (Applause)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I rise on two points: The Leader of Government Business has just made a statement that at an appropriate time Government will respond to this statement. This statement is made under Rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure. Under that rule, there is no way a statement made today will be responded to another time. There is provision for a debate for a limited time of 15 minutes. I quote: “Any statement made by a Member shall be presented on Thursday and may be commented upon…” –(Laughter)- wait, can I finish? I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker. May I continue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow hon. Okello-Okello to speak. 
 
MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am quoting the rules. I start again, Madam Speaker.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we know the rules.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: “Any statement made by a Member shall be presented on Thursday and may be commented upon by other Members for a limited duration of time not exceeding fifteen minutes….” Madam Speaker, if we are to follow this rule, we have already flouted it –(Laughter)- because the Leader of Government Business alone took 17 minutes. This one was on request. The statement was made today because today is a special day. (Interjections). Madam, can I finish, please?

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to start by registering and appreciating the concerns of members of Parliament. I would also like to let the whole country appreciate that we in no way want to undermine the institutions that we have been fighting for. If in the process of making the statements that we made and in circumstances which are difficult and painful; and recognising that we must give those that we refer to opportunity to respond; and knowing that the two persons, one not referred to by name and the other one referred to by name, with the letters that I should ordinarily have tabled for the record of Parliament not here -(Interjections)- I have consulted my colleagues, please, please- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Don’t intimidate the Leader of the Opposition. Order, members!

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: And the two issues, one on the commissioner_ (Interruption)

MR KALIBA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, but when the Leader of the Opposition said that he has consulted his colleagues we heard so many voices asking, “who?” Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to tell lies to this House? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I sit near the Leader of the Opposition and I saw him consulting this area.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Madam Speaker, my good friend from Fort Portal municipality knows that the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t tell lies. He knows and actually I did consult. More importantly, I am the Leader of the Opposition and sometimes I can take the prerogative to act on behalf of the Opposition. However, in this particular instance I consulted. 

Therefore, I would like to take your advice that the content of my statement should not relate to the Chief Justice because it didn’t. It relates to the Acting Chief Register whom I quoted in two letters, one which he wrote to me and the one on the Commissioner for Human Rights whose name I did not also mention be withdrawn from the statement -(Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Madam Speaker, I was on the floor. Today is a Tuesday and not a Thursday and we know this. This is a special Tuesday for us because it is a historic day in the history of this Parliament –(Interruption)- Yes, can I finish, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should ask for a time frame from the Leader of Government Business and agree on which day to come back to debate this matter because Government has a right to reply. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, having noted the level of controversy that this report has generated -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, your word is always final. You have ruled that the Leader of Government will bring a statement here at a specific time, which you will give to him. Is it in order again for hon. Okot Ogong to bring a motion when you have ruled on this matter? Is he in Order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, give us a time frame because, first of all, the members on this side don’t even have the statement. I don’t know how we are going to debate when half the House has and half does not have. Anyway let us get the government response and then we shall give you time to debate.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition for expunging the parts of the statement that offend our Rules. I undertake to respond to this statement on Tuesday next week. Thank you.

3.55
MR JULIUS BALYEJJUSA (NRM, PWD, Eastern Region): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise three issues of concern in this Parliament. While touring my constituency I found out that some of the pupils who sat PLE last year especially the blind have not yet got their results released by UNEB yet the term for senior one started yesterday. They study under the same syllabus and take the same exams. May I know from the Minister of Education when these results are going to be released; and how these students will be catered for since they have been delayed?

Secondly, when you look at the USE programme, Government has come up with an inclusive system of education but many of the schools that were selected to undertake USE have not been facilitated with special needs education units and therefore many of these students may not be able to benefit from USE programmes. May I know the government’s contingency plans for such?

Thirdly, under UPET, vocational training institutes are also supposed to benefit but to my surprise one of the vocational training institutes for persons with disabilities, that is RAZAR, has been sold to an investor called NACOM Investments Ltd. May I know from Government what contingent plan they have to integrate the would be beneficiaries from this vocational training institute from UPET programme? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I wanted to seek information from the honourable member who has just been on the floor. He is a member of the ruling party and the ruling party has high priorities as far as investors are concerned. So I don’t know what the problem is. It is your party making good decisions and you are among the majority. What is your problem? (Laughter)

3.58
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national concern -(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD.) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, for quite some time we are getting ridiculed and I think -(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I require your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected. Honourable members, stop heckling. Let him speak.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I require your protection.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are protected.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, we in the ruling party- when I say we, I refer to the NRM. Somebody raised a query of concern and before he could be answered, somebody interjected that the ruling party is pre-occupied with investors. I was -(Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, our Rules are very clear on how we should address members; it is hon. Otto who gave the information here. Is hon. Rwamirama in order to say, “somebody,” when he knows that it is hon. Odonga Otto of Aruu County? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I was with the Parliamentary Press Association and they expressed concerned; they still do not know the members and their names. For purposes of broadcasting on radio, they would like to hear your names often when you are speaking.

RTD MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  When a Member asks a question and somebody deliberately –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is hon. Otto.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I did mention hon. Otto, but it goes beyond that because it is a behaviour that is catching up with this House, and I think we hold public offices in trust, the taxpayers are seeing us squandering time in a wasteful manner – it is not fair. 

So, the clarification I wanted to seek from you is, is it procedurally acceptable for people to keep on wasting time before the relevant people respond to questions that are directed to them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that that was just bantering, but we expect the response from the Minister of Education on all those issues.  

MR MUGAMBE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to state an issue of national concern. This has to do with the mysterious cassava disease that has struck the gardens in Nakifuma County. 

This banana disease makes the cassava plant looking normal; the leaves are okay, the trees are okay, whereas the tubers underground are decayed. This is rampant in two sub-counties, mainly Kasawo and Namuganga sub-counties. 

This pauses a food insecurity situation.  You may recall, honourable members, that the first incidence of Banana Wilt was in Nakifuma County and spread to the whole country.

This is a serious situation because when you look at the cassava plantations, you cannot be sure of the type of cassava, and this is happening at a time when we do not have a biotechnology and bio-safety policy. So, we may not know the source of these plants.

Recently, again in the county of Nakifuma, we had a hailstorm where plants were destroyed and the entire parish of Kiwafu is depending on food donations from the district, of posh and beans. 

So, I would like to call upon Government to come to our rescue, find out what this disease is and also speed up the process of presenting the bio-technology and bio-safety policy.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Agriculture has heard his problem and it will be taken up.  Now, honourable members, I only had three requests.

4.05
MR DEUS BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have an issue concerning our committee work. In the last Parliament, we had days set aside for specific committees. Tuesdays and Wednesdays were for sessional committees and Thursday was for standing committees. 

But since we started this Eighth Parliament that has not been streamlined yet, in which case you find that a standing committee is sitting at the same time with a sessional committee and yet we share members, and this is jeopardising some of our committee work.  

Madam Speaker, the issue raised by my honourable colleague, about the cassava disease, I can respond to it in my capacity as the Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The disease is called, Brown Streak. It is a virus disease. When it attacks the cassava, the tubers get rotten. So, as soon as it attacks, you cannot tell unless you have harvested the roots.  

By the time you see the symptoms on the leaves, the tubers are already rotten. So, the answer to that would be to plant resistant varieties and clean planting materials. Now, of course, that is thrown in the court of the ministry. We saw this during the budget speech and we made a recommendation. We know that this disease exists in the districts of Wakiso, Mukono, where he comes from and other districts.  But something needs to be done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.08
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): The issue my honourable colleague has raised, regarding committee work, this matter could be referred to Business Committee or the Committee on Rules; it may require reviewing our Rules. Because as a chairman of one of the standing committee, we have backlog for seven years and we must finish this backlog. We are not going to be given one day or two days in a week. It is time members of Parliament decided whether they want to belong to a standing committee or a sessional committee and we start work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anyway, honourable members that matter shall be handled at our level.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The people of Tororo County have been appealing to the government for the last many years that they need a district – that has up to this day not been handled. We have several issues in police regarding the life of people who are threatened. I would like to know from Government when this matter will be resolved.

Secondly, the people of Tororo County are very pleased with Government, that at last, after many years of requesting for an inland port Government has complied under the agreement of East African Community in Tororo. But the people are so saddened that they will almost benefit nothing from this inland port, because the procedure of awarding the tender violated the PPDA. The procedure of acquiring land was violent and the land was grabbed. 

The Government has gone ahead to award a consensual to this company called Great Lake a worth of $200. And I have been told that the major shareholder of this company is a minister who has never appeared in this Parliament, Gen. Salim Saleh. 

So the people are wondering, this Government establishes a law that is Public Procurement and Disposal of Asset – it doesn’t follow the procedure, the clearing firms are complaining –(Interruption)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ekanya knows very well that that company that is establishing an inland company is not a company owned by Government. Hon. Ekanya knows very well that hon. Salim Saleh, whom he is alluding to is not a shareholder and he is not in any way connected to this company. But he can substantiate if he insists. 

Hon. Ekanya knows very well that the land that was acquired by that company – he knows very well because he was attending those meetings - was never grabbed whatsoever. Is it in order, therefore, that hon. Ekanya, a hon. member of Tororo County, who is requesting for a district anyway, but is still being processed, is he in order to tell lies to mislead this house by making statements that he can not substantiate, that are maligning people’s names?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a bit difficult for me because I don’t know about this company. So, I don’t know who attended this meeting – but can you substantiate the things you are saying?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am very careful with my words, I said that I have been told -(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No that is not substantiation.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I request members to give me the opportunity, I have evidence. The minister who has put in on order is one of the ministers who chaired a meeting to force the landowner at gunpoint to surrender this land. I have a document; she chaired a meeting and forced the owner of the land to sign away his land under duress. The matter – we even have documents, I am ready to table it here and to take it to the disciplinary committee.

 MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. I think it is not fair for hon. Ekanya to stand on the floor and continue telling lies to this House, and on that, I would request your good chair to refer this case to the Disciplinary Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should leave that for our office to handle – we will handle it (Interruption)- honourable members, I know you have just come back and you want to speak, but could you lower your voices, the voices are a bit too much.

MR EKANYA: Lastly, Madam Speaker, the people of Tororo County are leaving in a state of fear. We approved a loan here to carry out mineral survey. But the survey is being carried out without adequate information to the population. 

The plans which has been doing that survey has been passing at very low altitude, and the people are being told that the whole sub-county must be relocated because we are very rich, we have phosphates and other minerals, and now the people are fearing to put up houses, to engage in agriculture, to plant and even to burry, because they say that if they burry, tomorrow they are going to be forced to pull out that body.

I have tried all attempts to seek the intervention of the minister of minerals, but the minister has kept on promising. The people are leaving in a state of fear; I said in part of Lobongi and my minister is here, he has heard the same complaint; they are threatening to harm any foreign investor that they will see in that place, which is not good because we need investors.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the phosphates?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: No, on his remarks, Madam speaker, hon. Ekanya is a long serving MP and is known to be vocal. Since he is aware of the activities of the plan as a local leader, why has he not taken it to himself to sensitise the people instead of leaving them to die of fear and intimidation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are bringing so many issues yet you did not consult me. Hon. Ekanya, you didn’t tell me that you wanted to raise this. I had only three requests from hon. Balyejusa, hon. Mugambe and hon. Fungaroo. These are the only requests that I have, but now you are bringing in this – you did not come -(Laughter)- okay, let us hear from the minister, then we go back to the Order Paper.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY (Mr Simon D’ujanga): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like specifically to respond to the issue of aerial survey. You recall that in the seventh Parliament, some money was approved in this house in order for the country to be able to carry out survey in the whole country – and this is an aerial survey that uses modern technology to detect, which minerals are in the ground. This programme begun with Western Uganda and will be done all over the country.

These plans fly at 80 meters above the ground in order for the equipments to detect the minerals. My ministry has put radio announcements to –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue which hon. Ekanya has raised seems to be so pertinent that the minister had to rush and give a ministerial statement. Would it not be procedurally right, since this issue is a national concern and we invested a lot of money in form of a loan, for the minister to come with a statement with information for this House, so that we all know what is going on? 

In my constituency, there are some prospects of diamond, gold and even oil. So, would it not be prudent that the minister comes with a statement, which is well researched, so that it benefits all the members of the House, and also helps him inform this House on how that programme is going on.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the picture for the whole country so as to report, or you will report on a few areas?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I am rising to explain this because the honourable member for Tororo County said that the people there are scared. These planes are harmless. They are just taking photographs of what is under the ground. My ministry has put radio announcements on all the local radio stations alerting the population about this plan. They only started in Tororo and Busitema area, but they will extend the activities to everywhere in this country.  

Madam Speaker, we will be delighted to come with a statement but I thought I should say this to allay the fears of the people of Tororo County. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to the Order Paper -(Interjections)

MR KAKOOZA: We are going astray, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of debate are very clear. Rule 57 says: “A Member desiring to speak shall rise and address the Chair and shall only speak after catching the Speaker’s eye.” Is the honourable member, my chairperson from the opposition, hon. Odit, in order to point at a Member in the government? Is he in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are supposed to address each other with decorum. Do not threaten anybody on this side or even on other side, but you can ask your question.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, the minister is taking this matter very lightly. The fear is not only in Tororo. Throughout last week I was in my home district of Lira and all radio stations were announcing the exercise, which is going to be undertaken by the two planes. He might be focusing his interest only on the minerals but there are other implications once an area is gazetted because it has minerals. The land matter comes in. The people have to leave the area. 

Whereas he says the exercise starts from Tororo, we are already being alerted. Those two regions own what we call a customary land tenure system. The minister should be able to present a very good case otherwise people are scared. They are scared not because the plane would be flying low but because the pilots may say that this area has minerals, and therefore, the citizens should leave the area. 

These are issues that are bringing these fears. So, honourable minister, please, when you are talking about the planes, package a message that can convince the citizens especially for some of us who hold this customary land tenure system. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I hope the minister knows that the population is protected by the Constitution on that issue. They are entitled to royalties so if they leave how will they claim them. Anyway, you will address us in your statement and you will deal with the issue of the land.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, as I said earlier on, we can bring a statement to this Floor but this exercise is merely for mapping out what is underground. This programme was approved by the Seventh Parliament where my honourable colleague was. He contributed to this debate, if we can check the Hansard. However, we would be delighted to bring a formal statement on this matter.  

4.24
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I arise on an issue of national importance. The people of Obongi County, Moyo, Arua, Yumbe, Koboko, Nebbi, the entire West Nile Region, are living in fear and are mourning because by 6.00 p.m. yesterday in the evening, they had lost 91 people to meningitis. About 2,582 people got affected with the disease. 

This being an epidemic, I am afraid it knows no borders. Whereas I do not wish it to come here or go to your constituencies, I would like to ask the Minister of Health and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness the following questions: 

i) 	What action has so far been taken by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to respond to that disaster? 

ii) 	What action has been taken to-date by the Ministry of Health to help the people of West Nile survive from this disease? 

iii) 	Does the government of the Republic of Uganda substitute the work of the Ministry of Health with the work of the World Health Organisation and other NGOs that are working in the health sector?  

I asked the last question, Madam Speaker, with one thing in mind; any acknowledgement of the work so far done to try to rescue the people of the West-Nile Region from this disease goes to the World Health Organisation and MSF. I have been with them. I came from West-Nile last Saturday. There hands are also tied. They ask questions like, “What is the role of the ministry? The World Health Organisation has ordered for vaccines but the vaccines have not arrived. Now, assuming the World Health Organisation was not there, do we as a country lose the ability to help our people from this kind of disease? I need your help, honourable members. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am aware that hon. Mallinga is due to issue a statement, but since Dr Otaala is here maybe you can say something about the vaccines.

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE, PRIMARY HEALTH CARE (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague, hon. Fungaroo, for raising these questions. 

I would like to assure hon. Fungaroo and all the people of West Nile that the Ministry of Health is in control of the meningitis situation in West Nile Region and the Karamoja Region. Just last week my hon. Minister of Health, the hon. Stephen Mallinga, was here and he made a statement in this Parliament. Today as I talk, he is in the West Nile Region overseeing the various implementation activities that we are carrying out to combat the epidemic. 

 The outbreak of meningitis in West Nile Region and Karamoja Region was expected, and we put in place a district emergency preparedness team to oversee and control this epidemic. As I talk now -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Honourable minister, I am glad that you are a medical person; maybe you would also want to tell us whether the disease does not spread across borders. Buses are travelling to West Nile and back everyday, the honourable Minister of Health was in West Nile and he also comes to this Parliament regularly –(Laughter)– hon. Fungaroo is here. I do not know if you can assure us scientifically, if we are safe in this particular august House. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister for accepting to give me some clarification on a few of the issues that I would like to raise. 

Mr minister, you know very well that the epidemic has been in West Nile for the last month. This is a disease that spreads so rampantly, especially during dry season. For us in Northern Uganda this is our dry season and this disease has really spread very fast. You are now telling us that things are under control yet time and again we are receiving news about deaths of our dear ones. 

In desperation, you know very well that the Police last week was investigating Zam Zam clinic, which was administering the vaccine to people at a cost of Ugshs.28,000 per person. This morning I went with my colleague, hon. John Arumadri, desperately in search of this vaccine. We went to KCC and there was nothing. They referred us to Bombo Road, there was noting. We went to Case Clinic and there they told us the vaccine to be administered on every person is worth Ugshs. 60,000 per person. Surely, how do you expect my poor people in West Nile to come to their rescue if Government is dragging its feet on this matter? 

You are telling us that the honourable Minister of Health is right now in West Nile. There is a standing regulation in this Parliament, which was here even before I came to Parliament, that when a minister is touring a particular constituency the area members of Parliament must be notified. None of us from West Nile has been made aware of the tour of the Minister in that regard. Was it because we, members of Parliament from West Nile, cannot assist you in this mobilisation? We need to put our heads together. Please, kindly clarify as to how soon the trucks of vaccines can be on the ground.

COL (RTD.) BUTIME: I want to inform the honourable member who has been on the Floor that the Minister is not touring. He has gone to West Nile as an emergency, so he is not touring at all. He is there as a medical doctor and a minister to manage the meningitis problem, but he is not a tourist. Thank you.

MR OLEGA: I want to inform the minister that there was a step taken by members of the opposition to ferry some of these drugs to West Nile. I do not know how safe it is, because I am told handling these drugs is a bit critical and requires somebody who is well trained.

Two, I am also aware that the Minister of Health is in West Nile because I consulted him over the issue. He has gone there because of that. So, my colleague, the member of the opposition, should be informed that the minister is there because we called him and he is there to assist the people of West Nile. I thank you very much.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, this Parliament knows very well that for the past one month the honourable members of the opposition had been out of this Parliament and they did not leave the honourable ministers with their addresses -(Laughter)- So, when the hon. Wadri -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for the last six years. There are those of you who have been in this Parliament for the last 20 years, others 15 and others 10. Some have been in this Parliament for the last seven months. In all my six years’ experience in this Parliament, whether you are attending plenary or not, your pigeonhole remains open and any correspondence that is addressed to you will always reach you. Is my colleague therefore trying to imply that while we were absent from this plenary our pigeonholes were also locked, more so when we were even attending parliamentary business in our committees? Can he kindly clarify on that issue so that we move forward?

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, we are actually talking about an emergency and in order for us to address the emergency, we needed to act urgently. I do not think it was really very pertinent that we begin looking in the streets and elsewhere to inform the honourable members who are concerned.

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, when these issues are raised they are entitled “Matters of National Importance”. It continues to appear to me that the Minister treats this matter as a secondary school debate, and it is really hurting. I appeal that we do not treat it like that. Is it in order for a minister to stand up and start saying we were on the streets?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister does not sit here. I think he operates from somewhere near Wandegeya. So, it is possible that he did not know where you were. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, though the honourable minister has said that we have been out of this House, in the streets, as he calls them, there are screens everywhere in this building where we watch what is going on, and we have been in the committees and there are also radios. The honourable minister, when a similar issue was raised, did promise Ugandans that he will give them only five days - today the fifth day has elapsed - meningitis will be history. Do you still stand by that word, honourable minister?

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I think this time I will be allowed to finish, and that might clarify most of the issues being raised

We started vaccination in the West Nile Region about two weeks ago. For this vaccine to take effect it requires two weeks and it remains effective for the next three years. When I said that within five days we would be having no more meningitis, I was talking as a scientist, knowing very well that we started vaccination two weeks ago. 

Secondly, in addition to vaccination –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am taking this matter so seriously. This is an epidemic and people are dying- (Interjections)- so, I would like those of you who are trying to make me keep quiet to bear with me because I know people are dying and it is a serious matter. 

Having said that, I heard the hon. Minister of State for Health say that the Ministry of Health knew that there was bound to be an outbreak of meningitis. Those were his opening remarks. Leave alone what transpired in the middle there, the debate is as to whether people who are mandated to lead their people should be put in the know; forget about that which I think was also unfortunate. But that he said that the ministry was aware that there was to be an out break of meningitis attack. I thought that was the time for the ministry to have moved and started the vaccination exercise. This is what I want to understand; why did the ministry wait given that information, given that knowledge, given that surveillance? Why did they wait and start vaccination the other day? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members –(Interjection) Okay, you were not here when the matter came up.

THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Francis Epetait): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact, this is such a serious matter. The Committee on National Economy and also Members of Social Services Committee moved to West Nile at the pick of the epidemic, and we were really taken aback at what we saw. 

In Koboko District, for example, there is only one medical officer, he is the medical superintendent of Koboko Hospital; he is also the District Director of Health Services; he was greatly overwhelmed. The staff is just so thin on the ground and the minister is telling us here that they formed a committee and they are on top of the situation. Yet on the ground, by the time we went, it was over one month that the district authorities had communicated to the Ministry of Health and they had never received any response, only to start doing it two weeks ago. 

Let us try to handle matters of life very seriously and not just downplay them and say that yes, we were aware the outbreak would be there. Then why did you not take action? The ministry should even improve on the issue of the human resources -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: I just want to make an observation to inform my colleague that the way the Ministry of Health handles issues in this country is very bad. Last year, my father died because we could not get tetanus serum in this country. I drove to Kenya at night; we went to Mbale Regional Hospital; we went to Tororo, and we could not get tetanus serum. My father, at 65 died because the Ministry of Health does not care about the people in this country -(Applause)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I want to concur with hon. Wopuwa; when the Committee on Commissions was meeting the National Medical Stores together with the Ministry of Health, we came to know that there is enough stock of homer pack, and we gave them opportunity to say so if it needed supplementary budget for them to have this distributed to the villages, to the health centres, and we bring it to this House. To date, nothing has come. 

I was shocked when an honourable minister told me that “We have enough homer pack in office; we cannot distribute; can you come with your car and we give you some?” Is that the way we are going to distribute drugs in this country? Why don’t you distribute these drugs in time in order to save lives? 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was in Gulu and I was told that the death toll was 45 –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then what?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: That the people who had died in West Nile were 45. Today, the number has gone to 91 and yet here is a Government Minister telling us that the situation is under control. How, when the number keeps on going up? How controlled is the situation? 

Two, Madam Speaker, the Minister has just said that vaccination started two weeks ago. Can the honourable minister tell this House how many people have been vaccinated in the two weeks? And how long will it take to vaccinate all the people of West Nile? 

Lastly, the neighbouring districts, some of us are concerned that there is a lot of population movement. Are we going to wait until it has struck the neighbouring districts, or vaccination should now take place even in the neighbouring districts? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SANTOS PIRO: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of State for Primary Health Care has told lies to this august House. I come from Adjumani District and West Nile as such. The only information we got from Adjumani and West Nile is that the vaccination materials taken there were for health workers who were handling the affected patients. But nobody is being vaccinated from the time meningitis broke in West Nile region. 

So, the information the Minister of Health for Primary Health Care has been telling us here is wrong and it is not correct. I want the members to take note of this. Up to now, people are ringing us leaders who come from West Nile everyday about the death toll of people affected by meningitis in our region. Can the honourable Minister of Primary Health Care withdraw his statement for telling lies to this august House? (Laughter)- Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the information of the House, we do not use the word lies in Parliament. You might say he was inaccurate, but not that he told a lie- (Laughter)

DR OTAALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Honourable members, if you give me time, I should be able to explain thoroughly most of the issues you have raised. But also I would like to promise to come here to this House with a comprehensive statement on how we are managing the meningitis outbreak.

But suffice it for now for me to say that according to the epidemiology of meningitis or the history of meningitis, it is not possible for us having anticipated the outbreak to begin immunising people. First of all, there are very many strains of this meningitis outbreak.  So you must, first of all, carry out investigations –(Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, we have been educated by a Member in this House and it is quite correct that the honourable Minister gave us information which was discovered to be inaccurate.  Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister to withdraw that part where he said the situation is under control, before he proceeds?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, that is the statement of one Member against the person in charge of the sector.  Allow him to explain then we shall know who is right.

MR KAKOOZA: But, Madam Speaker, when we are here as members of Parliament - I have heard from even our President that members of Parliament are development agents and partners in Government programmes. However, since this Parliament started, ministers have got a habit of going to constituencies without informing the area members of Parliament and that is why you see all these problems happening.  

There is a Standing Order from the Leader of Government Business that whenever ministers go to a constituency, area members should be informed. I beg your indulgency Madam Speaker, to request the ministers to give a courtesy call to us.  For instance, the statements he is delivering here are inaccurate and members in constituencies will watch it on TVs. we do not have this information.  So, I beg this House to request and give time to the Minister so that he comes with a comprehensive statement so that all of us are aware.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He should explain what he can now. Please, Dr Otala, apparently the members prefer that you make a comprehensive statement.  Is there something burning?

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, there are certain things that I can clarify now, like the question raised by hon. Alice Alaso concerning why we waited having known that there was going to be a meningitis outbreak.  

As I said, there are various strains of the meningitis outbreak and you cannot begin vaccinating without first of all identifying the specific strains against which you want to vaccinate.  Like in Kotido, we had a strain for which there is no vaccine and we managed to put it under control through early case detection and treatment. 

 In West Nile, we discovered the strain that could be vaccinated, that is the A strain and the C strain, and even then before you begin vaccinating, the WHO has certain minimum recommendations that you must fulfill. For example, there must be at least 10 cases out of 100,000 population detected before you can begin vaccinating and we satisfied all that.  That is a WHO recommendation.  

MR BANYENZAKI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the ways these ministers are dodging our concerns, like the concern I raised on NTV and I do not see the Minister of Information here, you tend to give this information haphazardly and you leave a lot of information.  You have been given an opportunity to come with a comprehensive statement tomorrow.  

Madam Speaker, you have guided him and said, “Come with the statement.”  Why does he heed to your guidance and come with the statement tomorrow?  Like I would request the Prime Minister to urgently send for the Minister of Information here who is supposed to explain matters of NTV.  So these statements, which you are ordered to give, are of importance and the ministers should heed to the directive of the Speaker. When the Speaker directs and rules, you should always adhere.

DR OTAALA: Madam Speaker, I will bring the comprehensive statement tomorrow regarding this matter so that we put everything to rest once and for all.  

PETITION 
 
4.52
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. The humble petition of members of the Non-resident Tenant’s Association, these are KCC shops at old taxi park presented on their behalf by hon. Nathan Byanyima states that:

“Although Kampala City Council is our landlord and we are sitting tenants; 

Although a Commission of Inquiry was set up by the Minister of Local Government, under Legal Notice No.17 of 2005 to inquire into the alleged proposed sale of plots of the old taxi park; 

And although the said Commission of Inquiry did complete its work and did submit its findings to the Ministry of Local Government;

And although His Excellency the President did direct that the report of the Commission be debated by the 8th Parliament; 

And although KCC has flagrantly ignored the directives of the President and continues to purport that it has sold the plots of the old taxi park in total disregard of the sitting tenants;

NOW THEREFORE your humble petition has prayed that: 

1. 	Parliament does set up a Select Committee to handle the issues of the alleged sale of the plots of old taxi park.

2. 	Parliament directs KCC to halt and revoke any sale of plots of old taxi park.

3. 	Parliament directs the Minister of Local Government to table the report of the Commission of Inquiry.

4. 	Parliament debates the Commission of Inquiry report and comes out with directions on the matter.  

Madam Speaker, your petitioners as in duty bound will pray for this to take place. I wish to lay on Table the documents relating to this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Byanyima you are supposed to describe the document heading, date. Please read the title.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the documents related to this petition coming from the members of the Non-Resident Tenants Association presented on their behalf by hon. Nathan Byanyima, member of Parliament for Bukanga.  It is dated, 19 February 2007 and signed by ten people even though there are many others. There are ten registered and signed petitioners.

MS SEMPALA: I would like the honourable member for Bukanga County to clarify whether enough consultations were made when he was making this petition. This is because there are other issues that we know are happening in Kampala City Council. Would it not have been proper for us to wait for the report, because we were not consulted and there are other issues that are pertaining to this? So, I see –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Is the honourable member for Kampala in order to – (Interjections) – but, Madam Speaker, is she in order? All Ugandans have a right to petition in whatever form.  So, if this is just a sub-set of what she thinks, is it in order for her to suggest that he should withdraw the petition?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure of what she wanted to add because the petitioner has raised these as their problems.

MS SEMPALA: I just wanted clarification on the manner it was handled.  I am not informing him. I would like to seek some clarification from him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will do that when the committee is sitting. You will go there and make your presentation.  Hon. Byanyima, why in particular do you want a select committee? Can we do it in our ordinary sessional committees or you insist on selecting a select committee?

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I respect the sessional committees we have but by the nature of the work that is involved in respective sessional committees, I feel this matter is very important in the sense that the Minister of Local Government sets up a Commission of Inquiry.  The Commission of Inquiry took a bit of time and Government spent its money because their target was to avoid the illegal sell of plots and buildings that are coming out in haphazardous manner.  

So, I feel that these aggrieved people and many others whereby as honourable member for Kampala said, other issues can come in, but the most important thing is that we would want this matter handled expeditiously to avoid people continuing to put up illegal constructions overnight and especially on Kampala old taxi park.  

Looking at that structures there are 11 plots instead of having architectural and good design plan where we can hand it over to a capable person to put up a good structure. You give it to 11 people each putting up his own structure.  We have had bad planning in Kampala. We cannot afford to have it now at this particular age.  I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I seconded the petition for a select committee as hon. Byanyima has already put it.  You know this area needs some professionalism. If we get the committee they may not be able to have all the combination of the professionalism and that is why we felt we leave this discretion to you to pick people whom you know have the knowledge or the understanding of these matters. 

Also given the nature of our Parliament today, it is both opposition and the ruling party. That also takes care of that such that it does not look like it is a one sided thing.  This is a national issue. This city is for all Ugandans and not for one side. That is why we felt we leave it to your discretion to pick a select committee, which can handle this matter expeditiously.  Thank you.

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to support the petition by hon. Byanyima.  However, considering what the Chairman of Agriculture has just told us this afternoon that he is facing a problem of quorum on his committee because there are so many other committees especially standing committees taking place at the same time, I would rather suggest that we have a committee directly concerned with this to handle this matter specifically at a given time. 

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I do not think lack of quorum should be an excuse to have a select committee and ignore the role of our existing committees.  But more so, this petition is brought under Rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure and Rule 27(5) says, “All petitions shall be laid on the Table without question put and a petition may be ordered to be printed or, if relating to a matter other than the Bill before a committee, may be referred to a relevant committee by the Speaker or on the request of the Member tabling the petition, for consideration and report.”  Rule 6 talks of Select Committees on Bills based on petitions. 

My understanding of sub-rule 5 is that the relevant committee being referred to must be an existing sessional or standing committee. It cannot be an adhoc committee or select committee.  So, in pursuit of Rule 27(5) it is only proper that this petition be referred to one of the existing standing or sessional committees. It cannot be a select committee in my opinion.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I want to re-emphasise that this particular matter is very important because it touches Kampala City Council whereby in our constitutional amendment, Kampala is supposed to be under Central Government.  However, this particular Parliament has not made relevant laws for the Central Government to takeover City Council and that is why we still have those problems.  I feel because of the importance that we attach to this city we live in, we could have a select committee because as he stated in the rules, there is no rule that stops any petition to go to a select committee. It is under your jurisdiction, Madam Speaker. So, it is according to the graveness of the matter that I am praying to you that we have a select committee of competent enough people to handle the matter expeditiously. I pray you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I do not know how competent my personal opinion will be, but if I would read between the lines, first of all, I do not see that as an urgent national issue and we should be careful on legislations governed by people’s interests. It will put you in a very difficult position and if we would want to achieve any results, I would still buy the idea of the Leader of Government Business. Let us allow the existing committee to do its work. Its mandate is original; it cannot be enfranchised and pushed around here and there. 

The issue we are handling is very sensitive and if you do so at such a speed as the honourable member for Kampala has said, there are also other people who are already resisting the spirit in which this petition signed by ten people was brought. It is like those who failed to buy the land are now saying, “We shall go a mile ahead”. So, there are several competing forces. I feel that the parliamentary committee should be allowed to do its routine work. You could only guide them and give them a timeframe. That is my own opinion.

5.07
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is in accordance with what the chairperson has been expressing and why he is requesting for a select committee. He is taking into account the busy schedule of the committee in view of the importance of the matter. What we should do as Parliament - if it is possible - is to let the committee in place take over this. We could maybe give them a timeframe in which to do it. But on the other hand, it will necessitate the committee to postpone some parliamentary work. If there is some urgency, I would go by what the honourable minister has suggested that we let the committee in place take over this and we come up with a timeframe as to when this report should be presented to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought the chairperson’s position was that the committee may not have the totality of the professional expertise and he was hoping that the select committee could assist us to identify the people to actually do this work. I think that is his problem.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is exactly why we moved that way. Because the professional people we are going to pick will definitely make sure that the work is done in a stipulated time. I know definitely, as hon. Otto has put it, there are people who have interests. It may not only be those who lost, but even those who bought may have also bought in very dubious ways. So, either way people have interest in this. A select committee, which has the professional, knowledgeable and experienced people, will definitely be able to handle this matter in the shortest time possible.

5.09
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support that we set up a select committee because it does detailed technical work and is in most cases very informative. For us to take proper decisions on the matter concerning KCC, we really need technical information and good work done on the ground, other than us just moving. We have a lot of concern about the operations of KCC. Everywhere you are seeing garbage heaps - things are not moving on well. 

Even the transport sector itself has a lot of traffic jam because the kamunyes are everywhere. Are we also going to allow house jams everywhere? We cannot allow slums to develop in the centre of the town. Let us have proper planning and I think the work the select committee is going to do will do us proud as a country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a commission of inquiry on land allocation, grabbing, et cetera, which was instituted by the Ministry of Local Government in 2006; and I have a copy of their report. It has a number of recommendations of which, to my disappointment, very little has been implemented by Government. So, if you accept the select committee, it will use some of that information too and I would recommend that it widens its scope to look at the whole land allocation and grabbing issue. The report mentions several plots of land, including areas for evacuation in case of fire in this city, which have been allocated to developers. People have put structures on top of sewage pipes, which is very dangerous. So, it is really my proposal that a select committee be formed. The information is there. And also the Ministry of Information set up a commission of inquiry called the Katorogo Commission. So, the select committee in other words should not concentrate on only that taxi park land but on the holistic KCC. Thank you. 

5.10
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Madam Speaker, I stand to buy the position of the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business. What I want to add is that let us co-opt it so that we get the expertise into the relevant committee and it moves in a professional way. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I am very happy with this petition because it is an eye opener to Parliament of the rot that is in KCC. I want to inform Parliament that Baganda Bus Park was designated in 1954 to be the bus terminal in the city. But KCC allocated the only terminal that we have in the city to developers; and in that terminal we have shopping malls and buses have no parking area in the city. Now all the buses are parked along the streets and they are just going like we do not have a Government. 

At one time we went with the then Mayor of Kampala to the bus park, but I do not know the effect of this petition. Because that time we even worked with all the Ministers of: Local Government, Lands, and the Minister of Transport to help in that matter because the buses were parking on the streets and affecting the traffic and passengers yet nothing was being done. Right now the whole place is built up with shopping malls. So, I do not know the way we are going to work. 

The way we handle Government programmes; the way we handle this country; we need to wake up and handle this country well if we are to move forward. I want to support the mover of this petition that we get a select committee that will be given the programme of handling this matter effectively because when we combine it with other duties of other committees, it may not yield the effect that we need as Parliament. We should create a select committee that will have the expertise, which will have the people with the interest and time to work on that problem. Madam Speaker, I want to support the mover of this petition.

5.15
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this House we are guided by the Rules of Procedure and I thought the Leader of Government Business read the provisions related to petitions, which are under rule 27. So I would like to ask you to interpret for us rule 27(5) and (6) because in this House, hon. Banyenzaki, it is the speaker who rules and interprets the rules. I am asking the Speaker to interpret for us the rules related to petitions, that is, rule 27(5) and (6).  

27(5) says, “All petitions shall be laid on the Table without question put and a petition may be ordered to be printed or, if relating to a matter other than a Bill before a committee, may be referred to a relevant committee by the Speaker or on the request of the Member tabling the petition, for consideration and report.”  And 27(6) goes on to say, “No action taken upon a petition under this rule shall prejudice the subsequent reference of the petition to a select committee on a Bill under rule 119.” 

So, I would really still believe that the drafters of these Rules of Procedure felt that it is only under extreme circumstances that this House will demand for a select committee. In the circumstance of this particular petition, I would really think the relevant committee would be the appropriate committee for this matter to be referred to. So I still support the drafters of these rules. For us to refer to the relevant committee as you heard the Member for Kampala is already complaining that there are many other issues that have been missed. Maybe let me first hear your interpretation of this. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, the interpretation is not really a problem because it says, “may be referred,” it did not say, “shall be referred.” So it gives a description. The honourable chairperson has made a case for moving out of the committee and that is what we are considering.  

5.18
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the House is proceeding within its mandate when the petitioner asks for a select committee under rule 27(7), which says, “After consideration of a petition under this rule, the House may take any decision it considers appropriate and communicates the decision to the petitioner through the office of the Speaker.” In this case, hon. Okot Ogong raised the issue of the bus park, which was also sold under unclear circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, if you could, please guide this House because there are other queries so that we expand the mandate of the select committee that is going to be appointed to investigate the sale of land under unclear circumstances, the bus park and the land in Butabika, which is not yet explainable. I request that we appoint a select committee to investigate the sale of not only the old taxi park, but even the bus park and this other land that has been sold under unclear circumstances.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much for giving way. The hon. Okot Ogong gave us half the information he had about the bus park because KCC is not operating out of dreams. They have laws made by Parliament to regulate their activities. Now a select committee may have mandatory powers, but those mandatory powers may not tantamount to changing the law. Like the position of the buses, which hon. Okot Ogong was talking about, KCC came out with a good idea that if you own a bus, you buy your own terminal the way it is done in other countries like Kenya. 

The very people who are the victims of that decision are influential enough to ensure that this institution can create a select committee to question what has been done illegally. For example, on the issue of Nakasero Market, KCC has decided to lease it for 45 years, no matter how many select committees you put. It is the law, and even if you amend the law, you do not apply it retrospectively. So I think what we wish to have may not be necessarily what we can have; whether it is a select committee or it is a committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we just abandon it. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is, not to risk the whole institution putting its hands where it cannot pull them out clean, let the traditional committee of Parliament do its work. The select committee is going to be rendered incompetent by non-compliance. I have seen people being summoned before the committee of hon. Ekanya and they have refused. They go there and they are not sure whether they are testifying or it is a judicial commission of inquiry. So we are going to be bogged down in unnecessary details and you will come out with a report that you just need a laptop warrior to type. You do not need a select committee. So, I insist that the position of the Leader of Government Business would still be something that we could buy.

MR KAKOOZA: When you read Article 164(2) of our Constitution, about accountability in this country - I can read it verbatim: “Any person holding a political public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she ceased to hold that office.” Our parliamentary committee has powers of a High Court and I do not think the select committee has the same mandate like the Parliamentary one.  

Therefore, I feel that the cost implications of instituting a select committee as stated by the Leader of Government causes a burden on the Consolidated Fund, which is not planned for. It would be very prudent if we used our committees of Parliament to do the work competently because any Member who feels that he can submit a petition can go and attend the committee proceedings and I feel that all Members are competent.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I stand to be corrected if I understand things in a different way. I feel that Members of Parliament irrespective of their committee are competent enough. In addition, when the chairman of the select committee stands here and requests Parliament to give him an opportunity to have a select committee, I do not see the difference between the work that will be done by the select committee and what the committee in place would do.  

Madam Speaker, I am of a view that we give mandate to the committee to co-opt two or three Members. They already have that mandate so we can give them an opportunity to go ahead and do the work for us because this is what we expect the committee to do. There is no difference that a select committee is going to make. In the first place when one of our honourable colleagues rose up to give her explanation, she said that one of the problems we have had is that some committees do not get quorum. Therefore, what difference will it make? 

I, therefore, suggest that we have the committee in place to do the work and we give them a time frame that probably in a month or in a few weeks time we want this report on the Table. I think the work will be done like any other work. That is my view, Madam Speaker.

5.26 
MRS MARGARET MUGISA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, I want to give some information to hon. James Kakooza. We were talking about having a select committee to investigate KCC and only one petition but speaker after another are saying no because there is a lot of rot in KCC and one mayhem leads to another. We shall begin with the sale of the taxi park and go to that of the bus park, and then we shall go to the potholes, the traffic jams, the digging of potholes that is taking place and the mayhem in Kampala as you know it. I think we should be specific. What exactly are we looking for? We started with the taxi park, somebody else raised the bus park, others are raising traffic jams and you know we can go on and on. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this particular one relates to these people who have been identified as non-resident tenants.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssenide has partly supported the issue of the select committee. She has raised the issue of quorum in committees and this is a problem that chairpersons and vice-chairpersons have been facing. We feel as you put it that regarding the issue of the select committee, the people who will be charged with the responsibility of producing work within a specific time will not have this problem of lack of quorum. 

The Committee of Infrastructure, which is where this would go, is where hon. Nathan Byanyima belongs. However, there is still a lot of work in this committee so we shall not be able to do this work within the time you are going to give us. Actually at the moment we are still even handling the petition of the Northern by-pass. So, the issue of a select committee is the best way to handle this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, I think this matter has been spoken for and against. I think we will decide it by vote.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I have appealed to Members that there is a full commission of inquiry report by the Minister of Local Government on land allocation and grabbing and the commission has made recommendations in the report. Furthermore, I am also a Member of the Committee on Works. Therefore, I really want to appeal to Members that a select committee would be the way forward even regarding the commission of inquiry’s report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us vote
. 
(Question put.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is one abstention; 27 Members voted in favour of the regular committee and 29 Members voted in favour of the select committee. Therefore, we shall appoint a select committee.  

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules enjoin me to consult with the Whips of the House in composing this committee. It is a committee of five people so I shall invite the Chief Whips of the House so that we can compose the select committee. The period of reporting is one –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I do not know if it is within your power to reveal the terms of reference because from the discussions and what hon. Nathan Byanyima actually presented, we can accomplish more things. He seems to have centred on the old taxi park but Members raised several other issues. I do not know if your office could look at the terms of reference so that we get value for the human resource. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I don’t know whether time is of essence in this matter; is it? Because if we include more matters it means we need more time.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I think one month would be enough because I am sure Members of this House would want to see sanity in Kampala. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking because Members are proposing that we review the terms of reference to include other things that Members have mentioned but I have said that if we do that it will take longer. That is why I asked if time is of essence to you. 

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I feel that this matter belongs to this House now. Much as I represent a number of aggrieved people, the earlier we tackle other areas the better for this country. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think for the moment we can take a month. If we review our terms of reference and that select committee finds that it can’t finish within that time they can always ask you for an extension of a few days.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I was a Member of a given select committee but quorum remained a problem there. Therefore, I would like to caution the Members that will be and the chairperson of that committee that they should ensure that they call for quorum because the Members who are on the select committee are the very Members who are on the regular committees.

The other issue is something to do with Kampala City Council -(Interruption)- I have been keeping quiet for the last one hour so let me make my point. The point I am trying to put across is that when we made the Constitution we said that Kampala City would have a special status. Therefore, it is upon the Leader of Government Business to ensure that Local Government brings a law because in as far as we are carrying out this; KCC has the powers to defy. Therefore, let us have this law to operationalise the special status of Kampala.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. This is in the interest of my survival in this House really. I have heard my neighbour hon. Kubeketerya saying that the chairman who will be appointed will be a “he” so I am wondering, “What about the ‘she’?” That is the chairpersons? Is it pre-determined? Is it the view that it will be a chairman? You know I have to be sure that we the “she’s” exist in this House.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Alaso is right so the power that be who will appoint the chairperson let me hope will be a “she” such that we don’t have to –(Interruption)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO SECURE FINANCING FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK FOR THE PURPOSE OF FINANCING THE EAST AFRICAN TRADE AND TRANSPORT FACILITATION PROJECT

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I see on the Order Paper that there is item 3 and it has not been called yet we are proceeding to item 4. What has happened to item 3?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know I have been waiting for the Minister to arrive. I don’t know whether the Leader of Government Business knows what is happening.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I consulted the Third Deputy Prime Minister and he told me that he is making further consultations on this matter and as soon as he has finalised with those consultations he will make the statement.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this issue has been hanging for a long time and the Minister is dodging to explain the closure of NTV. I now, therefore, move under rule 46(1)(g). Is my motion seconded? Very good, now I read the motion:

“Given the fact that the closure of NTV Uganda was carried out by the Broadcasting Council and it was carried out outside its power -(Interruption)

MR OTTO: Madam Speaker, our rules are very clear concerning the manner and fashion of raising Motions on the floor of this House to the effect that one must first begin by stating the Motion before substantiating. Therefore I seek your guidance that mustn’t someone first second a stated Motion before someone starts speaking about it? I seek your guidance honourable Speaker -(Interruption) 

MR BANYENZAKI: Give me a chance to I read my motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, that is not how we are going to work. You have not even informed me what the motion is about and up to now I don’t know what it is about. I know it is about NTV but I don’t know what you want to effect.   

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam, the Motion is about the closure of NTV in the sense that this issue has been before this House for the last two weeks and last time the minister was directed by the Speaker to come here and explain circumstances surrounding the closure of this NTV. When the minister came here last week he did not give a clear explanation and he was directed to go and extract what I stated from the Hansard and the directive the Speaker had given. 

On the 14th the Speaker gave further directive that this week he come with a clear and concise explanation. However, the Minister is wavering and he does not want to explain this issue. I even stated what I wanted the Minister to explain and I submitted my letter to the Speaker, the Minister and to the Clerk’s office for distribution amongst the Members. It is on that note that I am moving a motion that this House should resolve and direct the Minister of Information to re-open NTV immediately -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I think I am in order to substantiate my motion –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I crave your indulgence and I would like to appeal to my colleague hon. Banyenzaki to kindly defer his motion. The Minister will come here with a statement on Thursday and on the basis of that statement you could move your motion if you wish. But I would crave your indulgence to defer the motion today, please. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, given the fact that this is the first time that the Prime Minister of my own generation is taking charge and requesting me to defer my motion to Thursday this week, I oblige to defer this motion to Thursday. If by Thursday NTV is not yet open, and the Leader of Government Business is here together with the Second or Third Deputy Prime Minister, and he is the Minister in charge of National Guidance - if this is the way he is going to guide this country, then I do not know where we are heading. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I just want to re-emphasise to the Leader of Government Business that these are the kinds of things that annoy Members of Parliament. When they ask questions and they are not answered, the Ministers disappear - that is why sometimes you find difficulties. So, I think let us be more compliant and co-operative, then work will move more smoothly in this House.

5.45
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad that there is a commitment by the Leader of Government Business to ensure that this is put to rest that there is a clear explanation by Thursday. 

I would like to emphasise the urgency of this matter. The closure of that television station is casting a lot of doubt on the commitment of Government to allow independent access to information in this country. As long as the National Television remains closed, people are very worried about our freedom, about our rights to access information. It should be in the interest of Government more than even us in the back bench to ensure that this station reopens soon. 

Alongside that, Madam Speaker, I would like to raise the fears of a radio station in my district, Radio Caritas, which has always been told that it will be closed down if it continues to allow people, the Opposition MPs like Alice Alaso to go there and talk freely. Those are some of the things - if NTV remains closed, you know, people get the opportunity to believe that Government actually does not want those stations that operate independently to continue operating. 

So, the sooner Government comes up to shed off these fears, and I would be even happier if at one point the hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business comes up this afternoon to assure the people of Soroti that the government of Uganda is not interested in the closure of Radio Caritas and is not interested in the intimidation of the Soroti Catholic Diocesan Development Co-operation, which runs that station -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us proceed. Let us leave it; let us go to the Order Paper. 

MR OKUPA: This is something different though related.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have said that they will bring the information on Thursday, when they do then you can raise those issues because he is not even here.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I would just wind up by really wishing that at one point - because I know that when they come on Thursday, they will not be addressing those other fears. But as they come –(Interruption) 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, I am just wondering, you have ruled, and definitely we should learn to respect you. Once you have ruled, however urgent our issue is, we should be able to listen. Is it in order for hon. Alaso, who has talked very many times, to try to overrule you? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, she is out of order and also Members, I prefer you to raise those issues when the sector people are here so that they can answer, but sometimes when you are talking generally to the Leader of Government Business, you may not get the right answers. Let us do this on Thursday.

5.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Madam Speaker, it is not –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On NTV?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, thank you. This is not on NTV, but something related to the Front Bench of the other side. 

As hon. Banyenzaki has rightly put the issue, when you make a ruling here that the Minister should come here and make statements on specific issues that are of public concern and ministers do not come, that disturbs us; it disturbs the public. Since last year, the hon. Speaker, your colleague gave a directive that the Minister of Finance brings a statement here. I even put a question on circumstances surrounding the Tri-Star. I raised it again when we came on 30th January, hon. Prof. Kiwanuka is here, he was given one week, but nothing has come out until today! We are here reading the papers that they have given it more money. 

So, how do we proceed when the Front Bench is not responding? It is good that hon. Adolf Mwesige is in charge today, can you please prove to us that you are the future leader of this generation and direct that this matter be brought to this House next week? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister for Investments, was it you who was asked to produce the statement?

5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, we undertake to bring a statement here next week regarding Tri-star.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion for the resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to secure financing from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank for the purpose of financing the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project. 

I would like to invite the chairman of the committee –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, it has been seconded. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, you have not justified why you are moving this motion. Why do you want this money? You should go on record. 

PROF. KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, this is the motion:

“WHEREAS a Development Credit Agreement for a special drawing rights US $18,200,000 is to be concluded between the Internal Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank group and the government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project;

AND WHEREAS a partial risk guarantee of up to US $15 million will also be concluded between the IDA and the URC concession and Government for IDA to guarantee the performance by Government of its obligations under the concession agreement; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source subject to other constitutional provisions; 

AND WHEREAS under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament; 

AND WHEREAS in line with the above stated constitutional requirements, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for the approval and authorisation; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that the government is hereby authorised to secure the said financing and guarantee from the International Development Association (IDA) for financing the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project.” 

May I, therefore, beg to move that the motion be adopted? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You beg to move that the House do consider the motion and approve - I think that is what you want?

PROF. KIWANUKA: I beg the House to consider the motion. 

5.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I read our report I would like to lay on the Table the Development Credit Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and IDA dated 07th April 2006; the East African Trade and Transport Facilitation Project; a project implementation manual, a project appraisal document, the national transport master plan, including the master plan for the Greater Kampala and Metropolitan Area indicative of the government framework; the concession agreement between the government of the Republic of Uganda, Nalukolongo Railway Workshop Limited and Rift Valley Railways Uganda Limited; schedule II of the conceded assets signed between the government of Uganda, Nalukolongo Railway Workshop Limited and Rift Valley Railways Uganda Limited; the direct agreement, which is an agreement amending the agreement signed between Government of Uganda and RVR and this one is dated 30th October 2006; and a performance bond in favour of the government of Uganda, issued by UAP Insurance of Kenya. 

I would like also to lay on the Table the Solicitor-General’s interpretation of clauses 3, 4 and 5 of the Insurance Act, because some of us had a different opinion; but we have the Solicitor-Generals opinion. 

Also included are the co-insurance certificates insuring RVR, the government of Uganda, International Finance Corporation (IFC), KFW Bank and Uganda Railways, an Interface Agreement between the Attorney-Generals’ Chambers, that is, the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda and Attorney-General of the Republic of Kenya.

There is also a subsidiary financing agreement between the government of Uganda and Uganda Revenue Authority and Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan for Uganda Railways concession. Also, Madam Speaker, here are field minutes and findings –(Interruption) 

MAJ. (RTD) MAGULUMAALI: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on this particular subject matter. The issue being discussed is very vital to the nation, and if my eyes serve me right, there are very few people around. Is it in order for us to go ahead and discuss this issue when we do not really form quorum? I seek your guidance. 

MR WOPUWA: Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Maj. Magulumali has said, this document looks big. We really needed time to read through it so that we can reconsider things with a very serious mind. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think I saw copies arriving this afternoon and Members were debating other things. So, maybe we refer this to tomorrow? Present and then we have a debate.

MR KADDUNABBI: Madam Speaker, if you could also allow me, I wish to lay on the Table the minutes of our committee? I have no problem with presenting tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can present tomorrow? Okay.

MR KADDUNABBI: I lay on the Table the minutes of the committee on East African Trade and Facilitation Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable members, I think you need time to go and read the document, so let us adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. for presentation and debate. The House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 21 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)


