Wednesday, 27 February 2008 

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, once again I am happy to welcome you to this sitting. In the gallery are 10 committee clerks from the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly in Juba who are on a five-day study visit to the Parliament of Uganda. They are led by Mr Jackson Wani, Deputy Clerk in charge of Parliamentary Affairs in the Southern Sudan Legislative Assembly. You are most welcome.  

Honourable members, there is an understanding with the Parliament of Southern Sudan that we should cooperate with them as they build up their capacity in Parliament. The Speaker visited us last year and we agreed that we shall be interacting with members and staff of their Parliament in order to share experiences. That is why these people are here and they are most welcome.

Honourable members, yesterday we received a report on Bat Valley Primary School by the Committee on Social Services. We did not discuss this report because as it was being presented, it was realised that there were some constitutional and legal matters involved and we wanted to ensure that the recommendations are in tandem with the Constitution and the law. Therefore, before we debate it, we agreed that we should set up a team of lawyers to examine it and ensure that all legal implications are addressed. They will advise us as to the best way in which to accommodate our wishes and also ensure that these wishes or recommendations adhere to the Constitution and the law. 

You asked me for a team but I must confess that as I was looking at the list, I would have wanted this team to have a gender element. Unfortunately, I do not know because I have not been able to attain that. It is not that I am not aware of the need but this is the position. I decided to have hon. Peter Nyombi - you know he is the Chairman of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee - hon. Asuman Kiyingi, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Nuwagaba, hon. Okello-Okello; for reasons, which we appreciated yesterday; hon. Sam Njuba, hon. Balikuddembe and hon. John Kawanga to look through this report, consider the law and the Constitution and then advise us. They are free also to liaise with the authors of the report. 

I think this is a matter, which is likely to take one or two days because everything therein is cleared. After that we shall be able to dispose of this issue. We agreed that the status quo should remain and that there should not be any disturbance of people, students or pupils and teachers who are using this property. 

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Your last comment is sufficient because I was anticipating some people to begin speculating that there is still a problem and go ahead to destabilise the school. As the Ministry of Education, we would like to concur with you that the status quo has to remain.

Secondly, by the time the committee made these recommendations, we had agreed with them and even discussed this matter with His Excellency the President. One aspect, which came out of trying to look for land for some investors, was not because of what is happening; rather it was because of the government’s interest in attracting investors so that if the investor wants to carry out investment in this country and he had pinned his hopes on Bat Valley, we could look around. However, as we discussed it with the President, Bat Valley has to remain in that place.

Thirdly, it was also decided that the primary schools within the city must remain because we also have the urban poor who may not have access to some of the private schools. Therefore, as a ministry and having discussed this with the President, all the primary schools within the city have to remain where they are. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly as we said, there may not be – but there were constitutional issues apparently, which were never addressed and will be addressed. I think this school will remain, provided we adhere to constitutional provisions. 

Yesterday this issue of Nakasero Market came up here particularly in respect of the committee’s report. It was pointed out that a committee report should never go out to any other person because these are reports, which must be tabled in Parliament so that they are owned. They can never be used before they are owned by Parliament. However, there was an incident where a report was used outside. Today, hon. Erias Lukwago came to my office and brought a letter, which I am going to read to you. Unfortunately, he was travelling to London. I asked him to be present but he is travelling this afternoon and he said he would be unable to be present when this matter is being discussed.  

We are going to discuss it and reach a reasonable or logical conclusion. This is the letter, which has been addressed to me and I think I should read it. It is in connection with the subject, which was postponed yesterday. The letter is dated 27 February and addressed to the Speaker of Parliament. The subject matter is, “The Local Government Public Accounts Committee Report on the sale of Nakasero Market”. 

It says, “The above subject matter refers, as the record shows that it was noted on the Floor of the House during yesterday’s sitting that some Members were concerned with the way the said report found its way to the vendors in Nakasero market; 

It was against that background that the Leader of the Opposition made a request that the House permits us to first handle the matter in the Opposition caucus and report back in today’s sitting. 

I did inform the Opposition caucus meeting that convened soon thereafter that it is true on Friday 22 February I received copies of the report from the office of the committee’s chairman. That after reading through the two reports, I took serious exception and objection to the various observations and recommendations in the addendum to the original report and, therefore, decided to write a minority report. That in the course of doing so, I felt obliged as an area Member of Parliament to brief the leaders of the vendors about the new developments. This is because I knew they already had a copy - I don’t know how they got it - of the first report, which had been tabled in the House way back in July 2007. 

I honestly believed that it would be unfair if the changes in the original report caught them unawares especially in light of the fact that they all along thought that President Museveni had settled their matters; that I met some of the leaders of the vendors in my office and briefed them on the new developments. I requested them to come to Parliament on Tuesday 26 February - it says 2006, I think it must have been 2008 - to witness the Parliamentary proceedings as the report was going to be tabled that afternoon. That I did explain to my colleagues that I honestly believed that whatever I did was to protect the interests and/or rights of my people in Nakasero Market and I never intended to degenerate the integrity of Parliament. 

I also informed my colleagues that I never visited the market on Friday nor did I participate in the meeting of vendors on Saturday 23 February when a decision to go on a sit-down strike was taken. 

On those premises, Mr Speaker, I wish to tender my sincere apology for my aforesaid inadvertent act, which was occasioned by an honest and bona-fide belief that it was meant to protect the interests of the people I represent. I would, in the same vein, humbly pray that this august House does protect the interests and/or rights of my people in Nakasero Market, which are apparently at stake. Most obliged, Lukwago Erias, MP, Kampala Central”. This letter has been copied to the Leader of the Opposition. This is the communication from hon. Lukwago.

2.44
MRS JUSTINE LUMUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for reading us that letter from hon. Lukwago. The issue is about leaking a report before this House has pronounced itself on it. I have been in Parliament for seven years and this has never happened. I remember in June or July when hon. Sempala stood on the Floor here and said hon. Lukwago had leaked the first report before it was presented to this House. We didn’t consider it as a big issue but he has gone ahead to do it the second time. This has caused problems as the business community has lost money because of what happened there. 

Yesterday when we were debating here, hon. Yiga alleged that members of the committee had been bribed and that some members are from the ruling party and not from the Opposition. However, they were not in the caucus to defend themselves. Hon. Lukwago is a Member of Parliament who has gone to London and who I think must have informed you when he will be coming back. I want to move that we wait for him to come back and explain to all of us because even if we put the questions to you, Mr Speaker, you cannot answer them. I beg to move that we wait for him to come back, explain and even apologise to the chairperson of the committee who has been singled out by the vendors and for whom hon. Lukwago cannot offer defence now. 

There is also the issue of hon. Sempala who is also an area Member of Parliament and who hon. Lukwago has tried to isolate using the same report. Yesterday, I remember she asked for protection from you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that this is not a simple matter; people have started making utterances against individuals without evidence. People on the committee, as hon. Kaddunabbi said, are suffering because of an individual and he has gone away! Let us wait for him to come back and if need be, apologise to all the members of the committee, the chairperson of the committee and the whole institution of Parliament. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

2.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yesterday when you brought the matter to the attention of the House, I informed the House that we had been discussing the matter in the Opposition caucus and we asked that we be given time to go and complete our discussion. We did go back immediately after the session ended and we met in the East Committee Room until about 8.00 p.m. Hon. Lukwago, as reflected in his letter, admitted that he was the source of the information that the vendors used. We discussed the implications of this matter and actually went back and looked at Rule 190, which was cited yesterday. We also looked at Rule 193 but eventually we found in Rule 189 an appropriate error that hon. Lukwago made because it was clear under Rule 189 that he could not take committee documents outside the House. 

Immediately, various colleagues made their contributions and two matters emerged. The matter pertaining to what was raised in the House was universally accepted and hon. Lukwago also accepted that he was in error. He informed us that he was travelling to London and we made it clear to him that in coming to report to the House, I would not make any apology on his behalf. We advised that he formally writes to you, Mr Speaker, to tender that apology, which copy of the letter I received. 

The other matters were those that arose as a consequence of the anger of the vendors. We did recognise that we have a political problem amongst us in Kampala, and we agreed in our caucus that we should address this. We also asked if any of our members know of an allegation that can be linked to hon. Lukwago, as reported in the papers, as to whether hon. Lukwago directly or indirectly accused anybody of taking a bribe; and what was agreed was that the question of bribes appeared in the papers - in yesterday’s New Vision, in yesterday’s Red Pepper and in the utterances of vendors in the media. 
We, therefore, agreed that we take great exception to allegations levelled against Members of Parliament. I have made a public appeal in the media that anybody who has any allegation against any member or who knows anybody who has made allegations against such members should bring it to us so that we formally take this matter up and even get it to Parliament, because we are equally concerned, as hon. Lumumba said.

Mr Speaker, hon. Lumumba said that this is not the first time that reports of committees have been leaked. This is not true. With the Buganda Bus Park issue, there were a lot of quarrels about those reports; this has been happening. But what is true is that this is the first time that a member owns up to that leakage and apologises to Parliament. This is a practice that should be encouraged –(Interruptions)

HON. MEMBERS: No!

PROF. LATIGO: Oh, yes. Excuse me, not to encourage leakages but to encourage apologies where mistakes are made -(Interjection)- let me just finish. Mr Speaker, in our practice in Parliament, one Member can stand up and declare that, “So and so uttered this statement”. The Member who has been named will stand up and say, “Mr Speaker, can the honourable member substantiate and if he cannot substantiate, can that Member withdraw?” This is the frame in which I am making an appeal; I am not condoning.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD.) OTAFIIRE: I thank the hon. Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I would like to inform him that it is on record that hon. Lukwago in their committee alleged that I had a pecuniary interest in Nakasero Market. I challenged him in the committee to substantiate. He has never, to date, substantiated. He repeated it outside on the radio. I challenged and said, “I put it to you that you are lying; you have lied before, you are lying now, and you are going to die a liar.” (Laughter) He has up to now not substantiated. In his minority report, he has gone ahead to write that I have got interest in that market. Honestly, hon. Leader of the Opposition, what evidence do you want?

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, honourable minister, for the information. Honourable minister, if you were in the House, maybe you did not listen carefully. I am not defending hon. Lukwago on any other matters. A matter specifically arose that we asked to deal with and that was the leakage of information -(Interjection)- let me - well, I can give you, no problem.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a member of that committee and I take strong exception to hon. Lukwago’s utterances and to the plea from none other than the Leader of the Opposition on behalf of hon. Lukwago, whom I have just met outside. He has just been around here. Last night hon. Lukwago, while on Radio One, went even further to say, “Let them try to take me to any committee, I will spill even more beans.” That is the honourable member that you are trying to protect! I take strong exception to this. 

Hon. Lukwago has not done it for the first time. The first time he –(Interruption)- the integrity of this very House, this very institution is at stake. Mr Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I think now is the time for all of us to rise up as one person, with one voice and condemn, not condone such behaviour.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a problem here. First of all, there is the dissemination of copies of the report, but then at the same time it was accompanied - in respect of the same report – by a claim that the chairman, hon. Ekanya and the Woman Member of Parliament for Kampala District “ate” in order to produce the report. So, what do we do? These are the issues.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I would like to let my honourable colleague know that Prof. Latigo will never condone misconduct, corruption or anything of that kind. In what I am presenting, I ask that we complete the process that we have started. I am merely reporting to Parliament; I am not protecting hon. Lukwago; I am not saying that he did not say what hon. Otafiire talked about or what you said. I am just submitting to you a report, which is not contained in the letter, so that you understand that we in the Opposition - if we condoned it we would not have held a meeting before the matter came to Parliament to sort it out. We initiated the meeting before the matter came to Parliament; that is not condoning. So, I do not think it is right to misrepresent me. The problem that has arisen is a problem of Parliament, but I am under obligation to report what I committed myself to do and that is all I am doing. What you do afterwards is your business. (Dr Epetait rose_)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Whereas hon. Lukwago has attempted to give an apology, I observe that according to a number of Members, there are several issues that hon. Lukwago will probably have to substantiate. In my opinion, he has submitted an apology and it will be up to the House to decide what will happen, and I think we shall only arrive at such a decision after hon. Lukwago appears in the House in person and probably clarifies on a number of issues. So, I think that the motion moved by hon. Justine Lumumba should hold such that we wait for hon. Lukwago to come and clarify other issues that have been raised. 

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have some information for the House. That letter is a gross misrepresentation of what the honourable presented to the caucus, because the issues of saying, “an honest attempt” by him to the vendors was not reached at. So, I do not think that even that letter is appropriate and is a representation of what we discussed in the caucus. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, whether hon. Lukwago is here or not, the first steps of trial will not be here. I think that this matter has to go to the committee. The committee will investigate and hon. Lukwago, if he is required, or any other person, will go and appear before the committee. After this investigation, the committee will report back and then we debate the report of the committee. I think that is the best way to handle this matter, because the committee will be able to even receive witnesses that cannot come on the Floor of the House, whereas if we try to have a trial here, those witnesses will not be able to come here. So I think the best we can do - we have received his apology in the form that it is - is to maybe direct the committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to investigate this matter of disseminating the committees’ reports and also deal with the issue of bribery and corruption, by the alleged Members and then we get a report. 

3.03
MR AMAMA MBABAZI (Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry I missed the contents of the letter, but I imagine that if he is apologising, then he is admitting. 

THE SPEAKER: He did; it is an admission, of course. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If someone makes an admission, then it is not necessary to try him. So, I think Mr Lukwago should be sent to the committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, for the committee to hear him in mitigation, so that they can then come here with a recommendation on appropriate action for this House to take because of his act of indiscipline. I think that is the right procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from this side.

3.04
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to present a personal explanation to this House -

THE SPEAKER: No, on what? (Laughter)

MS KAMYA: On the matter -(Interruption)- sorry!

THE SPEAKER: No, let us conclude this matter. Yes, Madam from Ntungamo.  

MR ARIMPA: Mr Speaker, my proposal -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Are you a madam?

3.05
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): I thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. I am the whip of the Local Government Accounts Committee for my party, NRM, and I wish to state that hon. Lukwago’s apology should be seriously rejected because of the issues that have been raised by Members. I also wish to say that it is not only hon. Nabilah Sempala and hon. Ekanya that are accused of bribery. Yesterday, I was going to Nakasero Market and those vendors almost beat me up because they know that I belong to the Committee on Local Government Accounts. So, these allegations are very serious and, therefore, I beg to move that hon. Lukwago’s apology be rejected. 

THE SPEAKER: Now there is a motion specifically dealing with the apology. Should we deal with it here? I think that let this go to the committee and then we shall deal with all the issues involved when we receive the report; but they have taken note of what you are saying.

3.06
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I want to totally agree with Members that we need to follow our Rules of Procedure from A to Z and that if we are to do that, it should apply to hon. Lukwago. Our rules are clear: if a Member is in breach of our Constitution - [Hon. Members: “Our rules.”] - our Rules of Procedure, a Member should be referred to our committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. And if the Member decides to apologise, it should be at the bar of Parliament. A Member will stand at the bar and a Member will deliver his or her apology. 

In addition to that, as much as we want to protect the integrity of Members of Parliament, as Members of Parliament we also must live up to that. I want to refer to my committee on National Economy. On Thursday, we met as members of the committee on National Economy to consider a request by a private company, Phoenix Uganda Limited. As members of the committee, we unanimously agreed that this matter should be clearly studied and we requested to get information from the ministry, meet with the President and meet again with the member requesting -(Interjection)- what I am talking about is the integrity of Members of Parliament. 

I went over to Lira on Friday and I came back on Sunday. Just yesterday, I met a Member - a big person - who told me, “Okot Ogong, we went behind your back and we have already talked to those members.” I got surprised. He was saying that, “We were talking and those members have already agreed”! You make a unanimous statement on Thursday then on Monday you turn around without making - so that is the integrity of Members that we need to consider.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General and then wind up this matter because we are not going to decide on it now; we are going, I think, to refer it to the committee.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I have carefully listened to the complaints raised against our colleague and they are certainly very grave. We have received what one colleague called “an attempted apology”. In my opinion, I think it would not be fair because the Rules and Discipline Committee acts in a quasi judicial capacity; it must act to the greatest extent possible showing all levels and manner of impartiality. If we now debate this issue of apology and actually either condemn or not condemn, but assuming we do condemn, what signals do we send to that committee that will be listening to the entire case? So, I think the best thing would be to refer that apology or so-called apology to the committee to hear everything and come back here with a report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, why don’t we conclude this? The conclusion is that this matter has risen here and according to our procedures we refer the matter – the matter of disseminating the committee’s report outside Parliament and of the allegations against the Member of having “eaten” - to the committee to investigate and then report back with recommendations. Is that the view?

3.11
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, as hon. Yiga stated yesterday, when this matter about bribery and influence peddling was raised against so many Members of the Local Government Accounts Committee, the Members decided - because on Saturday it is true hon. Lukwago himself was not in the market because we have accessed video recording -

THE SPEAKER: We shall find that out. Were you there?

MR EKANYA: What we have decided –

THE SPEAKER: You see -

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, give me opportunity to tell you -

THE SPEAKER: No. But you are entering -

MR EKANYA: I am not mentioning hon. Lukwago. What we decided was to find a court case of defamation against the people who made the allegation against us as the Members of the committee. So, our lawyers have already filed the case because we cannot bring those people here to Parliament. 

And also, Mr Speaker, we have filed a matter with the Police because our lives are threatened and the Minister of Internal Affairs is aware so there is already a case with the Police.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think I was clear with you yesterday. I said that whereas here you have an umbrella, a privilege in that you can defame me or you can defame another and you go without any liability, I said if you came to do it at the City Square or Clock Tower, I said lawyers will earn their fees. Therefore, if you think that this matter again has given you cause to go to court, you are free to do so. We are doing our work as Parliament. This matter has been sent to the Privileges Committee to investigate and report to us promptly. The matter is closed. [Mr William Nsubuga: “Guidance.”] Guidance on what? The matter is closed.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

3.13
MS BETI KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North, Kampala): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker for the opportunity you have given me to present this personal explanation. I do it under Rule 42 of the Rules of Procedure of this House.  

Last Monday, the 25th of February, four men went to my mother’s home in Lungujja, Lubaga division. Two wore police uniforms while two were in plain clothes, but all were armed. One presented himself as the OC of Nateete Police station, and looking mean, they asked my mother where I live. My mother is 75 years old and suffers from high blood pressure. She was terrified but she asked them what I had done and why they were looking for me. They told her that I am a very important person so they had to know where I live so that they can provide protection for me. My mother had no choice but to direct them to my home, which is actually very close to where she lives. But they did not go to my home and neither have they been there since then.  

Mr Speaker, it is unusual for an OC of a police station to go looking for important people to protect them without their requisition or when it is not their privilege. Besides, Lungujja falls under the jurisdiction of Old Kampala Police station. So, the OC of Nateete Police Station had no business forcing protection on me even if I needed it. But more importantly, that person, the one who said that he was the OC of Nateete Police Station was an impostor because several people that were present at my mother’s home know the OC of Nateete Police Station and he was not the one.  

Either my life is in danger or the incident was intended to harass and intimidate my mother and through her, my family and myself. I need advice, Mr Speaker, through you, from the Minister of Internal Affairs on what I should do to protect myself and my family from such threats and harassment.  

I suspect that this could be the result of an article I wrote that was published in The Daily Monitor of 28 January this year which the editor titled, “Where is Museveni’s heart?” Since that article was published, I have received phone calls, messages and I have seen letters in the press all angry and intimidating me and promising a rebuttal to whatever I am supposed to have said. 

The state was highly offended by my article and I was charged on several cases, but the law forbids me to comment on matters before court. Suffice to say that my attorneys, hon. Abdu Katuntu and counsel Yusuf Nsibambi are preparing my defence. But I would like to use this occasion to make a clarification on two matters in that article, which matters are not before court and, therefore, not subjudice but which have captured some public attention. That is the matter of allegedly calling for genocide against the Bahima community and also allegedly questioning the President of Uganda’s citizenship.

I am really disturbed and pained that some members of the public –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Let her make her statement. You know we are not going to debate it.

MS KAMYA: Some of my friends interpreted my article as a call for genocide against the Bahima. Mr Speaker, I could never, ever do that. This is not subjudice; genocide was not subjudice. It was not, it is not in the case.

MRS MUGYENYI: Mr Speaker, what applies to me should apply to her. I could not comment on this issue because you ruled that this would be subjudice. The issue is in court. If I could not make an explanation on behalf of my people, how could she be allowed now to make an explanation of a similar nature? I need –

THE SPEAKER: This rule of not discussing a matter over which she is charged is in her favour. Now she is opening it up for debate; it is intended to protect her interests but now she is opening it up. So if you open it up then you can - you should not be offended. She is now opening it up because it is something, which is intended to protect her as an accused person. She is now opening it; how are you offended then?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, when you look at Rule 60 of our Rules of Procedure - I agree with you but I am constrained to add that the Rule intends to protect, in your discretion, all the parties to the case not necessarily one party to the case. So I am constrained to –

THE SPEAKER: You mean the case is between the state and her? Actually, she is the only one being protected by not discussing it because they say you are going to prejudice it by discussing it. Now she is opening it up. It is a shield for her and now she is saying – honourable members, let me guide you. It was a shield against her because discussing it would prejudice her. Now she is throwing away the shield. How are you bothered? 

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, the first part of hon. Beti Kamya’s personal explanation is very clear. It is about the event that took place at her mother’s home. I would suggest that the honourable colleague limits herself to that part of the statement only -(Interjection)- that is why I am appealing to her; am I withdrawing anything?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamya, the rule that was used to prevent debate on this one, we were informed as this matter was coming up that you have been charged in court and, therefore, you need protection because a debate on this matter will prejudice you. Now you are saying, “Forget about the protection and let me explain ….” Therefore, if you do and the rule is waived, then others will comment. Is that what you want or you want to stop where you are? Otherwise, the rule will not allow us to debate the article, the subject of the charge. You may be advised to just stop at the part of your mother and leave it there. Otherwise, you are the one removing the shield. By opening it up you make it controversial. So, it is up to you.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, this is a matter that concerns my security; I need your guidance on this one. People are very aggrieved and they will not be waiting for the court process before they vent out their frustration. That is why I thought that this explanation would help the people’s emotions because I was completely - and besides, I would like your guidance on this one also; that the matters in court are: violence, sectarianism and not genocide –

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Mary Mugyenyi had come here to deal with that article not knowing that you had been charged in the courts of law. As she was starting, somebody stood up and informed us that you have been charged in respect of the same article. Therefore, because our rules do not permit us to prejudice you, we should not debate and we complied with it. That was the point. And then now, when you talk about genocide, you are referring to the article, which you wrote on the 28th. That was the very article, which Members wanted to debate and they were denied the chance because you had been charged. Now when you open it up then we will say, “Okay, it is open now, let us debate it”. Is that what you want? 

MS KAMYA: It is my view, Mr Speaker, that it would be healthier to debate it than to quash it because I need people to understand me not misunderstand me. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you want the rule against that matter to be suspended?

MS KAMYA: I would like to -(Interjection)- I would like to complete this statement, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Apply.

MS KAMYA: I would like to move that the rule be suspended and this statement be read. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. There is a motion that we suspend the rule against this particular provision in respect of her case so that we debate it. I put the question – but shall we – the problem we have, honourable members, is that there is fair trial; we should always promote fair trial in debating this matter; it is in our Constitution.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, in the interest of harmony, I would like to end my statement with the information about the attack on my mother.

THE SPEAKER: Well, she has withdrawn it and she is stopping there. 

3.27
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform Parliament and the nation that disaster struck my constituency, Mbarara Municipality, last night at around 7.20 p.m. Fires started in the central market of Mbarara Municipality and this fire destroyed over 25 percent of the central market.  

Mr Speaker, I would like in one minute to give a chronology of these fires. In 2002, the fire gutted the whole of the central market and His Excellency, the President directed renovation. So, the Minister of Local Government, working together with the Minister of Trade and Industry renovated this market and handled it over in 2004/05. 

Now, on 14th June 2007, the Nyamutyobora low income market was totally burnt. I reported on this Floor when this happened.  Then again, on 3rd July, this very central market caught fire and about 15 shops were destroyed, but the fire brigade came and took control. This time, the fire brigade again came but unfortunately, about 25 percent of the market was destroyed. 

So, I would like to ask the Minister of Local Government and the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry who are concerned to take note and find out the causes, because we believe that this fire is beyond natural occurrence. If you look in the span of this year, after spending over Shs 400 million to renovate this market, the fire again started on 3rd July last year. Now, it has been successful again. So, it seems there are intentional arsonists who burn this market. I would request that an investigation be carried out so that this situation can be halted.

Secondly, when a disaster happens to urban areas, we get a problem. In rural areas, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness moves quickly, but in urban areas sometimes it takes so long for action to be taken. Mind you, the people working in these markets are the low income earners. And most of those affected were women, and they have loans, they have children. So, they also need to be assisted quickly. 

But this time, I think an investigation should be carried out right from the Ministry of Local Government to make sure that this does not happen again because the frequency is very worrying and everybody believes that it is intentional. That is the information. I thank you.

MR ELIJAH OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am rising up on an issue of procedure on the matter of the Order Paper. I remember, on Thursday last week, after the question I raised on the national oil reserves, you did direct the Minister of Energy to produce a statement yesterday, but he did not. Today, I do not see it on the Order Paper yet on the next item, which is going to be read, there is an issue on this addendum for supplementary schedule regarding the national fuel reserves - the restocking.  

So, may I know why the Minister of Energy defied your ruling that he produces a statement yesterday? And now, what do we see, we see him asking for more money for the fuel reserves? Could we have that statement first, Mr Speaker?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I think it is high time we took your rulings and the resolutions of this House seriously. The matter that we have is urgent in nature, but when there is a standing ruling that we get a clear statement so that we can be guided about the status of the fuel reserves; more so, just this morning, there were alarming press reports that the fuel reserves have been privately and dubiously awarded to a little firm to manage them. To my surprise, Government is keeping quiet about it, what we see now is to urge Parliament to have the fuel reserves restocked with this much money - in billions! 

Why is Government not taking this House seriously, Mr Speaker? Is this the way we put the cart before the horse? I thought it would be the other way round; we first look at the status of our fuel reserves then we can appropriately move. But hiding our heads in the sand and sinking such colossal amounts of money should not be allowed by this Parliament.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on Table an addendum to Supplement Schedule No. 1 for financial year 2007/08. 

Mr Speaker, this is to support the recurrent supplementary of Shs 70 million to fund the survey of unsold Government institutions and condominium properties. Shs 45.554 billion under recurrent, to supplement the emergency procurement for fuel for restocking the national fuel reserves in this country. 

Vote number 104, Parliamentary Commission, Shs 6.0 billion to cater for pensions requirements for the parliamentarians. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the appropriate committee should takeover the documents and then make the report promptly so that we can consider the supplementary.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LAW REVISION (FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS 
IN CRIMINAL MATTERS) BILL, 2006

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Bill, 2006” be read the second time. 

Mr Speaker, the objects of the Bill are: 

To revise and rationalise fines and other financial amounts stated in existing laws in criminal matters with a view to raising them to realistic levels having regard to the change in the value of the Uganda shillings over the years and in the value of those amounts owing to inflations and other causes. 

The Bill also intends to standardise the rational fines in relation to corresponding period of imprisonment in written laws. 

It also intends to convert fines and other financial amounts into currency points at prescribed values and to empower the minister to vary the value of a currency point. At present, Mr Speaker, the fines and other financial amounts in the existing laws relating to criminal matters have fallen to ridiculous levels in their application in the courts. This state of affairs is due to the fact that the Currency Reform Statute of 1987 had dropped two zeros in every amount expressed in any written law, which was in force when it came into force on 15 May 1987. And also, due to major inflation that has occurred over the years - and I will qualify that statement at a later stage - we are talking about the years particularly between before the Currency Reform Statute came into force and up to about 1990.

The Currency Reform Statute 1987 was repealed by the Law Revision Miscellaneous Repeals Act of 2001, Act No. 5 of 2001 as part of the ongoing law revision excise. However, by virtue of section 13(2) of the Interpretation Act, Chapter 2, the previous effect of the statute is retained and therefore the two zeros are still dropped in the affected legislation.

Having regarded all the circumstances, it is therefore imperative and urgent that a new law be enacted to rationalise and update fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters affected by the Currency Reform Statute 1987 or by serious inflation over those years that I will actually look at or bring to your attention or both and also to convert fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters in written laws and the currency points of a prescribed value and to standardise the relationship between fines and imprisonment.

Accordingly, therefore, Mr Speaker, Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to apply the Bill to any written law, which provides for fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters. The other financial amounts are in respect of compensations and other amounts prescribed in relation to offences.

Clause 2 of the Bill defines some of the terms that are referred to or used in the Bill. For instance, there is the definition of a “currency point”, which is defined in the schedule to the Bill as amounting to Shs 20,000. And the Bill provides that where an amount on conversion does not exactly amount to a currency point, it should be expressed as a fraction of a currency point. For instance, Shs 40,000 will be equivalent to two currency points, and Shs 78,000 will be equivalent to 3.75 currency points.

Clause 3, seeks to provide a fixed and standardised relationship between fines and related terms of imprisonment. The Bill to this end states that each month of imprisonment is equivalent to two currency points. Therefore, for instance, if an Act prescribes two years of imprisonment, the fine in relation to two years shall be 24 months multiplied by two currency points bringing it to 48 currency points. 

The provision will apply and override all written laws in relation to criminal matters existing at the commencement of this Bill once it is passed into law. And future legislation is also expected to conform to this ration. There must be a rational for everything; so we have a rational of two currency points to equal to one month imprisonment. 

The formula of two currency points was devised for the Bill by the Uganda Law Reform Commission based on a study conducted of all existing legislation at the time of the study. The commission was concerned that a formula should be devised which is simple to calculate as well as one that takes account of incomes of Ugandans.

The Uganda Law Reform Commission has explained that to arrive at the ratio of two currency points to one month imprisonment, the commission had used the ratio period of six months of detention for non-payment of a judgment date as the best example, as being equal to Shs 25,000 prescribed by rule 31 and appendix A, of Schedule 3 of the Magistrates Courts Act. 

The figures in that appendix were re-enacted in Statutory Instrument No. 81 of 1993 – (Interjections)- I am being asked, “Where is the report?” I saw the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs’ report outside as I was coming in, and the Bill was circulated long time ago and read for the first reading.

Mr Speaker, if I may continue, the commission then took the two zeros as directed by the Currency Reform Statute 1987 and the figure of Shs 250 obtained is then multiplied by Shs 1,000 as directed by Cabinet, resulting in a figure of Shs 250,000, which is then divided by six months and rounded up to Shs 4,000. Each month represents the amount of a judgment debt default, the non-payment of which will give rise to one month detention under rule 31 and appendix 1 and schedule 3 of the Magistrates Courts Act.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is not very clear what text the minister is reading. What most of my colleagues and I have is a report from the committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Bill. Apparently, I do not see where the minister is reading from. Maybe the minister would be courteous enough to provide us with copies of that report.

THE SPEAKER: I think we needed a brief explanation to the purpose of the Bill then the committee will come in with the report.

MR RUHINDI: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. But as the mover of the motion, I thought I should actually offer detailed explanation because what I was referring to is not even in the committees report. But I am most obliged. I can as well stop here and beg that that Bill be read for the second time and we wait for the committee’s report.

3.45
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the Vice-Chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. Permit me to read this report, Sir 

The Report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Bill, 2006

Introduction

The Law Revision (Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Bill, 2006 was tabled in Parliament on 5 December 2006. The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Bill in accordance with Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology

The committee discussed the Bill with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Uganda Law Reform Commission. The committee carried out extensive discussions and liberations on the Bill. 

Object of the Bill

The Bill is intended to cater for and update fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters which have been affected by the Currency Reform Statute, 1987 or by serious inflation over the years or both. 

Mr Speaker, the Bill also seeks to convert fines and other financial matters in criminal matters in written laws into currency points over a prescribed value in the Bill and to standardise the relationship between fines and imprisonment. 

It is also intended to amend the penalties in the existing legislation.  

Observations

Clause 3: Ratio of fines to imprisonment

Mr Speaker, Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide a fixed and standardised relationship between fines and related terms of imprisonment. The Bill also states that each month of imprisonment is equivalent to two currency points.  For instance, if an Act prescribes two years of imprisonment, the fine in relation to the two years must be 24 months multiplied by two currency points; that is 48 currency points. 
 
Definition of currency point

Currency point is defined in the schedule to the Bill as amounting to Shs 20,000. The Bill provides that where an amount on conversion does not exceed an amount exactly to a currency point, it should be expressed as a fraction of a currency point.

The rational of the currency points equivalent to one month imprisonment

To arrive at a ratio of two currency points to one month of imprisonment, the Uganda Law Reform Commission used the ratio of the period of six months of detention for non-payment of a judgment debt as being equal to Shs 25,000 prescribed by Rule 31 and Appendix A of Schedule 3 of the Magistrates Court Act, 1970. The figure in Appendix A was produced by Statutory Instruments No.81 of 1983. 

Mr Speaker, the commission took out of Shs 25,000 the two zeros as directed by the Currency Reform Statute, 1979 and the figure of Shs 250 obtained is then multiplied by the figure of 1,000 as directed by the Cabinet, resulting in a figure of Shs 250,000, which is then divided by six and rounded up to arrive at Shs 40,000 to each month representing the amount of judgement debt default, the non-payment of which will give rise to one month’s detention under Rule 31 under Appendix A of Schedule 3 of the Magistrates Court Act, 1970.

Clause 4: Fines in legislation without accompanying terms of imprisonment

Mr Speaker, Clause 4 of the Bill provides that in relation to fines prescribed in written laws relating to criminal matters not accompanied by terms of imprisonment –

(a)	where the written law was in force on 5 May 2987, that is, the day of the commencement of the Currency Reform Statute, 1987, the prescribed fine should be multiplied by a factor of 10,000 and converted into currency points at the rate specified in the schedule to the Act. The Currency Reform Statute, 1987 dropped the two zeros from these fines;

(b)	where the written law came into force after 15 May 1987, but before a cut off date of 1 July 1990, that is, where the Currency Reform Statute, 1987 did not apply, the fine should be multiplied by a factor of 100.

Rationale for the multiplying factors

The 10,000 multiplying factor in relation to fines in force on 15 May 1987 means –

(a)	a restoration of two zeros removed by the Currency Reform Statute, 1987;

(b)	multiplication by the factor of 100 to cater for the level of inflation obtaining in Uganda from 15 May 1987, to a cut off date of 1 January 1990 when serious inflation is supposed to have stopped.

Clause 5: Compensation and other financial amounts in the existing legislation

Mr Speaker, Clause 5 applies the 10,000 and 100 multiplying factors to compensations and other financial amounts prescribed in criminal laws in force on 15 May, 1987, or those coming into force after the date and before the cut off date of 1 January 1990, in the same way and for the same reasons as the applied fines are stated above.

Clause 6: Application of ratio of fines and imprisonments to specific enactments
  
Mr Speaker, Clause 6 of the Bill relates specific existing written laws to the principle of one month imprisonment being equal to two currency points. These provisions are sections 192 of the Magistrates Courts Act, 1970 and Section 109 of the Trial on Indictments Act. Both of these prescribe periods of imprisonment to be applied when a convicted person fails to pay various amounts of fines imposed.

Clause 7: Power of the minister to make statutory instruments

Clause 7 confers on the Minister responsible for Justice various powers of making a statutory instrument to amend the value of the currency point in the Bill or in other existing laws and also to modify existing laws to give effect to the principles of the new Bill or to remove doubt or eliminate injustice in the application of the principles in the Bill.

Clause 8: Attorney General to cause Penal Code to be reprinted

Mr Speaker, this clause enjoins the Attorney General to exercise the powers of the Attorney General under Section 19 of the Acts of Parliament (Act No.16 of 2000) to cause to be printed amended laws in order to incorporate the amendments, by causing the Penal Code to be reprinted incorporating the amendments arising out of the application of the principles contained in the new Bill.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that subject to the proposed amendment, the Bill be passed into law.  

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Well, this is really a technical Bill. It is the circumstances that have given rise to –(Interruption)

3.54
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. And before I actually thank the committee further, I want to seek clarification. When you read the object of this Bill, you realise that the minister based on the currency reforms. It is unfortunate that the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning is not here but I would have loved - because the Bill has come up with the factor of 10,000 to multiply to the various fees which are charged.  

The question I wanted to pose if at all I can get an answer from the Executive is that, I think for the last 10 years or so, the inflation rate of this country has been controlled to one digit and that has been the stand whenever we are receiving the budget. I want the minister to tell me on which ground did they base the 10,000?  Because you realise that when we had the graduated tax, the rate was 3,000; people failed to pay and we agreed to abolish it. Even these current fines; people cannot afford them but now we are multiplying them by 10,000. 

Before we actually pass this, Mr Speaker, however technical the Bill maybe, we would get an answer from the Minister of Finance to tell us the factors. Let him give us a schedule of the inflationary rate dating as back as 1986 even if it is monthly or annual such that we can actually pass - because we all understand the law. Otherwise, if we just pass it the way it is we shall be doing a disservice and we shall be deceiving the population because -(Interruption) 

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thought that this is a law to deter the criminals from doing some of the things they do that are against the population. So, if the speaker holding the Floor seems to say that some fines are not paid and sounds to be sympathetic to people who commit such crimes, is he trying to stop the habits or condoning? I would like him to inform me on that issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, for example, in this case of adultery, the fine is Shs 200; you get these coins with fish and then you go off. (Laughter)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for the information. But I would have loved if the minister brought the Bill without connecting it to the inflation rate. Because there are two different things: If you say, I am increasing the fines because the inflation rate has caught up with us, that is understandable. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, this is why I had a long statement but I was cut short. (Laughter) But essentially, the 10,000 factor is in respect of the provision in Clause (5) (1) of the Bill. This category covers written laws, which were in force on the day on which the Currency Reform Statute, 1987 came into force, which is 15 May 1987.  Therefore, it is proposed under the clause that these should be multiplied by a factor of 10,000. 

Even the 10,000 has also got a historical formulation, to restore the two zeros because the currency reform had struck off the two zeros. Actually the proceeding debate was that this Bill should first restore the two zeros but it was found that it could not work in respect of what had already gone on. So, it was decided that – I can actually read you the whole –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: The two zeros were knocked off in 1987 or 1986? 

MR RUHINDI: 1987, sorry if I said 1986. It should be 1987. 

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I thank the minister. I think hon. Nsubuga has got a point here when he says that the reasons do not seem to be really very clear or even the rationale is not clear. When you talk about currency reforms and you limit yourself to striking off two zeros only, you forget the fact that 30 percent was also removed after striking off the two zeros. So, if someone had Shs 1 million at that time, they would end up with Shs 7,000. This is not reflected here.  Besides, even the multiplying factor of 100, because these are now figures we are talking about, should be backed by facts. I think this is precisely what hon. Nsubuga is trying to raise. Thank you. 

MR RUHINDI: The 30 percent component, I would need clarification on its enabling legislation because the enabling legislation that I have – the Currency Reform Statute is very clear and I have it here; I have some of the provisions. I can read you the relevant provisions of the Currency Reform Statute because I am informing you of the legal position.

THE SPEAKER: But wasn’t 30 percent a revenue sort of collection?

MR AMURIAT: If it was a revenue collection, it should also have been backed by the law. Unless the minister is telling us now that what was done way back in 1987 was illegal. Is this what the minister wants to tell this House?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Bill before us is in respect of sentencing powers by magistrates. When considering sentencing powers, the sentences normally given are either cash fines or custodial sentences.

When you look at Clause 5, the multiplication factor that seems to be bringing problems is in respect of only two fonts and it stops actually as at 1 January 1990. Indeed, it takes into consideration the inflationary factors but from 02 January 1990 up to now, the multiplication factors do not apply. Indeed, when you look at the Bill itself and the laws it tends to affect, these are reasonable and should not bring us into a lot of problems. 

MR RUHINDI: Actually to be more specific, Mr Speaker, the multiplication factor before 1987 is 10,000. There is history to that. Now the multiplication factor from 1987, that is 15 May 1987 to 1 January 1990 when serious inflation is supposed to have stopped, is 100 and not 10,000. The 100 is what actually came from the Ministry of Finance at that time as a factor of inflation prevailing between that period. This was a study carried out by the Uganda Law Reform Commission and it is scientifically analysed. I know you could have been a co-opted engineer to participate but we had some other mathematicians and engineers on the project.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, even before we assign the Minister of Finance, you can direct because this information is in the library. You can send somebody to compile – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You go to the library and get it. What is the problem?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: What I want to justify is that, the inflationary rate of 100 the minister is saying is not correct.

THE SPEAKER: No, go to the library, get it and then come back and give us the information.

MR RUHINDI: The Bill was read here for the first reading way back and this study stretches back to many years. When the Bill came here for the first reading, it was referred to the appropriate committee. I believe that the appropriate committee must also have done a lot of research on this subject. They can actually speak for themselves. This is a scientifically analysed report.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that, “The Law Revision Fines and other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2006” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LAW REVISION FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS 
IN CRIMINAL MATTERS BILL, 2006

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, there is a typographical error on sub-section (2) clause 3. It should read, “Subject to this Act, any penalties prescribed in any written law referred to in sub-section (1)…” not sub-rule (1). It is just a typo.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, a proposed amendment to the Bill. Clause 7(1), delete the word “cabinet” appearing in the third line and insert the word “parliament”. The justification is to enable the participation of parliament in making a decision in the amendment of the value of currency point.

MR KATUNTU: In fact, I would like to move that the whole clause be deleted or re-drafted. If you look critically at Clause 7, plus the committee report on page 4, point eight, it is authorising the minister to make laws. The purpose and spirit of the Bill is to standardise the currency points such that there is certainty in the punishment prescribed by any other law that provides for fines and financial amounts in criminal matters. If you provide these powers to the minister, that means he can any time come and vary the actual punishment. And that is substantive; it is really maiming the punishment because he can vary it either upwards or downwards and that is not the work of the minister; that is not the work of the Executive. What the Executive can do is to propose –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The rationale of the amendment specifically to substitute the cabinet with parliament is to ensure that as representatives of the people, we have a say when it comes to varying the currency point. If you are to do away with the whole clause, then it would mean that inflationary levels in future would require making a fresh law altogether other than only amending a fact of one clause related to the currency point. So, hon. Katuntu, do you want to suggest that the fact of amending the currency point should not be talked of in the Bill in the manner suggested by the committee?

MR KATUNTU: Once you say, either way that the -(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I am seeking clarification. Is hon. Katuntu a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee?

MR KATUNTU: Yes, I am a late entrant on the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. When this Bill was discussed, I was still on my forced leave. (Laughter) But now that I am back, I think the committee could have had benefit to listen to my argument.

MRS WINFRED MASIKO: I also need some clarification from hon. Katuntu about this. Suppose it happens that we get a calamity or some kind of political instability – God forbid - as it has happened in other countries and suddenly things change especially issues to do with inflation, what do you think would happen to the country if it does not have some enabling clause to at least try to fit in what is happening at that particular time? Don’t you think that this is a clause that is supposed to cure such a situation?

MR KATUNTU: I really cannot appreciate the clarification. Even what they are providing for is that, the minister may consult the Minister responsible for Finance and then they come to Parliament. The essence is, they are still going through the process of legislation. Under ordinary rules of legislations, substantive amendments of any law are by Parliament. If they are coming here, it would be the same like they would come with the proposed amendment to this particular Act and Parliament will certainly amend it. It is as easy as that. They will come here with a substantive amendment to clause 6 to cater and cure the problems you are talking about. 

What I am against is to get legislative powers and give them to the minister. We cannot amend a law by a statutory instrument. A statutory instrument is supposed to assist – it is like a regulation to implement or operationalise a particular law. The effect of Clause 7, as it is now, is to give ministers substantive powers to amend substantive provisions of this particular Act. That is my problem. 

Mr Chairman, you can even look at the words that are being used. Take the for example, 7 (2), it says: “The minister may, by statutory instrument modify any law…” –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, honourable member, I think you have to see this clause in two parts.  I personally would not see any problem with Clause 7 (1) because Parliament itself must approve the proposed changes. That is why it reads, “… Minister responsible for Finance and with the approval of Parliament….” 

However, what I do not know is, in respect of Clause 7(2), whether approval also applies to it. I am saying this because it would appear that approval by Parliament applies only to Clause 7(1). So, I do not know whether you also intend to have Parliament involved into Clause 7 (2).

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Even then I have a problem and I do not know whether I am making myself clear. Otherwise, my position is that amendment of a substantive provision of any Act is a duty of Parliament; we cannot amend an Act of Parliament by a statutory instrument. If we are coming – can I make myself clear, Mr Chairman? 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Katuntu, the first clause, 7(1) is in respect of the value of currency, which may change from time to time. I think that is Clause 7(1). What you are talking about is in Clause 7 (2).

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the essence of Clause 7(2) is not to make substantive provisions of the law. It says: “The minister may, by statutory instrument, modify any written law to give effect to the principles stated in this Act.” This means that it is actually to give effect to the principle of this law –(Interjections)- let me finish up –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, when you say any law, therefore, it can be the Penal Code Act; it can be a law relating to animals and so on and when you change, you are really amending it. This is what he is saying that changing laws should be left to Parliament.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I do not know   whether our minds are meeting. I am saying this because it is to modify, yes. Maybe the right word should be, “Subject” to mean subjecting this particular enactment. Let me give you an example, Mr Chairman. Article 292 of the Constitution talks about modification of laws and in clause (1) it says: “Subject to any express provisions of this Constitution, any laws in existence before the commencement of the Constitution Amendment Act, 2005…” - okay, that is not applicable. 

But clause (2) says: “The President may, by statutory instrument, within two years after the commencement of the Constitution Amendment Act, 2005 make such modifications in any law referred to in clause (1) for the purpose of bringing it into conformity with this Constitution.” What actually this means is bringing any other law, where necessary, into conformity with the provisions of this Act.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, let me try to assist. For example, if you had a clause which reads, “All laws relating to fines and other financial amounts in criminal matters shall be interpreted in accordance with this Act”, wouldn’t that cure what you are saying? I am saying this because what you are creating here is an uncertainty; you are telling the minister to, at his own discretion, modify a law. If we had a clause like that one, I think it would capture exactly what you are proposing.

THE CHAIRMAN: You must see this clause in two parts. One part is different from the other. The first part is okay; the problem is with the second one.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I also have a problem with Clause 3. I mean what is the relevance of it? It says: “The minister, for application, can cause the amount to be rounded upwards or downwards…” I think that does not make sense. Even if the fine, after multiplication with the currency points, comes to say, Shs 21.1, let it be it. Do you have to round it off upwards and downwards? So, Mr Chairman, my problem is that we do not have to over stuff our statutes with some provisions, which are –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: I think while you are drafting the kind of amendment that you want to make in respect of clause 7(2), can we dispose of 7(1)? Do you still have problems with it?

MR KATUNTU: If we can have this recommitted, I will sit with the Attorney-General and we have an appropriate amendment to cater for the whole of Clause 7. If he doesn’t mind, we shall sit and agree because I also have issues with Clause 7(1), but I do not want to engage so much in the debate.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us do it this way. The committee was proposing to amend Clause 7(1) so that the statutory instrument, which is done in consultation with the Minister of Finance is approved by Parliament. Can we pronounce ourselves on this one? [Members: “Yes”]. Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7(1) agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: We now move on to Clause 7(2).

MR RUHINDI: On Clause 7(2), I still stand by what is in the text, unless someone or any other colleague moves an amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you seem to have agreed to hon. Katuntu’s position. Do you want time to make the – okay, amendment is not moved. Okay, I put the question –(Interruption) 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, as a known lawyer, I am getting very confused. What is the difference between modification of the law and amendment of the law?

THE CHAIRMAN: That is why we think that a modification is an amendment. I agree that a modification is an amendment.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, if that is the case, then it is only Parliament that can amend the law, not the minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you make a proposal? Otherwise –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, legislative powers are with Parliament. We know that under Article 79, but Parliament can delegate some of its jurisdiction to any other organ, body or persons with powers to amend –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, why don’t you subject this power under Clause 7 (2) to approval of Parliament? [Hon. Members: “Yes”]. Move it!

MR RUHINDI: I now move, with the advice of the Chairman, an amendment to Clause 7(2) to read as follows: “The minister may, by statutory instrument, modify any written law with the approval of Parliament.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: I am sorry, Mr Chairman. Probably I do just not understand this, but let me ask this. Do statutory instruments have the powers to amend the law? I thought an amendment would be tabled on its own merit. Are we now saying that we are going to give, under this provision, the minister, powers to come up with a statutory instrument which effectively takes away the constitutional mandate of this Parliament to amend the laws? Is that what we are saying now? I seem to be lost.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You see, the power to make laws is vested in Parliament, but the Parliament, by law, can authorise another authority to make a regulation and normally these regulations are made by statutory instruments. He can only make the regulation by a statutory instrument if he is authorised by the law passed by Parliament.

MS ALASO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, because then if it was as specific as in terms of the regulations I would have no problem with the statutory instrument. But a statutory instrument which empowers the minister to modify the law is actually saying “Minister, you have powers to amend the law.” I think I would have problems with that one.

MR MWESIGE:  The rationale of Parliament allowing ministers or other bodies to perform legislative functions, which would have otherwise been performed by Parliament, is that this Parliament cannot sit all the time to do all the legislative work that there is in this world.  That is why this Parliament gave local councils the power to make by-laws. By-laws have the force of law.  You have LC Vs- which make ordinances. Ordinances have the force of law.  

In this provision you cannot envisage at this stage how many pieces of law this law is going to affect. They are so many and it will be very cumbersome for the Attorney-General to identify a piece of law, however small it is, that this law will affect, either directly or by infection and bring it to this House for modification.  

What the minister is requesting this House is that, this House gives him the power to go further and do research, because he is not just going to do anyhow, and find the laws that are affected by this amendment and modify them. So, for as long as Parliament gives him or her that power- I would like to agree that we still retain the power of veto by requiring that the minister returns here for approval in case a modification is made. Clearly, I would find no problem with this House allowing the minister to modify any law affected by this amendment, by a statutory instrument, which will be returned to this House for approval.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman I find that contradictory, the hon. Minister is saying that Parliament does not have all the time to do all the legislative work in this country and that is why the Constitution allows other bodies to legislate. And at the same time he is saying that after the Minister has done research, which he has not done, he will come back to Parliament and we shall be going through the same process he is trying to say we do not have the time go through.  At the end of the day there is no way a minister will modify a law without Parliament. Modification of a law is amendment. There is no way!  And if we are coming to-

THE CHAIRMAN:  Honourable member, Article 79 (1) reads, “Subject to the provision of this Constitution, Parliament shall have power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and the good governance of Uganda.” 

(2) “Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have power to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.”  So, by an Act of Parliament a minister or director can make a law; the Constitution allows that.

MR KATUNTU:  Yes, Mr Chairman. This is a proviso. The general powers of making law are provided for under Article 79 (1).  But they said, “…except provided,” and there must be reasons as to when this particular exception is invoked. And I am submitting that we do not have those reasons at all.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I am of the view that with my expressed discomfort on the phrase “modify the law” how about if we reframed that provision and said that that section gives the minister powers to review fines and regulations in accordance with this. So, that we remove the modification of the law because that is where my discomfort is.

MR NIWAGABA:  Can I be of help? You see, when you are reading this clause, you must look at the word “amend” and “modification” and connect them to the value of a currency point. That is the only thing we are talking about and giving the minister. But again subject to the approval of Parliament- and I believe if we do this we are not going against the principle of delegated legislation or legislation perse. So, you are only modifying or amending only the currency value, nothing more, nothing less and simply because we have too many laws that cannot be envisaged here.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So what is your position hon. Minister?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman we are saying that the Minister can bring a statutory instrument here for approval of Parliament.  What I do not know is the difference between bringing that statutory instrument here and bringing the actual amendment of the law before Parliament.  If it is Parliament to approve both, why are we saying that the Minister should make law on behalf of Parliament and then bring it to Parliament?  Why does the Minister not bring the actual proposed amendment here then we handle it as we would handle the statutory instrument? 

MR MWESIGE:  I thought, Mr Chairman, we would sort out this matter. This Parliament cannot do clerical work. Because what this section is saying is that go and look at all provisions in all the volumes of the laws of Uganda and identify those sections that have been affected by this law. I do not think we want Parliament to do that work.  That is why the Minister is saying, “Let me go and do it; do the research, identify clauses in all the laws in this country that are affected by this clause, and come back to this House for approval”.  But if we want to go and do all the research and all the clerical work in Attorney-General’s Chamber, I doubt if this Parliament has that time. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I want to put the question. We have spent a lot of time on this. The amendment is that the minister may by statutory instrument modify any written law with the approval of Parliament. That is two. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 7, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.34

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports there to.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi):: Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision, Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2006” and passed it with minor amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF A REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: The motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LAW REVISION, FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS 
IN CRIMINAL MATTERS BILL, 2006 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision, Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2006” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Law Revision, Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters Bill, 2006” be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LAW REVISION, FINES AND OTHER FINANCIAL AMOUNTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS BILL, 2008”

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON LUGOGO LAND

THE SPEAKER: Before you come in, the Minister of Energy came in after we had directed that he reads the report and apologised saying that he had just moved out when this matter was raised. The statement by hon. Migereko will be made tomorrow.

4.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek your indulgence- 

THE SPEAKER: The problem is that according to the Leader of Government Business, the Minister of Local Government is not here. Can we receive the report or – 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to seek your indulgence that – of course this matter has raised a lot of heat- you allow Members to receive the report; I could read the report. And also to adjust the Order Paper so that we present the report on Nakasero and then the other one will follow, so that this matter is out of the committee because as we speak now, the committee has three pending reports. I seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker.

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If that is acceptable, I would ask that the addendum to the report of Nakasero be circulated to Members so that I proceed.  Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: So, this is Lugogo?

MR EKANYA: No, I am seeking your indulgence so that we present a report on Nakasero, which is item No.7. The report is available, once you authorise, Mr Speaker, it will be circulated. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, instead of No.6 we put No.7.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS 
ON NAKASERO MARKET

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. And I will try to summarise. Mr Speaker, you will recall that the debate on the Local Governments Accounts Report on Nakasero Market was suspended to enable the committee meet other people mentioned in the report who claimed that they had not been given chance to present their views. 

The addendum report therefore arises from the meetings between the committee, M/s Sheila Investment Ltd, Hon. Eng. Byandala, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Kahinda Otafiire, the Deputy Town Clerk, Mr Gordon Mwesigye, Eng. Deputy Town Clerk, Mr Turinawe Ephraim and the former Town Clerk, Mr James Sseggane, among others.

The report is arranged in accordance to the witness submissions, committee observations and recommendations. 

The submission of Eng. Byandala

Hon. Eng. Byandala confirmed that M/s Sheila Investment illegally erected a storied building but hastened to note that this was not in his area of jurisdiction but instead for the Chief Town Planner who was in charge of development control. He, therefore, denied ever giving Sheila Investments Ltd any authority to erect a storied building without any approved plans.

He confirmed that the illegal structure was council property and its continued existence without approved plans was detrimental to council’s approval. However, all stakeholders who have investigated this matter, including the Local Governments Accounts Committee, the PPDAA, the KCC Public Accounts Committee and the Chief Government Valuer have realised that what the council approved was a draft plan. Unless approved to the contrary, the final version of the plan has never existed neither with KCC or M/s Sheila Investments Ltd.  

Observation

This being a matter of revenue collection, this matter falls under the Director of Finance. However, as a technical officer, Eng. Byandala, participated in the award of the Nakasero tender, which was irregular.

Upon being awarded the Nakasero Market contract, M/s Sheila Investment Ltd on 4 December 2004, requested KCC to make repairs on the toilets, water systems, park yard and chicken houses.

On 10 December 2002, the City Engineer and Surveyor gave M/s Sheila Investments Ltd a go-ahead to make the improvement as requested. However, contrary to what hon. Eng. Byandala told the committee, these improvements had a financial value since he had requested M/s Sheila Investments Ltd to submit the bill of quantities for the repairs.

The committee noted that Eng. Byandala did not conduct preliminary studies on M/s Sheila’s request to ascertain the nature and the volume of work but instead gave no objection, which has caused a loss to the tune of Shs900 million according to the bills of quantities submitted by M/s Sheila Investments Ltd. It was also discovered that he did not supervise the project/repairs nor did he avail the certificates of completion. 

There was clear conflict of interest by Eng. Byandala in that he was a consultant to the investor and at the same time the City Engineer as portrayed by appending his signature on the structural design. 

Members noted that Eng. Byandala is at the center of this problem as the City Engineer.  

Recommendation

Eng. Byandala makes good the loss of Shs900 million in accordance with Article 164(2) based on the percentage loss caused by each, and KCC should recover this money from his pension, gratuity and from any other source of his income.  The IGG should help enforce this recommendation. This recommendation replaces recommendation No.26 in the main report.  

M/S Sheila Investment Ltd Submissions

Mr Basajjabalaba informed the committee that M/s Sheila Investment Ltd is a subsidiary of Habba Investment Ltd where he is a chairman. He informed the committee that M/s Sheila Investments Ltd acquired the contract to manage Nakasero Market in 2002 for three years. Before the expiry of the management contract with M/s Sheila Limited, he entered into a joint venture.  He further stated that before the end of the contract, M/s Sheila got a sub-lease in May 2006.  

He further stated that as a result of the court order, M/s Sheila Investments Ltd got the sub-lease on 8 May 2007. 

Mr Basajjabalaba informed the committee that the joint venture never took off because KCC never fulfilled its obligations. 

On failure to pay KCC, he exonerated M/s Sheila Investments Ltd and noted that they were ever willing to pay, however, based on the reconciled accounts. Members noted that KCC had reconciled accounts, which M/s Sheila disputed since they were contentious, for example, the arbitrary change of contract sum from Shs25 million to Shs47 million, abolition of daily dues and Shs1 billion arising from the construction of the storied building at the market. 

He also noted that there were two reconciled figures from KCC. He categorically stated that M/s Sheila did not owe KCC any debt unless they reconciled to know who was indebted to the other. He noted that in the first year, all contract sums were paid upfront, but in the second year, they never paid KCC since it owed M/s Sheila Investments Ltd.

The witness stated that he proceeded with the development after being given a go-ahead by KCC. It has since been established that M/s Sheila Limited applied for permission to construct the storied building on 30 December 2002 and it was granted authority to construct the same on the same day by W.W. Rwanyange. For members to note, we were told that this engineer passed away. He also stated that in 2003, the council allowed the bills of cost which had also been verified by KCC engineer worth Shs1 billion.

Mr Basajjabalaba stated that in the second year he paid on a quarterly basis. He noted that M/s Sheila had never been in Nakasero illegally since KCC authorised it.

Mr Basajjabalaba informed the committee that M/s Sheila is not in the market under the new arrangement but shall expect KCC to hand over the market, failure of which he will resort to other means of obtaining redress.

He also stated that M/s Sheila Ltd first got an offer letter from KCC signed by Mr William Tumwine, Ag. Deputy Town Clerk.

On the purported Shs248 million paid to KCC, he stated that he paid much more than this; but these were eventually reconciled before granting the sub-lease.

He noted that if any errors were committed, the public officials responsible should be punished. About his company, the witness assured the committee that he would always protect his rights in the sub-lease.

Regarding the President’s directive that the market be given to the vendors, he stated that he had learnt of it in the press and would seek audience with H.E. the President to rebut the lies upon which the vendors got the market.

He concluded by informing the committee that his company is not in occupation of the market yet because the agreement does not permit him but will enter the market when the date arrives.  

Recommendations

KCC should reconcile accounts with M/s Sheila Limited on the management of Nakasero Market.

Recommendation No.3 of the main report is modified to read as follows: Though the transaction subsequent to the expiry of the management contract in 2005 between KCC and M/s Sheila Investments Ltd to date has been riddled by fraud and characterised by illegalities, Government should wait for the outcome of the court ruling in order to take care of the interest of the vendors in a transparent and competitive manner under the direct supervision of PPDAA.

Recommendation No.8 of the main report is modified to read that the Attorney-General should interest himself in the case regarding nullification of registration of sub-lease on Plot 4B and 7B Nakasero Street and Government should take appropriate action according to the outcome of the court case.

Recommendation No.9 and No.14 should be implemented depending upon the outcome of the court.

Mr Speaker, we have court documents here that I would wish to lay on the Table. We have clarified that there is a court order here: 

“THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA IN THE HIGH COURT OF UGANDA AT KAMPALA, APPLICATION No.590 of 2007, Arising out of Miscellaneous Application No.589 of 2007, arising out of a civil suit No.386 of 2007 Sheila Investment Ltd, Applicant/Plaintiff vs Chief Registrar of Titles   Respondent/Defendant  

Interim Order  
This application coming up this day 8 June 2007, before His Worship W. Masalu Musene upon hearing Godfrey Nangumya, counsel for the applicant in the presence of M/s Atalo Loyera, counsel for the responder. 

It is here by ordered that an interim order restraining the respondent/defendant, his agent/servant from reversing instrument No. KLA381421 relating to the sub-lease on a property known as LRV2808 folio 22 plot No. 7B and LRV2808 folio 24 plot No. 4B Kampala; and 

Further prohibiting the said Registrar from interfering with the building on the said sub-lease until the determination of the main application for temporary injunction; cost be in the cause. 

Given under my hand and seal of this honourable court this 8th day of June 2007. Signed by the Registrar of Court.”

I would like to lay the copies on the Table; and more copies are here for members. 

THE SPEAKER: But you had made a promise at the beginning that you were going to summarise. Is that what you are doing?

MR EKANYA: Okay, let me try to summarise. Mr William Tumwine informed the committee that the issue of re-developers of Nakasero Market came to his attention when the Minister of Local Government called him to his office. He noted that the choice of a developer appeared hand picked. 

He informed the committee that the issue of the vendors was discussed and the decision was that they enter into agreement with Ms. Sheila 

The committee was informed that it was his first transaction. He also informed the committee that the Executive was of the view that KCC goes a head with the sub-lease. The observation and commendation as presented in the main report still stand.

Mr Gordon Mwesigye, Former Town Clerk

Mr Mwesigye informed the committee that the strategic framework for reform of KCC had a number of pillars, including restructuring. He noted that in 2001, KCC advertised for management of the markets and that he had a lot of political pressure and he yielded to the demand of granting the market to Ms Sheila. Mr Gordon Mwesigye admitted liability on the illegality and the transaction of the market. 

The recommendations of the committee regarding, Mr Gordon Mwesigye

1.	The IGG should invoke the provision of Article 162(4) of the Constitution, the Leadership Code and other relevant laws to ensure recovery of these funds (Shs 1 billion) since he admitted liability. When Mr Mwesigye appeared before the committee, he admitted liability for the errors regarding construction of illegal structures in the market because he was the Town Clerk then.

2. KCC should recover this money from his pension and gratuity.

Mr James Ssegane, Former Town Clerk

He noted that the contract was running well. He informed the committee that there existed a joint venture between KCC and Ms Sheila and the former mayor, Mr Ssebaana Kizito, signed the agreement. He noted that KCC and Ms Sheila failed to implement the joint venture.

The committee recommends that he takes liability and makes good part of the loss of Shs 1 billion attributed to Mr Gordon Mwesige. 

The reason is that Mr Gordon Mwesigye who was the Town Clerk left the office when the structure was there, and when Mr Ssegane took over the office, he directed the then assistant engineer to prepare the evaluation of the illegal structure so that KCC owns it and takes it up.

Despite the Government Chief Valuer having been called, he rejected and insisted that the building was legal and could not stand simply because the architecture had not been known and other details.

Hon. Kahinda Otafiire, Minister of Local Government

On Ms Sheila’s request that he intervenes in the matter with KCC, he noted that though it was an open appeal to him, the Minister of Local Government seeking intervention in causing KCC to implement the joint venture caused a meeting of both sides with their respective lawyers to discuss the issue.

He noted that KCC was reluctant in the arbitration and took over months without presentation. KCC sighted the ambiguity that loomed amidst the impending take over of KCC by the Central Government for its reluctance.

Upon this, council decided to offer a sub-lease and he as a minister gave him advice. He informed the committee that the acting Town Clerk wrote to Ms Sheila terminating the contract. Upon this, Ms Sheila went to court, hence plot 4b and plot 7b issues became sub-jaundice. 

He pointed out that the sum from the management contract that were still outstanding and had not yet been paid were affected by the presidential directive on the market dues. 

The minister denied ever pressurising the acting Commissioner for Lands Registration pointing out that his letter was only a request, which would be accepted or not. He also noted that Mr Karibwende only wanted his letter for his record purpose. 

Hon. Otafiire future noted that HE the President’s decision was based on wrong information. He noted that there were unresolved legal issues and the matter is sub-jaundice.

Observation

Members noted that even before Ms Sheila was paid, the sub-lease was already registered.

It was noted that the Minister had successfully defended himself. It was therefore only logical to expunge the committee’s earlier recommendation No.26 on the Minister. Recommendation No.  26 is expunged from the main report. Though the Members were concerned with the minister’s close interactions with Ms Sheila investment Ltd and that this had raised suspicion. 

The committee noted that the Contracts Committee had no place in the disposal of KCC land but this is wrong since all disposal of council assets is subject to the PPDA Act, PPDA Regulations and Local Government Regulations, 2006. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that recommendation No. 26 of the main report be replaced as follows: 

The Minister is strongly urged to use the structures in his ministry for effective management of KCC affairs.

Mr Basir Bataringaya, Former Deputy Director Finance

Mr Basir Bataringaya informed the committee that he was acting on orders of Mr William Tumwine, Deputy Town Clerk. He noted that the deal was bad and the continued transaction of business with MS Sheila would lead to further loss of revenue to KCC and it was being driven by power politics from within KCC and without KCC. He had also complained to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government.

Recommendation

Recommendation No. 23 of the main report regarding the Deputy Director of Finance is modified to read, “The Town Clerk takes appropriate disciplinary action against the Deputy Director of Finance for misconduct towards the Director of Finance.” 

What happened Mr Speaker is that the Director of Finance reconciled accounts without referring – the Deputy Director of Finance, Mr Basir Bataringaya reconciled accounts with MS Sheila without referring the matter to the Director of Finance.

Eng. Turinawe Ephraim

The witness worked as Senior Assistant Engineer since his appointment in March 1989 up to his retirement from KCC service in February 2006.

His entrance into the Nakasero market matters started when he was instructed by the then Clerk to KCC, Mr Gordon Mwesigye to get all documents on Nakasero market and the proposed new construction and prepare the project cost.In the process, he could not find the structural drawing plan from the KCC archives. He informed the committee that he got a copy from the Nakasero market developers, which he used to draw up his costing. Honourable members, just as a summary Eng. Turinawe was Assistant Engineer to Eng. Byandala. 

The committee discovered that when he was directed to prepare and gather the necessary documents, he ignored the advice of the Chief Government Valuer, that had declared the structure illegal and that it could not stand in the middle of KCC. Upon being asked why he could not present a technical report, he stated that he was being threatened by dismissal by the Town Clerk and Eng. Byandala. 

Recommendations

Recommendation No. 26 regarding Eng. Turinawe should be modified to read as follows, “Tthe Association of Engineers should investigate the professionalism of Eng. Ephraim Turinawe in his conduct of the affairs of Nakasero market and take appropriate measures and the responsible minister reports to Parliament on the outcome.”

Conclusion

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee would like to appreciate the effort put in by the witnesses and for their co-operation during the meetings.

The committee requests this house to adopt the report and the recommendations therein to be implemented by the relevant government bodies. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and members of the committee. Honourable members, as you see this is another part of the committee’s report, which I think – the first one was presented sometime ago. I do not know how we – because if we debate, we have to debate the two jointly.

MR EKANYA: I would like to also present the minutes and the evidence, as per our Rules. I beg to lay documents related to High Court Civil Suit No. 82 of 2007, consent order for withdraw of the suit. I would also like to lay copies of complaints, signatures of the vendors of Nakasero market, the minutes, evidence from the Town Clerk, the Minister of Local Government and all the witnesses who appeared as attached here, file No. 28.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay all the minutes of the committee proceedings which we were able to type and print, otherwise there is a complete Hansard, because during these meetings all the decisions were being recorded.

I would also like to lay documents, which were tabled before the committee and submission of Mr Basajjabalaba. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have to read the two reports to be able to effectively debate. I do not know whether you can in the present circumstances- you need to look at the other report. What do we do? We debate this next week, because tomorrow is fully booked. We fix a day next week when we will be in position to debate this and I suggest Wednesday. So, you go and study them so that you prepare your submissions on the two reports.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It might also be necessary for us to have the main report that has been repeatedly referred to in this summary. It appears there is a bigger document that has not been availed to us yet. So, for the story to be complete, it may be necessary to peruse the entire report.

THE SPEAKER: Which report? 

MR AMURIAT: The original report.

THE SPEAKER: The original report was given to you many months ago-(Interjections)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, we have taken steps to reproduce more copies. 

THE SPEAKER: But I am sure these copies must be with you somewhere.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS ON THE LUGOGO LAND

5.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (MR Geoffrey Ekanya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will summarise this one. During the examination of audited accounts of KCC, the committee discovered that several assets of KCC were irregularly being disposed of. Among these included the area between Shoprite and UMA, which is currently being used as a sports ground - land comprised in plots 15-17, Lugogo Sports Grounds. 

The committee established that the intended location Shoprite and Uganda Manufacturers Association show grounds Lugogo is in contravention of Katorobo Commissions Report of 2006 appointed by the Minister of Local Government, page 42-43, which recommends the land for recreation and sports activities. _

The transaction follows a directive by the Minister of Local Government to the acting Town Clerk to allocate the land to, Ms Valley View Estates Ltd, and the letter is attached. 

Contrary to the advice of PPDA, which was in accordance with PPDA Act No. 1 of 2003, which enjoins KCC to subject the sale to competitive bidding and subsequently consider the best proposal, the Minister of Local Government, the acting Town Clerk in collusion with KCC council solicited and selected Ms Valley View Estates Ltd without the due process being followed. A letter from PPDA, Executive Director, to the acting Town Clerk, KCC, dated 16 February 2007, is herein attached. Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, it emerged that NEMA had not authorised this land to be given out to Ms Valley View Estates Ltd. to put up the structure. 

It also emerged that next to that land was also sports ground land, which was being used by the Rugby Club of Uganda. It emerged that Rugby Football Club started using this land way back in 1998 and they had even secured funding to build a centre for Africa rugby in that place.  

During the meeting it emerged that the authority to convert change of use of this land had not been sought. 

It also emerged that if this land had been given to the developer Ms Valley View Estates Ltd., the activity of Uganda Manufacturers Association would be totally affected because during the show; that is where show goers park their vehicles and it is even a point for fire escape in case of danger. 

The place is also a wetland reserved between Lugogo Show Ground and Shoprite and therefore it also emerged in our meeting and consultation with NEMA that if that land is used and new structures are in place, KCC, especially that area along Jinja road, would have a worse state of floods because that is a kind of reserve. 

Recommendations

In light of the above findings, the committee recommends that:

(a)	The land remains as a green belt and should therefore be reserved as such;
(b)	The land remains reserved as a flood plain;
(c)	The sports grounds at Lugogo should be maintained as sports and recreation facilities under UMA and Uganda Rugby Union respectively;
(d)	UMA and the Rugby Club’s applications for leasing the land should be considered following the requisite procedure;
(e)	The Minister of Lands protects the land from any further interference by lodging a government caveat;
(f)	Government acquires the land in public interest for UMA in order to promote industrialisation, tourism and recreation activities; and
(g)	The Rt hon. Prime Minister reports on the progress of these recommendations, which we had stated that by the end of September 2007, which has passed.

In conclusion, the change of land use at Lugogo is not in public interest and it is detrimental to the environment. The responsible minister should, therefore, not deviate from national goals and vision enshrined in the PEAP, which focus on environmental protection, industrialisation and tourism, among others.  

Hon. Speaker and hon. Members, I wish to lay on Table some of the documents: List of appendices /or attachments: 81 page attachment from UMA; Letter from KCC dated 27 July, 2007-initial rental of the field; sub-lease agreement for Plots 15 and 17, Coronation Avenue; extracts from the Ministry of Local Government, Commission of Inquiry into   KCC land allocations; Plans for changing room and toilet block; and quotations from Keltron Ltd for installation of flood lights. Mr Speaker, all these documents are herein attached including the minutes of the committee.

Very importantly, hon. Speaker, I would wish to read a letter from H.E. the President directing the Minister of Local Government to reserve this land for UMA. The letter is herein attached, dated 05 June, 2007 and signed by H.E. Yoweri K. Museveni, President, and copied to the Rt hon. Prime Minister, the hon. Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Chairman, Uganda Manufacturing Association, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Local Government and the Mayor, Kampala City. Thank you, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I thank you chairperson and members of the committee for the report.  Now, Members you have received this report; are you in position to debate or we again debate it with the other one on Wednesday, so that we finish Nakasero and then go to Lugogo? 

HON. MEMBERS: We do it once.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. On item No.8, I have been advised by the Minister of Finance that this money in the proposed loan or borrowing lapsed and they are trying to negotiate with the bank so that it can be revived, otherwise it is no longer available. There was time within which the Government should have processed it but this was not done and as a result the offer lapsed; it is no longer available. But they are taking steps to ensure that it can be back on Table. So, with this we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow to continue with other business. 

   (The House rose at 5.18 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 February 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)


