Thursday, 28 February 2008
 
Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. In the gallery, we have our visitors - the visitors of the Leader of the Opposition - who have come here to see the proceedings of the House. You are most welcome. (Applause)

I have been requested by hon. Ahabwe to remind you of the function this evening in the parliamentary gardens, to which you are all invited. Please go and give him the necessary support. 

Yesterday, I announced the team which will scrutinise a report of the committee on Nakasero Market, in particular to examine all the legal and constitutional issues, and make a recommendation to us before we debate [Mr Kaliba: “Bat Valley”] sorry, Bat Valley, before we pronounce ourselves on what happens. I have seen a report in a newspaper that we have made a decision; we have not made any decision because we have not debated that report. The debate will come after this team has reported.  

It could be that some people were not here; maybe I have to repeat the names. They are: Hon. Peter Nyombi, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Nuwagaba, hon. Okello-Okello, hon. Sam Njuba, hon. Balikuddembe and hon. Kawanga. Unfortunately, I did not indicate who should convene because we need somebody to convene such a team, and I hereby appoint hon. Ben Wacha to be the convener. And as I said, it is an urgent matter, which can be handled in a day and a report made, because it is a question of considering the constitutional and the legal provisions and then see how you harmonise the recommendations with the law and the Constitution. 

2.35
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question of road accidents continues to worry me and indeed I think it continues to worry Ugandans. Only a few days back, the Police Traffic Department released a report and they did say that last year alone, 2,334 people died in road accidents, and that 12,056 were wounded. Now that does not mention the details of how many orphans and widows were created out of those road accidents, and how many families were lost. 

The same report said that there is a 7.5 percent increase in road accidents. Last year, on 19 July 2007, I did raise a similar concern in this House, after the death of our former colleague from Mbale, and the House decided that the committee on Physical Infrastructure should look into this matter and actually examine ways in which we can bring down the carnage on our roads. Unfortunately, it seems to be taking too long and every day that passes by, somebody dies. 

From what is emerging - after listening to a report on the tour of the minister of state for Transport, hon. Ejua, in Western Uganda - he said the problem is over-speeding and even after reading a report by the traffic department, they also said the problem is over-speeding. Now, no one is telling us what has happened to speed governors and no one is telling us what has happened to the enforcement. There are regulations in this country, but people continue to die in huge numbers every other day. I think we really ought to be worried about this situation. 

Mr Speaker, I urge the committee - if the report can help us find ways of controlling the carnage on the roads - to do the fastest it can and probably give us a report by Monday. I see the chairman is looking at me, but I am very concerned. 

2.37
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I must also thank hon. Alaso for raising this. It is lined among the forthcoming business, and I appreciate that it will be better to have this report when the Minister of Works and Transport is available here. He is on leave currently, but by next week -(Interruption)- no, allow me please. This is an important issue that almost every Member of Parliament has lost a friend or a relative in accidents. It needs a concerted effort that we all fight together as a team, because some of the clauses in the Road Traffic Act were suspended. So, this is the same House that will definitely request the Minister to operationalise the Act. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think this is okay. Let us wait for the business of next week. Honourable, did you indicate that you had some business? 

HON. MEMBERS: It is commercial.

THE SPEAKER: Commercial? (Laughter)- Yes, but he should have come to me and indicated he had something to say. But, okay, say it briefly. 

2.39
MR ABOUD KITATTA (NRM, Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, we had a catastrophe in Mbarara, but again another catastrophe occurred in my constituency in the village of Kakoma Akanoni, whereby a hailstorm destroyed crops of the people in that area and even some houses were destroyed. So, I would like to appeal to Government, through the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, to come to the rescue of my people. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but what you should do in future when you have a problem is to get in touch with the Minister concerned and brief him, so that immediate action is taken. I think it is okay. 

2.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, we need your help here. I remember last year around November, the issue arose here of rotten seeds, fake pangas and hoes, and these were the items and commodities that were meant for the people in the North, especially those in IDPs and those who were going back home, and those in Teso. A committee was set up and this is now the time for people to prepare gardens. They need pangas, they need hoes, and the seeds need to be availed to them but up to now, the committee has not provided a report. Even when I look at the business to follow, I do not see it. 

I would urge your Office, Mr Speaker, to direct the committee to avail it such that when the rains start next month, the people in the affected areas are able to get the seeds so that they are able to plant them, because it has taken too long. I remember you had given them one month to produce this report but it has really taken so long. 


THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will get in touch with them so that they expedite the process. 

2.41
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ MINISTER OF INFORMATION AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Mr Speaker, I stand to present the notice of Government Business from 4th to 6th March 2008, under Rule 25 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to give notice that the business to follow between the 4th to 6th March 2008 will stand as follows:

1.	Motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the Report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on Lugogo.
2.	Motion for presentation, consideration and adoption of the Report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on Nakasero Market.
3.	Motion for a Resolution of Parliament on Debt Equity Swap (Phenix logistics (Uganda) Limited/ UDBL) loan of Shs. 5 billion, including interest. 
4.	Report on Public Accounts Committee on the Auditor-General’s report for the year ending June 2002/2005.
5.	Report of PAC on the allocation of public land.
6.	Report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the road carnage situation in Uganda.  
7.	Presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the delegation to the international seminar on sustainable road financing and investment.
8.	Presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the delegation to the UN Habitat for Humanity. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, is it an oversight that you have not announced that a statement will be made on the 9,000 square miles in Buganda - (Laughter) - specifically in light of Tuesday?

MR KIVEJINJA: Mr Speaker, it will be made as directed on the 4 March 2008 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.44
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am the Secretary- General for the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. This is a body in Parliament, which is composed of 140 Members of Parliament. 

Before I lay the papers, last year in May, we constituted a delegation that went to Karamoja and assessed the situation of children in that area, following the problem which we had in Kampala with street children, where most of the children on the streets were coming from Karamoja. 

This report was compiled by a group of Members who went to Karamoja, and it is entitled “Assessing the situation of children in Karamoja; what has changed and what need to be done.” In summary, those Members who went there summarised the situation of living conditions of children in Karamoja as human misery. 

So, I therefore request that you allot time in future, after Members have read this report, so that we can discuss and really assist the Government in finding a lasting solution to the situation of children in Karamoja. I, therefore, accordingly, lay the report on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. And therefore, I think the appropriate committee will take up the report, study it and make its observations to Parliament. Yes, hon. Minister. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER(RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, last week I was on Floor of this House, to present a report on the post-flood Government interventions in the flood-affected areas, and the post-flood activities in the North and North-Eastern part of the country. 

This House found the report to be very thick and therefore recommended that they would go and study it, so that we could go through it today. Given the size of the report, I have decided to extract a small summary that I will go through together with honourable colleagues. That summary was circulated, and I beg to request that in case there are officers who never got it, they could also get a copy, if it is still here with my staff. 

Mr Speaker, as you may recall, between July and November 2007, the Eastern and Northern part of the country suffered floods that devastated the region, with Teso sub-region being the most affected. On a positive note, I am happy to report that the job Parliament assigned my ministry in September 2007 has been successfully done. 

By the time my ministry moved to the ground, the threat of death on our people was real and it was real in the following areas:

Starvation due to lost food and inaccessibility to some of the communities that had been cut off, a big percentage of the population lost their harvest and there was disruption of planting. 

Mr Speaker, the state of sanitation deteriorated. There was poor sanitation due to collapsed facilities to the extent that in some areas in Katakwi, that is Ongora, for example, faecal matter was literally seen floating in people’s homesteads. Thus, this increased the likelihood of disease outbreaks like Cholera, Dysentery and other water-borne infections. 

There was increased risk of water-borne diseases like I said before, also in the area of 	malaria, diarrhoea, respiratory infections, dysentery, measles and all those diseases associated with the breakdown and flooding of the area. 

There was also physical harm, Mr Speaker, because houses were collapsing on the inhabitants. The catastrophe displaced close to 300,000 people; that is about 50,000 homesteads. There was damage to infrastructure like schools, to be precise 174 schools were recorded damaged, health facilities, roads and bridges. 75 percent of the affected schools were unable to reopen in time, in 2007. 

Security was undermined and the mobility of the security agencies was curtailed as a result of flooded roads and collapsed bridges. Some of the Police posts were displaced from strategic positions, especially at the boarder with the Karamoja region. As you know, Mr Speaker, the ASTU and other security units are deployed along the border of Karamoja and Teso, and Karamoja and Lango to curtail the rustlers from infiltrating the neighbouring districts. 

Worse still, the tragedy mainly befell the already displaced and vulnerable people in the camps, cutting them off and displacing some of them further. 

Despite all the above challenges, I wish Parliament to note that my ministry, in collaboration with other ministries, humanitarian agencies and development partners, did everything possible to save the situation. I wish Parliament to register that from the time my ministry got engaged in responding to the catastrophe, no more deaths were experienced. 

I am happy to report that with your support, particularly you, Mr Speaker, and these honourable colleagues to which we are very grateful, we were not only able to lead and guide the interventions but we also coordinated interventions from other humanitarian and charity organisations, including the private sector, in my view very effectively. As a result we were able to save thousands of lives from an imminent death. 

To add to this and as we speak, internationally, Uganda is seen as a model when it comes to coordinating emergency response. While the international community appreciates that we have not yet developed the capacity to prevent catastrophes, they respect our capacity to coordinate emergency responses to the extent that we are seen as resource persons to help the rest of the world. In a very special way, we want to extend our gratitude to H.E The President and the Rt hon. Prime Minister for their personal involvement in not only identifying and mobilising resources but also guiding interventions. 

We want to thank Parliament for being united in the face of this disaster, which helped us to cover a lot of ground. Parliament approved resources totalling to UShs 22, 409,735,350. This money was allocated to various sectors of Government to implement emergency related activities as follows:

1.	Office of the Prime Minister, Department of Disaster Management and Refugees, Shs 2 billion for purchase of relief food.
2.	Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Shs 4.820 billion for planting materials.
3.	Ministry of Water and Environment, UShs 2.24 billion for provision of safe and clean water.
4.	Ministry of Education and Sports, Shs 666,500,000 to help rectify affected schools.
5.	Ministry of Health, Shs 1,183,235,350 for health facilities.
6.	Ministry of Works and Transport, Shs 10 billion for road works.
7.	Ministry of Defence, Shs 1.5 billion to assist in transportation of relief items especially to inaccessible and cut off areas.

Mr Speaker, some of the sectors that is Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication and Ministry of Health have already submitted their accountabilities here attached as annex IV in the report. Some of the sectors are still implementing interventions from this same fund due to long procurement and contracting procedures but at an appropriate time, my ministry will request all the respective sectors of Government to furnish reports to this House as to how they spent the resources to the detail allocated to them under this emergency. However, our office is happy to note that all these sectors are on the ground and they have already made interventions while others are still ongoing. 

Our appreciation goes to the UN family, bilateral partners, NGOs and other charity organisations, the private sector plus the general public for whatever contribution they made towards addressing this catastrophe. 

Allow me to also add that there was a charity walk here, which was graced by the presence of H.E the President. I want, on a very special note, to recognise the contribution of the Leader of the Opposition in this House because he made a very significant- His presence helped to give a united face to the challenge. 

Special recognition is made to countries that made contributions as follows, just to mention but a few, Egypt who gave us drugs and food; Algeria who gave us food. Mr Speaker, Algeria sent their air force to fly in food. The Republic of Israel gave us drugs and given their experience in disaster management, they have also allowed us opportunities to train our children in their country in disaster management. The first batch of officers will be leaving at the end of this year. 

The German Government sent a water treatment plan, which was able to clean 60,000 litres of water per hour. This plant was installed in Magoro, Katakwi district where 98 percent of the water sources had been contaminated. This intervention saved thousands of lives in this area. 

As Government, we are very grateful to the German Government. Japan provided tents and blankets, which saved children and mothers from pneumonia. Several others also intervened as you will note from the big report already with you. 
The details of the flash appeal also reflect other countries that made significant contributions. The responses included the following: food distribution to over 500,000 people - please refer to your report for details. Roughly, 1000 metric tonnes of cereals, palsies and vegetable oil were distributed in the region. Attached as annex 1 are details of what was also provided by World Food Programme. 

We delivered 686 metric tonnes of relief items to 85 locations that were inaccessible by air because the Ministry of Defence was kind to avail us their helicopter, which supplemented what we mobilised from the UN. UPDF and the UN were very instrumental in facilitating transportation of these items with the help of their helicopters and trucks. Planting materials were distributed to the severely affected districts by both Government and partners, as you will note further in the report before you. Safe water kits were distributed to 60,000 households; water treatment plants were installed; continued testing of water is ongoing. Government and its partners prevented disease outbreak and ensured the capacity to respond. 

As we speak, there still vans there, which are doing surveillance and sensitisation of the population. They distributed essential drugs to all the affected districts. An annex is attached. Mobile clinics were operated to reach out to all the affected communities, and for the cut off communities air transport was used. 

I want in a special way to recognise the contribution of the Indian community led by hon. Tanna. Hon. Tanna was able to mobilise the Indian community in Uganda and they made a very significant contribution of items, including drugs worth about Shs 70 million and they were taken to Katakwi. They also accepted to operate a mobile clinic. We want to thank hon. Tanna and through him, the Indian community in Uganda. 

Access to education was ensured as well as reopening of schools. Partners established temporary learning centres for schools that were damaged or cut off. In total, 33 classroom tents and 74 teachers’ tents were improvised in different strategic locations. I wish to report that examinations were successfully conducted by the Ministry of Education and Sports as is indicated in the thicker report. The results may not have been good but what is critical is that at least they did the exams. Since then, some school facilities and latrines have been rehabilitated and all schools are now able to open for this term. 

The ministry, in conjunction with partners, was able to provide some household kits like mosquito nets, emergency shelter utensils, water containers and blankets to over 100,000 households in all the affected districts. 

Rehabilitation of feeder and access roads has been done in some areas although this needs to be stepped up. Some of the affected areas, which were cut off have at least been made ‘motorable’. We identified support to district local governments for recovery interventions as well. 

As I speak, we have developed what we call the Early Livelihood Recovery Programme for the flood affected districts, resources have already been mobilised and the UNDP is administering that resource. They are based in the affected areas. The ministry has continued to closely monitor the districts that were affected by the floods and has developed a contingency plan, under the various sectors, to address any upcoming threats but also to address the post flood effects. 

From the Uganda Flash Appeal 2007, huge amounts of resources were generated under the UN. A total of $ 41,469,801 was required for the response and that was what we launched in the Flash Appeal. We were able to raise $ 20,386,962 from the various donor agencies and this went to organisations like ASB, Food and Agricultural Organisation, Lutheran World Federation, UNOCHA, UNDP, UN Habitat, UNHCR, UNICEF but majorly World Food Programme and World Health Organisation. This was meant to implement activities under the various sectors like water and sanitation, food, health and education. This is also put in the thick report as Annex II.

Mr Speaker, the current challenges. The most expensive and challenging phase in my view has come. This is the recovery phase, which involves rehabilitation and reconstruction of not only the livelihoods but the entire infrastructure in the affected regions. Major roads and bridges deteriorated and they need to be rehabilitated or reinforced. Some schools reopened with sanitation facilities not up to minimum standards. Sanitation in some cases is non-existent. 

The health sector is under staffed in most of these areas without adequate first line response capacity. There are areas where up to now, we don’t even have medical personnel to administer even the emergency intervention that is delivered there. More than 57 percent of the water sources are still contaminated. 

Food insecurity in the region is already at hand. There is need, from our assessment, to feed the entire population of Karamoja, which costs $ 1 million, to feed the 500,000 people in Teso and parts of Lango. There is hunger and famine in some areas as we talk and some people are going with only a meal a day. The extremely vulnerable individuals still need special attention like the children and the elderly in some places. 

Mr Speaker, I remember recently visiting a place called Nawonoetau in Moroto district. I found that they had separated elders from the able bodied and they said that in the event that the resources are limited, the able bodied would be the first to get but the elders can wait because as far as they were concerned, the resources would not be enough to go around to the elders as well. So, there is a situation particularly affecting the very vulnerable. There is also need for alternative livelihood opportunities in the region for diversification. 

Mr Speaker, the purpose of giving this statement is twofold. One is because Parliament is supposed to get it by law; two, to bring to your attention the aftermath of the floods. We have all along focused our attention on the emergency and we feel that this phase should come to an end so that we can start addressing the post flood effects. We request Parliament to lift the state of emergency, which was declared in September 2007. We believe the declaration has outlived its purpose and should be lifted. With your permission, we request to focus our attention on the post flood interventions. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister, for the report. I would like to welcome the Mayor of Masaka, Eng. Tibaso and his executive. You are welcome. (Applause) Debate is open on this report.

3.05
MR BEN WACHA (Independent, Oyam County North, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I congratulate the Minister on this statement. Let me start by congratulating the Minister again on developing a draft national policy for disaster. This is long overdue. The ad hoc manner in which we have been handling disaster issues in this country is in itself disastrous. Nobody seems to know what to do when a disaster occurs because we don’t follow any programmed arrangement so the sooner this policy comes out, the better for everybody concerned. 

Secondly, I want to implore Government to develop a rapid response disaster brigade. It seems to me that it takes a lot of time for Government to respond when disasters occur. If you take over one week to respond to a disaster then you will have failed the victims. A rapid disaster brigade should be there as fast as possible, in any case not later than 24 hours. Any other interventions can occur thereafter but immediate action needs to be taken when a disaster occurs. At any rate anyway, there are certain disasters that don’t give you time. Supposing there was an earthquake, what do you do? Something needs to be done. A group of people, highly trained in management of disasters should be in place all the time. 

Thirdly, Government should also start thinking about establishing a disaster fund in which monies are put awaiting disasters. This thing of Uganda being a model for coordinating disasters- I think we should not even be proud of that. You look at this report; we thank so and so for giving us this. They themselves are giving you this because they are able to do it but they get the monies also from their taxpayers. 


We are also able, if we put aside a little bit of money at every budget, to build up our own fund so that when interventions are coming on later, we would have started doing something about our disasters. Then you can be proud of coordinating the aid given to you. But to be proud when you do not have anything is shameful. I thank you.

3.09
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for being responsible enough to come back to the House to give a statement about the disaster that befell this country. 

I am not proud of the way the minister is because if at all there was something substantial, we should all be proud as a country for the coordination. But I want to build on what hon. Wacha said that we should go back to the drawing board. The Ministry for Disaster Preparedness is disaster itself because they have nothing in place to support them. In terms of structure, they are limited to the headquarters; they are limited to Kampala. They rely on other structures when it comes to their activities. 

I only wish that the ministry could expand its presence, improve on its structures so that it is able to fill – to me the biggest thing we lack is first of all for the ministry to get a sense of an early warning signal. You cannot wait until a disaster has occurred and then you respond and then later on you turn around after people have died and say, “We are very proud, we are capable of coordinating all these”. 

Assuming the rain had continued, were you going to be proud? Nature also helped because the rain stopped. So, we should be above that; we should plan; we should have the capacity to have an early warning system in order to prepare ourselves for any of these challenges. And you see, when such a thing happens, it is not about only the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness. 

I was saddened when the minister said that he is very grateful because the Ministry of Defence was very kind to give them a helicopter. They were not kind, those are our resources and it is their responsibility. The Ministry of Defence is supposed to work on disaster anywhere. When disasters like these occur, they are supposed to come in. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister was just courteous to an institution. There is no harm in him being courteous to the Ministry of Defence for surrendering its facilities for this; it could have refused.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, yes but you see, the manner in which the minister stated, it is as if he was very grateful to the Ministry of Defence. You know, you work in a coordinated manner. Actually he should have come here and said, “We are very proud as a Government because together we were able to do this”, because it is not only the Ministry of Defence which actually gave a hand; so many other Government departments came in and supported you. That is the context in which I was arguing. 

As hon. Ben Wacha said, we should not wait for disaster to occur and then we come for a charity walk. It is a shame for a whole President to come out and go for a charity walk in order to raise funds to respond to a disaster situation. We should, as a country, be able to access funds to respond to such situations. 

Mr Speaker, when the minister made his statement, his major focus was on the areas of Teso, part of Lango and Karamoja. But I also want to draw his attention to - if you are talking about the flood disaster, you should take note of the Acholi sub-region because it was badly affected. Actually, it had the longest rains. The only difference is that the nature of the soil and drainage in the area limited the disaster to damaged roads and bridges, but most of the rivers became flooded, and the crops were destroyed. 

MS WONEKHA: Thank you honourable for giving way. Mr Speaker, the focus also left out Bududa District where we had lots of landslides. We had landslides in Manafwa; we had landslides in Kapchorwa, Sironko and Bukwo. So, the programme did not address everybody in disaster. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, we declared a state of emergency under Article 110 of the Constitution. Under Article 110(2), a state of emergency will remain in existence for not more than 90 days and shall then expire. Under 110(6): “During any period when a state of emergency declared under this Article exists, the President shall submit to Parliament at such intervals as Parliament may prescribe, regular reports on actions taken by or on behalf of the President for the purposes of the emergency.” I get confused: is the minister giving us his report basing on Article 110(6) or the minister is giving us the report under Article 110(2) because I understand the state of emergency has expired and during emergency, the government did not give us actions that were being taken during that period. And now they are coming here after the emergency! This Article is very clear; it says that Government will give us actions taken within the period of emergency. So, I do not understand, I need guidance from you, otherwise it is unconstitutional. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: This statement is made by the Minister in charge of Disaster and it is meant to brief us on what actions were taken by the minister. The question of state of emergency, maybe some other person will come but as far as I am concerned, he is telling us what was done by his sector in those areas that were affected by the floods. But this will not prejudice somebody responsible for declaring emergency to come here to do the needful. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am raising this for the future because during any emergency - and we want to advise Government - they need to follow the Constitution. During emergency, actions being taken by Government should be notified to Parliament during that period. But you do not wait until it expires and then you come when it is too late. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are right but the subject today is: what did the Ministry in charge of Disaster do? That is his concern but you have a valid point. However, let us continue dealing with what has been brought to us by the Minister for Disaster, without prejudice to what you have said. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that when the state of emergency was declared, many of us expected the government to do a lot more than charity walks led by the President and the Leader of the Opposition and coordinating collections from well wishers. We expected that we would go back and dip our hands into the national coffer and support the people who were badly affected. 

As a person who comes from part of the areas that got affected, we are not happy that Government did not do enough apart from getting collections, coming back to the national treasury and getting some funds because the money given – the money stated – first of all the money given for works is actually not adequate. If you go and see the kind of work done on some of these roads, which were extremely damaged like the Gulu-Juba road; you can imagine that any amount of rain now will take back this road to where it was during the floods. Therefore, it will make it extremely impassable. In future, Government should be more responsible and more sensitive; that all human beings are equal when there is disaster in this place. We must all cough as a nation and get back to the national treasury to support us.

I also want to know from the minister the major programme that is left because there are some bridges that are in a bad state and March is coming and the rain is coming again. We do not know the magnitude. For example, Aswa Bridge between Gulu and Kitgum you know it got flooded and students were being flown by helicopters courtesy of the UPDF. Now, what will become of it when it comes to March because the bridge is still extremely bad?  

Finally, do you see any emergency coming in the near future -(Laughter)- because you should have learnt lessons now and your ears are open? Do you foresee any emergency coming? (Laughter) And if so, are you prepared to deal with it promptly? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.21
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for this statement to Parliament. But straight away I would like to comment on the gaps that were glaring at the time of managing this disaster. The process of collecting data in all those regions was extremely poor and slow to the extent that some of the areas, which were seriously affected, were inadvertently omitted because of the poor data collection system. Therefore, I would like to urge the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to improve on its data collection system, in fact they should put in place a system that can get timely data for faster management or faster planning of interventions. 

Again in line, with that I have got complaints from a number of district disaster management committees that at the time of planning, the committees were involved. But when it came to the implementation, especially the manner in which the Shs 22.5 billion that Parliament appropriated for this disaster, by and large, they became observers. I think it is important for the district disaster management committees to be involved in all stages. A Member has just said here that the structure of the ministry is skeletal at all levels, both at the headquarters and at the local governments. But involvement of the district disaster management committees at all levels would probably address those gaps.

Mr Speaker, I want to comment on the manner in which the Shs 22.5 billion was allotted to various departments. You realise that almost half of the money went to Works. But one would require to get convinced on how Works has actually undertaken the tasks that it was faced with. I may give examples: the highway between Kumi and Soroti, especially at Awoja Bridge, was submerged in the floods and as we speak now, there are a number of potholes. In fact the tarmac is no more. 

About two days ago, one of the buses for Gateway Bus Company overturned at that bridge. I am wondering what the ministry is waiting for to start doing the work? I do not know whether this Shs 10 billion that the ministry was allocated did not anticipate handling emergency repairs of Awoja Bridge? 

It was also envisaged that the Ministry of Works would help to improve on the road from Kumi via Ngora through Brooks Corner to Soroti because when Awoja Bridge got submerged, that became the major link and there is a narrow bridge at Agu, which is just a one-way; two vehicles cannot cross it at the same time. So, the bridge is narrow and low. It was also planned that the Ministry of Works would handle improvements on that bridge but to-date I am wondering what is happening with the Ministry of Works and yet it got the major allocation. 

I am concerned that other sectors like education, which was given a mere Shs 665 million covering the whole of that region, which was under disaster, but had to grapple with problems of collapsed pit latrines in various schools. Many schools are actually in a funny shape. If anything, if we are to institute strict inspection, some of the schools ought to be closed because of having poor sanitation facilities. So, I think the allocations to the various departments that were to handle the disaster were rather skewed and we need serious audit on what some of these sectors have done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.26
MS BETTY AMONGI (Independent, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the detailed report because I sit on the Local Government Accounts Committee and if this accountability was standard, the accountability that we were receiving from Government, it would make work very easy. Because then it can make Members go back to their constituencies against this and see whether or not value for money is being achieved. 

However, I want to ask the minister: in your detailed report, some of the roads listed are either waiting for funds or some of them are having work in progress but funds are still lacking and some are still even waiting for funds as of February and March. It would be good for you to tell us whether this money will be got in time for most of the roads on which work has not commenced in your detail report.

Under the agriculture department, they are saying that money was sent to the districts. Was it sent to the districts to purchase or the aiding is not correct? 

The other issue I want to raise is that the emergency of floods was due to the broader question of global warming and was not only in Uganda. In most African countries at that time, it was a common problem. I want to know what your ministry is doing as a policy to sensitise the country on the impact and effect of global warming. What are the policies you are putting in place and what do you think, at a global level, is our Government position on issues of global warming and the causes? I am sure the issues are in the precincts of international debate. What is our position as a country on some of these causes of global warming and what do we envisage as a response? This is the fundamental cause of the problem of emergency floods. Thank you.

3.30
MR CHARLES OLENY (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for making this very elaborate statement to this House. Without going into the nitty-gritty of the report as given, as the Member of Parliament for Usuk County, one of the counties that suffered heavily, I want to indeed thank the minister and Government, NGOs and the public who came in to assist at the time all of us in that area of Uganda needed that help. 

The minister has indicated that it was not an easy task. I also want to make mention of the fact that this exercise turned out to be very expensive. Although reasonable amounts of money were released to this effort, the implementers of the rescue and response effort carried out what they were referring to as special emergency operations and it is from this dimension that the UPDF was involved. This involved, for example, transporting 40 bags of posho in a chopper. Government or the implementing agency had to fuel these choppers only to deliver 40 bags. This in essence meant that it was a high cost operation and probably if you went into the value for money question, it would turn out to be that it was a high cost, probably with minimal impact on those people who needed this assistance most. 

My appeal to the minister is that in future, we should be able to consider all the options that can be used to deliver any emergency assistance. For instance, if at that time specialised trucks were available, I am sure it would have been less expensive to deliver this food to that area than using aviation fuel. 

It is also true –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: I am getting a little bit perturbed. The Member comes from Teso and at that time Teso was flooded and the only possible option in was to fly. Whether the cost was high, the cost of life would even be much higher. So I want to find out from him that the area of Teso was flooded and trucks could not move, what other cheaper option would have been the most appropriate to deliver food to save lives to the people who were isolated?

MR OLENY: Thank you very much. The point I am making is not to dismiss the option but I am saying probably at that time, it was not the best option. I say this because you could have had a call for amphibian vehicles, which could have been able to deliver -(Laughter)- or even in some instances boats. I have not dismissed the option that was applied by the ministry. 

The earlier speakers to this statement alluded to the fact that –

THE SPEAKER: I want to draw your attention to our rules; we cannot spend more than 30 or so minutes on a ministerial statement and so far five people have made contributions. I intend to take another two or three and that will be the end.

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Earlier speakers alluded to the fact that in terms of institutional development in the ministry to respond to future disasters, we need to come up with a mechanism through which specialised agencies can be involved. In our Constitution, we are ordered under Article 249, that: “There shall be a Disaster Preparedness and Management Commission for Uganda to deal with both natural and man-made disasters.” Of course this point was made by hon. Wacha and the others and I think it is high time the ministry came up with this provision. 

Under the proposed National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Policy, chapter 2, page 5, which was circulated by the minister also, the institutional framework does not in any case indicate that they hope to establish such a commission. Probably this could be a word to the minister that he needs to take into account the order of the Constitution.

On the question of the President’s participation in a charity walk that was organised by mostly the leaders of Teso, I want to say that the President is a human a being. When we organised this charity walk, he came in to share with the leaders of the affected sub-region. 

Secondly, he is the President of this country and in his participation, in addition to the provisions that he made to different ministries to respond to the disaster, he also pledged to support the effort of the group and he pledged Shs 100 million in recognising the effort of that leadership. I want at this point to remind the minister that the leadership of Teso sub-region is still waiting for the Shs 100 million. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Oleny. I just want to add for the record of this House that among the very prominent participants in the charity walk was His Highness Emorimor Papa Iteso; he took part in that charity walk. Thank you.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much for that useful information. Finally, the minister in his statement provides the details of how various ministries were to respond to this disaster. We welcome the fact that Agriculture, for example, has made available some money to the districts and I can confirm that Katakwi District has received some money to go into the purchase of seeds and planting material. But the Ministry of Works, which is one of those I regard as key, has not come down to the ground to make this money available. I want to get clarification from the minister as to whether this Shs 10 billion has already been released to Works or not yet. Down on the ground, it is being waited for and nothing is showing up. 

Mr Speaker, on the return of some of the people who had been displaced for quite a long time to their homeland after the recession of the floods, I want to inform this House that we have a parish called Angisa in Usuk County, which was receiving all its previous occupants but unfortunately the authorities of Uganda Wildlife Authority have come in the way of the people and are obstructing the resettlement in their land. The minister should help us understand whether it is not against the wishes of the people of Angisa to allow UWA, which is actually encroaching on the people’s land - it is not the other way round like we always know that people encroach on the game reserves or parks. In this case, UWA is encroaching on 15 kilometres of the people’s land. They have stopped them from cultivation and resettling themselves. Thank you very much.

3.41
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness for the work that is being done for the people of Northern and North Eastern Uganda. Mine is a question. I would like to know whether this ministry ever thinks about other parts of Uganda as having disasters because we have so many disasters and yet have not seen this ministry responding to the disaster in our areas. I hope this ministry (Mr Amuriat rose_) I am asking a question. 

Right now there is very severe drought in some parts of South Western Uganda and the government is aware of it. We have had hailstorms destroying people’s crops; we have had diseases killing people’s livestock. Isn’t it high time that this ministry put on a national face and used national lenses to know that there are problems in other parts of the country?

3.43
MS BEATRICE AMONGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Ministry of Disaster and Government for the response they gave during the time of the floods. I want to inform the Minister of Disaster that in the presentation you have made to this House, you have forgotten that you gave Oyam food during that difficult time. 

I want it to go on record that you gave us 500 bags of posho and 40 bags of beans and although it was very meagre, I still want it to be reflected in your records. We had problems of transporting this food and I also know colleagues in this House that had problems in transporting the food that the ministry gave to their areas. In that vein, I want to appreciate the UPDF that provided transport for that food. 

We had a disaster in the country - perhaps some of us were not able to appreciate the extent of the disaster we had because it was not in our areas. But if one travelled to Teso during that period, you would have had sympathy for the people of Teso. We are talking of floods but the water in Teso was so much that we would not be in this House to ask, “Why doesn’t the Ministry of Disaster look at the country with a national eye?” A disaster is a disaster. It is not planned for. Therefore, one responds to it as best as possible. That is not to say that as a country, we should not try to organise ourselves a bit better.

Sometimes, I wonder when we are talking about the national face - I thought it is this Parliament that appropriates the monies of this country. Therefore, when we are appropriating the monies of this country, it is upon us to try to put there money for eventualities, which we are not foreseen.

I find it difficult to understand that the minister has made a presentation here and has appreciated our development partners who came in to help us. But now we are asking, why are we just listing the efforts of other people? Why were you just co-ordinating? What about Government coffers? It is in our hands to make that provision. And so - (Mr Wacha rose_)– no thank you hon. Ben Wacha; I appreciate what the donors did and I say that we could do a little better. 

Mr Speaker, I am very worried about this country. In some of the meetings that we go to, it is very clear that the question of global warming is very serious and matters are going to get worse than better, and it is the least developed countries that are going to suffer most. 

So, I would like to add my voice to those of my colleagues that it is high time that Uganda sat down as a country and pondered on the measures that we need to put in place to mitigate the disasters that are bound to come. We cannot say they will not come; it will get worse rather than better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me close this debate with hon. Opange.

3.48
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me join the rest of the Members of Parliament in thanking the minister for producing this report. The report is so elaborate, but I have a few questions to rise:

Mr Speaker, Shs 4.8 billion was allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for planting materials. My question is, when were the planting materials distributed? 

We are all aware that the spell of dry season has continued until today and there has not been any planting activity in Teso and those other affected areas. So, I want to know when this money was utilised for provision of planting materials in those affected areas. 

The other question is on the Shs 10 billion allocated to the Ministry of Works. Mr Speaker, if you went to Teso and Pallisa, you find that most of the roads are impassable. In Pallisa County where I represent, there is a river with a bridge which was swept by the floods that goes from Kameke to Kibaale sub-county and from Kameke to Agule sub-county. These roads connect us to Teso region and now the vehicles cannot pass there. 
I wrote a letter addressed to the minister concerned but the people of Pallisa are still waiting because they were also affected by the disaster that befell Teso.

Then, Pallisa got 251 bags of Posho and when we distributed it, we found that each family was to get just grams, which was inadequate. So the people of Pallisa are saying that the minister should bring planting materials to teach them how to fish rather than giving them fish. That is the only way you can solve this problem of disaster.

Then, on the challenges, the minister of state says that the health sector is understaffed without adequate first-line response capacity. Mr Speaker, this issue of the health sector being under staffed is not a result of the floods in Teso region; this is a result of public service regulation. You find that in Teso there are health centres IIIs, which were built by the donors, but up to now they have not yet been opened. Northern Uganda Social Action Fund under the able leadership of hon. Wakikona built a lot of heath centre IIs but they are just white elephants and there are no medical staff in them. So, it is a challenge to the government and the government should come up openly to address this problem. 

I wish to thank hon. Oleny for bring the issue of Shs 100 million. I was in Teso, and the people there were wondering – in fact, they were even alleging that some Members of Parliament received Shs 100 million. I am happy this question has been asked here so that the hon. Minister can clarify this to the public and let us know whether the pledge was honoured and if so, who received the money and for what purpose.

Finally, let us ask ourselves, today if Owen Falls Dam collapses, where is the alternative route to eastern Uganda? Secondly, when Awuja over-flooded, there was an alternative route through Agu Bridge but it is a very narrow road. So I urge the government to take a serious note so that they plan for alternative routes to Teso region through Agu and also plan an alternative route in case Owen Falls Dam is over-flooded. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have stretched the time. So far, eight Members have made contributions each for an average of five minutes.

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, this afternoon, I received a commendation from Masaka District where they thanked the minister and Government for responding to a disaster that befell them recently. This is just to help hon. Mugyenyi who thinks that maybe the ministry does not have a national eye. Masaka is not part of Teso; it is just another part of Uganda. Therefore, when a disaster befalls any part of Uganda, our ministry looks at Uganda as far as disaster management is concerned.

Mr Speaker, the Shs 100 million, H.E the President pledged was very categorical. He   produced – and I forgot to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi. He also gave some direct support on behalf of the people of Kinkizi. The President promised Shs 100 million in cash and promised that Government will support the initiative that was started by the Teso leadership with Shs 100 million. 

I want to make it clear here that recently, the envoy of the cultural leader of Teso, Mzee Paul Orono Etyang, communicated to me to forward the reminder to H.E the President and I can assure this House that H.E the President has directed action. It may not probably happen today, but action was directed.

Mr Speaker, the other question was what did the departments that were allocated resources, particularly agriculture, do? What the Ministry of Agriculture did in its wisdom was to look at the districts that were affected and divided the resources that were allocated to them. So each district has been given cash with some guidelines on how to procure planting materials.

I want to give the case of Nakapiripirit District. On receiving resources, the leadership of Nakapiripirit thought that probably putting all the money they have received on seeds may not be helpful. So, they requested my ministry to liaise with agriculture to permit them to use part of that money for buying a tractor and part of it for buying seeds. That permission has been granted and the people of Nakapiripirit can open up land and part of it can be used for seeds. So, the money has been allocated to districts in cash. 

Mr Speaker, before I came to this House, I communicated to the leadership of the Ministry of Works and Transport, and the commissioners are making assessment because they could not work at that time when the roads were waterlogged. But now they are trying to see – and then also what they explained to me I think the procedures of getting tenders are a little bit rigorous. They have indicated to us that very soon work will start. But I want to assure this House that the Ministry of Works and Transport, like all other departments, will be compelled to come here to very clearly explain how the resources that were put to them have been used. Otherwise, most of the interventions and suggestions, the minister has noted. 

The disaster risk reduction policy is ready, Mr Speaker. It spells out a national platform which is in line with some of the counties which have already such a district platform and a sub county and goes down even to the sub parish. It gives this country a framework on how we can mobilise resources and also how we can prevent disasters that are preventable and those that cannot be prevented, how we can mitigate them when they do happen.

Finally, for hon. Amongi, the truth is that global warming and climate change has arrived to the reality that we must grapple with now. I think what the international community is doing now is to find how we can adjust, as members of the human family, to this new phenomena of climate change. Because, for example, these floods that befell Teso, I am told it only happened in 1961, when most of my colleagues I am sure were not around -(Laughter)-  but it happened again. So, we must be prepared and I am assuring you our new coming disaster prevention and management policy is very clear. We should be presenting it to Parliament in a few days. But my prayer is, when it arrives kindly support us so that together we can mobilise resources to give confidence to this country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last Thursday during questions for oral answer, I made reply to questions raised by hon. Elijah Okupa and as a result, this august House asked me to present a ministerial statement and address the various questions that were raised on this subject. I wish to take this opportunity to make a summary of my response and answer the questions that were raised on that day. 

Ms Nampijja: Point of information.

MR D’UJANGA: But I have hardly said anything.

MS NAMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, according to our Order Paper, the Minister of Gender is supposed to present a ministerial statement, but I do not know how this statement was put on the Order Paper. I understand the minister first calls out to the Clerk to Parliament and the Clerk consults the minister first; the minister is here seated, she is telling us that she is not ready. Is this the way Parliament is going to operate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Energy -(Interruption)

MR D'UJANGA: Mr Speaker, the current status of the national oil/fuel reserve in the country. There is only one national fuel reserve depot in the country and it is in Jinja. The depot was commissioned in 1988 and is therefore old. The reserve’s facility is owned and managed by the government through my ministry. My ministry is making best efforts to maintain the facilities under serviceable conditions. The stocks are low but Government has put in place arrangements to restock the reserves. By its nature strategic reserves are not discussed openly for security reasons.

Measures to avert fuel crisis now and in the future. 

Mr Speaker, Government has developed short, medium and long term plans for strategic development and management of strategic fuel reserves. Short-term plans include arrangements with Kenya authorities for security of fuel tankers, convoys to and from Kenya, programme for restocking the reserves and developing the Tanzania route.

In the medium term Government will refurbish the Jinja storage tanks and support the construction of a large 150 million litres depot in Kampala at the head of the Kenya-Uganda oil pipeline extension, which will be accessible to all oil companies. The terminal depot will store 20 days consumption requirements. Government has also decided to fast-track the early production plan for oil discovered in the country and build a mini refinery to produce heavy fuel oil and a limited range of other white products – these are kerosene and diesel - for the domestic market.

For the long-term, my ministry has plans to develop four new reserve storage facilities in Nakasongola, Mbale, Gulu and Kasese. These will be connected to the oil refinery with a system of product pipelines.

Mr Speaker, I would like with your permission to turn to the questions raised last Thursday by hon. Elijah Okupa: “Apart from the Jinja storage tank are there other storage tanks, what is their status?”

As per my statement, Government conceived plans for four storage tanks, and this was way back in the 1970s. However, only Jinja was completed. Nakasongola was started on but not completed; Gulu and Arua depots were never built. There is no other Government owned fuel reserve storage tanks.

The status of Jinja storage tanks is also as given in my earlier statement. The equipment on those tanks is old but are being maintained. The stocks are low and have been drawn down during the recent shortage. Government is in the process of restocking the JST with 10 million litres of petrol and 20 million litres of diesel.

“You said 30 million litres are being bought for JST divided into 20 million of diesel and 10 million of petrol. Why not 10 million for diesel, petrol and kerosene as we know it?” And then hon. Okupa wanted to know further that if there are three tanks of 10 million litres each, why are we now saying there will be 20 million litres of diesel and 10 million litres of petrol. 

The reason here, Mr Speaker, is that there are indeed three tanks to the capacity of 10 million litres each. We are proposing here to empty the tank containing kerosene and convert it to hold diesel. This is because the consumption of diesel is much higher than that of kerosene. So, we will now have 20 million litres of diesel instead of 10 and the kerosene which is there will be transferred to another tank. We are looking at possible storage within the private oil companies.

“Oil companies owe Government Shs 12.2 billion according to Auditor General’s report. What is the ministry doing about it?” The Shs 12.2 billion reported by the Auditor General refers to fuel loans and penalty charges computed on products not yet returned by the oil companies. According to policy, product loans are repaid in kind, and penalty collected in cash. The ministry has been verifying and reconciling the debt figures and collecting back the product loans. In addition, penalty charges where they are confirmed have been collected.

“Refurbishment is stated as going on. How can we be restocking at the same time?” The refurbishment we are doing refers to repairs on pumps, valves, replacement of metering system, loading arms, valves, procurement of hoses extra. These fittings are done during idle time or schedule shut down without completely stopping operations.

“Metres are not working and even dip sticks are not working.” The existing metres are working but the calibrations are worn out, which can result in errors in the readings and that is why a new one is being procured. Dip sticks usually do not go wrong and are used concurrently with the metres.

“Why were the tanks not insured?” I would like to inform the House that the tanks and stock in Jinja are fully insured. It was only during the years 2003 and 2004 when they were not insured due to insufficient budget allocations.

The seventh question related to why there is no fuel at Soroti Flying School. The answer to this, Mr Speaker, is that Soroti Flying School, like other consumers, deals directly with the preferred suppliers of its choice; I mean suppliers of petroleum products. My ministry does not ordinarily get involved in making choice of suppliers.

Mr Speaker, hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo commented that the question raised had not been answered. He went further to illustrate that status means the condition and how much fuel there was. However, I think I have tried to answer this question that the facility is old but being maintained and that the stock is low, but also being replenished.

As I said earlier on, Mr Speaker, I am not comfortable discussing this thing openly. But in a relevant committee of the House, I can go in details on how low and how much is there as far as this issue of strategic stock is concerned.

Hon. Oleny wondered if there is price control. Mr Speaker, Government took a decision to adopt market-led economic growth and this entailed abolishing price controls, liberalisation of foreign exchange, privatization of commercial activities etc. This policy is still in operation. Therefore, the ministry does not set prices for petroleum products; this policy is also reflected in the Petroleum Supplies Act of 2003 as I have enumerated above.

There was also an honourable who wanted to know the status of early production. I would like to say that as indicated in my statement, Government has opted for early production from the oil discovery made. The major objective of which is to produce sufficient fuel and oil to generate electricity supplementary to hydro power. I would like to inform the House that a developer has been identified to implement this project and discussions are ongoing to reach a final agreement for the project. A mini refinery is to be set up near the production field, which is expected to be operational in the second half of 2009, which is next year.

The other question was about why Tanzania has closed its refinery and what Uganda has done to persuade Tanzania to reopen it? I would like to say that Government of Uganda cannot answer or question Tanzania why it closed its refinery. However, what we have done is to discuss with various Tanzanian authorities on what alternative arrangements can be put in place to ensure reliable supply through there.

Question No. 12 was about the two wagon ferries not refurbished and that what is going on. Mr Speaker, the hon. Member should be informed that Government has taken a decision to refurbish both Pamba and Kaawa and that funds have been provided to carry out these repairs.

Hon. Epetait, wondered why the oil pipeline project has taken long. Mr Speaker, the oil pipeline project is on track. There was delay at the beginning in selecting the private investment partner, but this was completed in 2006 and an agreement signed in January 2007. Since that time, the private partner has carried out a number of tasks covering the following: 

•	Pipeline route identification and selection; 
•	route survey; 
•	sensitisation of the people along the pipeline route; 
•	front end engineering design;
•	environmental impact assessment;
•	drafting of several project agreements, which include inter-governmental agreements, shareholders’ agreement, host Government agreement; 
•	inter-connection agreement with the Kenya pipeline company;
•	transportation and storage agreement with oil companies;
•	technical service agreement;
•	pipeline development plan; and
•	project information memorandum.

Currently, a team of surveyors are carrying out valuation of property to be acquired or rented during this process. This will be followed by negotiation and compensation of the owners of the property and thereafter works can begin. Mr Speaker, I would like to add that we estimate this work to start in May this year and take roughly one year to complete.

Question 14 was about whether the pipeline can be extended to Mbale. The answer to this is that, the pipeline from Kenya was not initially planned to be extended to Mbale. Demand for eastern and north-eastern Uganda will be handled from Jinja. With a plan to build a national fuel reserve at Mbale, it is intended to link Mbale to the refinery through pipeline network.

Mr Speaker, hon. Tanna raised a few questions one of them being that the system of operation with the fuel companies is abused. The honourable said that oil companies take fuel and pay for it later when its price has gone up. As stated earlier, the ministry does not trade in fuel in the reserves. When the fuel is loaned out, it is repaid in kind. It maybe true that at the time of repayment, the price of fuel on the international market may have dropped in which case the company stands to benefits. However, the reverse is also true.

Question 16 was about the status of the 10 days stock requirement. Mr Speaker, as stated last week, since the liberalisation of the market many new fuel companies have sprung up. It was prudent for the ministry to give these new fuel companies time to build capacity before we could start enforcing this provision of the 10 days mandatory stock requirement.

Mr Speaker, question 17 was about the pipeline to Eldoret being of a smaller diameter than the one from Eldoret to Kampala and this is a mismatch and the Member wanted to know whether my ministry was aware of this.

In my statement, Mr Speaker, I mentioned something about the capacity constraints of Kenya pipeline and I also said that Kenya authorities embarked on a pipeline plan since 2,000 to upgrade its capacity. Under this plan, the Mombasa-Nairobi pipeline, which is a 14-inch pipeline, is to have its pumping capacity upgraded from 440,000 litres to 880,000 litres per hour. This work was expected to be completed early this year.

The Nairobi-Eldoret-Kisumu line starts with 8 inches, but narrows to 6 inch diameter and that its current capacity is 220,000 litres per hour. The expansion plan has been drawn under which a new 8 inch parallel pipeline is to be laid and the old section of 6 inches replaced with the 8 inch one. This will double the capacity to 440,000 litres per hour and it is expected to be completed by the end of this year.

In contrast, the Eldoret-Kampala pipeline will be 8 inches with a maximum pumping capacity of 336,000 litres per hour. So, the ministry is therefore, aware of what is happening.

Hon. Kibanzanga wanted to know why the minister had not talked about the old reserves at Kasese, Nakasongola and so on. This question has already been answered above. What I can add is that, some storage facilities do exist at Kampala, Kasese, Mbale, Jinja and Entebbe Airport. These are privately owned and belong to the oil companies.

Hon. Okello-Okello wondered who makes the decision to sell reserves. The answer is that, ideally national reserves are not meant to be sold. However, as I explained last week, the stock was sold during the rehabilitation of the tanks and the decision to sell the product was made by Government.

“Why is there still fuel rationing upcountry?” Mr Speaker, I wish to state that the fuel supply situation has greatly improved since the near-collapse in mid-January this year. However, it takes time for the stock to build up to its pre-Christmas period. The situation is improving by the day as more product is received. 

Finally, hon. Okecho you wanted to know when we would start budgeting for the oil reserves. The early production scheme is planned to come on stream by the second half of next year and therefore it is hoped to start seeing some revenue thereafter.

“Is the refinery project on schedule?” Yes, Mr Speaker, the refinery project is on schedule as per the details already given above.

Mr Speaker, allow me to make some additional remarks. Yesterday, there was an article in The Red Pepper newspaper to the effect that there is a tender given to a company to run Government oil reserves. This is not true because there is no such tender. The responsibility to develop and maintain national strategic petroleum stock is vested in the commissioner of petroleum supplies’ department in the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources and this is provided for in Section 7 subsection (2) paragraph (h) of the Petroleum Act 2003. 

The facts are that:

a)	Currently, Government owns and is responsible for the running of the Jinja oil storage facility.
b)	There is presently a need to restock the national oil storage facility as we stated last week.
c)	The process to restock is going on following the laid down procurement rules and guidelines. 

I wish to end by thanking Members for the support and co-operation they have given us during the period when we have had disruption in the supply of petroleum products. I want to assure honourable members that Government is not only going to expand the strategic reserves but will also handle the matter with urgency. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, there is no procedure to have supplementary questions because supplementary questions have been answered. You cannot have supplementary answers on supplementary questions. That ends this exercise. (Laughter) 

Hon. Nampijja, the matter you raised had already been settled by me. I had earlier got communication from the minister and I accepted her explanation. She is making the statement on Tuesday next week. 

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 43/2/08 TO THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES 
4.20
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “Is the minister aware that only 168 out of the 207 employees of former District Farm Institutes (DFIs) then under National Agriculture Research Organisation (NARO) have since been paid; and even then only up to 2002? 

What has happened to their payment for the subsequent years and for the payments to the rest of the employees who did not receive any payment at all?

What plans does the minister have to address the fate of these employees?”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want to remind you of Rule 38 sub-rule (5) which says that questions must be answered within three minutes but that the Speaker can extend the time by two minutes so that the total time taken is five minutes.

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE (FISHERIES) (Mr Fred Mukisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The answer to the first question is yes, I am aware and I would like to give some facts. After the divesture of the District Farm Institutes, funds were transferred and names of the 207 former DFI staff were passed on to NARO by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Public Service in 1999. Details of these are in the annex which you presented. I will not go into it because of time as you have been told.

Upon receipt of the list from the Minister of Public Service, NARO carried out the verification exercise in May 1999 and it was found out that only 168 employees were available and working. The verification required that all employees then working should submit their last payslips. The balance of 33 employees was considered to have either absconded, passed away or were redundant. NARO then started paying salaries for the 168 employees with effect from 1 June 1999. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development used to send a block figure as contribution to semi-autonomous institutions for salary, wages and operations. NARO stopped paying salaries for DFI employees with effect from June 2002 and handed the staff over to the PS MAAIF. The reason NARO handed over these employees back to MAAIF was because it had not budgeted for them for the year 2002/03 and there was uncertainty on the outcome of the national agricultural research systems, NAADS review. 

The second question was, “What had happened to their payment for the subsequent year and for the payments to the rest of the employees who did not receive the payments and told?” Mr Speaker, when MAAIF received the staff it handed over the ADC staff to the respective districts where ADCs are located and advised the CAOs to include the ADCs in their annual budget and submit directly to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and not to MAAIF. As you can see, honourable, it is in annex 4 which you can look at. 

Since then, that is July 2002, the respective districts have been responsible for paying salaries for the ADC staff. The Government made a decision to allow NARO to retain the ARDCs and provide for salaries and operations. In total, there was 119 staff under ARDCs. NARO absorbed only 18 employees who had the required qualifications and has been paying them to-date. The remaining 101 were forwarded to Ministry of Public Service with a recommendation that they should be retired on abolition of office since they were considered redundant. This is also in annex 5 and you can look at it. 

The last question was, “What does the minister have to address the fate of these employees?” Mr Speaker, I wish to note that the remaining staff under the ARDCs who were not absorbed into NARO could not be taken over by MAAIF as the ministry’s structure could not accommodate them. After consultations with the Minister of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance, their services were considered redundant. Their names were accordingly forwarded to Public Service with the recommendation that they should be retired on abolition of office. 

To-date, Mr Speaker, a total of 150 employees of the former DFIS, the ARDCs and the ADCs, have been retired on abolition of office and their terminal benefits are being processed by the Ministry of Public Service.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have done very well! (Applause and Laughter)

MR MUKISA: I thank you very much.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you. Mr Speaker, first of all, I do not have the annexes that the minister is talking about so, I could not follow him very strictly. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I have in Kitgum District Farm Institute five of such staff members who are still there.  They have a letter from the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Agriculture that nobody should evict them from their quarters until their fate is determined. But they have not received any salary either from NARO, local government or the ministry since 2002. Is the minister aware of this? And if he is not aware, can he investigate and determine the fate of these employees? I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR MUKISA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My colleague, I will investigate and I will get back to you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is what I have been pointing out about this section 38. Either you are aware or you are not and if you are not aware, you go and investigate. This is how questions should be answered. Thank you very much, honourable minister. 

Thank you very much honourable members. We have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 March 2008 at 2.00 p.m.)



 


