Wednesday, 28 February 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)


The council was called to order.


BILLS
COMMITTEE STATE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

(Debate continued.)

Clause 55

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me an opportunity to move this amendment.  As I was saying yesterday, we need to insert another sub-Clause 4 to Clause 55 to read as follows.  Ballot papers shall be printed in triplicate with the same serial number while gamed at the back, and with two perforations.  What I have in mind, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, is that usually when we are voting, and this has been the practice.  When you go to a polling station you are given a voting card like this, and then you put in the ballot box.  There is hardly any point where at any given time if the ballot box is lost, where you cross reference and check on these ballot papers. The amendment I am bringing, therefore, is to the effect that, you will have the same serial numbers on a ballot paper, and then the first part is torn off, it will be thrown in the ballot box. 

The second part, Mr Chairman, if Members would care to look at their voters’ cards will be pestered right inside or outside depending on the way the voters’ card is.  So that it forms a permanent record.  Therefore, nobody can just easily cheat. So that, that would be the end of it and in case we want another election, the voters will come with cards, they will see that they voted because part of the voting card will have been retained there and, therefore, in case we need to do re-voting, the voters can line up and they can cross-check the actual voting as the way it went. 

The third portion of the voting card, will remain the property of the commission so that should they call another election, this will be easily done by checking with the voters’ cards so that it is easy to cross-check at any given moment, you can even make voters to line up, and you can know or tell who you voted for.  So that if they line up, it will be very simple. But if with first arrangement as it is currently, if it is lost, that is the end of it, and then you will never tell whether so and so voted for so and so.  So this will be the best way of moving in order to establish transparency and cross-checking above everything else. The second part is that I intend to have a news sub-Clause 55 (5) saying that the ballot papers shall be used as follows. Outer part as I have already explained so that it is embodied in the law, then the middle part be pasted on voters’ card, and a triplicate is to be retained and re-checked at any given moment.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move, and this hon. Members, is the best way of cross-checking in case of dispute.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGORA ATWAI: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment being advanced by hon. William Wanendeya on the grounds that, the argument brought force is that, in case of dispute, and lining up being proposed as opposed to the secret ballot under which the elections were carried.  Secondly, I think the Honourable is doubting the independence of the interim electoral commission. Because this is a body which is supposed to recruit people who are neutral, and will no way see to it that this kind of rigging if this is what it is amounting to, is not allowed.  So for this, Mr Chairman, I see that the proposal being made now, makes the whole exercise cumbersome. I beg to oppose.

MR KAVUMA: I beg to oppose the amendment.  It is cumbersome; it is going to cause administrative problems for no good reason.  The details are too many to be involved in this exercise, and in a piece of legislation, law is always law, you cannot even make an adjustment unless you have come back to amend it.  We are trying to organise and election in a very simple manner so that we minimize on problems But if we are to put this kind of details in the law, we are giving an impossible task to the commission.  There is a stronger reason, Mr Chairman. This question of being able to identify who you voted for at this kind of stage, is -(Interruption)    

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  May I inform the Minister that, it is not cumbersome because it will have been printed once and it is given to the voter at the time when he is voting.  Therefore, tearing off one piece at a time and making a permanent record, there is no cumbersome whatsoever.  In any case, I am not saying that, the voting will not be by secret ballot, this is really misinforming this august House.  I thank you.

MR KAVUMA: I was saying that inspite of the problems we have in our society, we try to protect the secrecy of the voting as much as possible. Now, if you are going to say you want to be able to do this and that, you are invading the secrecy of the vote, you are violating the constitutional right of the voter. If there are any problems, there is already machinery setting the law to redress these problems by way of petitions and challenging the results of the election.  On those grounds, I oppose the amendment, and appeal to the House to reject it so that we carry text in the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 55 sub-section 4 and 5 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 55

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 55 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 56 do stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 57 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 58 be amended in sub-Clause 1 by adding at the end of that Clause the following words, “and the polling station shall as fat as possible, be such as to facilitate access by persons with disabilities and the aged.  Mr Chairman, it is an objective in our constitution to facilitate the easy voting where possible for the people who suffer from disabilities and those who suffer from old age. So this is the purpose for this amendment, and I beg Members to accept it.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 58 sub-section be amended as proposed by hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 58 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59

MR GASATURA: I propose that Clause 59 sub-Clause 1 be amended to make it (1) (a) and (1) (b) be added to read, there shall next to the table referred to in Clause 59 (5) (a), that is first table, be positioned a large poster identical to the ballot paper to be used for voting formation, and a presiding officer shall before voting commences, and thereafter every 15 voters or 30 minutes, whichever the sooner, explain to all present using the poster the manner in which the voting is to be done. This, Mr Chairman, -this is to enable many of our illiterate people to know who is No.1 No.2 No.3 so that they can go inside or go to the voting table and without knowing how to read, they can identify AB and C candidate and using a finger print, can catch the candidate they so wish, Mr Chairman.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, though the suggestion sounds nice and good, I think it will confuse the electorate from the experience we had with the last elections, it may even influence whom to vote for.  I would just request that as I am waiting at the last hour, let the Member advocate for civic education before the elections other than saying, you go with posters, and what have you. It may turn out to be a campaign for one against the other.  I therefore, oppose that proposed amendment by hon. Gasatura.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 59 sub-section 1 be amended as proposed by hon. Gasatura.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 59 be amended in the following manner.  One; Sub-Clause 4 after the words election officers insert the words, “candidates’ agents, observers and monitors”.  The actually purpose of this is to accept a proposal from one of the hon. Members here that candidates and candidates’ agents should be some where near so that they can monitor effectively what is happening as the election exercise goes on.

There were many complaints last time we went for the CA elections, that candidates and candidates’ agents, especially agents had a problem of being to effectively monitor what is happening throughout the entire process of the election. I beg to move further, that immediately after sub-Clause 7 of that Clause, we insert the following Clause and it will be 8. Where another election has to held within 3 months after an election in which a voter has voted, and the hand of the voter has been marked, in accordance with this section, the corresponding part of the hand other than the one marked in the first election shall be marked in the subsequent election; and where this is not possible such part of the body of the voter shall be marked as the polling assistant shall, having regard to the provisions of sub-sections 5 and 6 of this section determine.  

Mr Chairman, the reason for this amendment is simple. We have already by statute said that there will be different election for the President from that of the Parliament. Also because of the malpractices experience last time, we have now tried to acquire a type of ink which is going to stay more permanently on the fingers that are going to be marked.  

Now, unless we put this provision, if the elections were to follow each other, it could happen that it could cause some confusion leading to some people losing their right to vote, or at least confusing the exercise where somebody turns up and he has or she has ink appearing on his or her finger or body which could lead to an inference that may be he or she is trying to vote a second time.  It is expected that this ink will last a period of about or slightly above 3 months.  Therefore, the need for this kind of provision in the statute.  I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  When we discussed with the Minister about this amendment, our worry was that, in the last CA elections the candidates’ agents were very much pushed around; and we had wanted that specifically to be stated in law that they will be seated let us say at the first table.  Now the Minister is moving that they will be in the vicinity**. My worry is the interpretation of the vicinity**.  Will the vicinity be some how around, or within the perimeter of voting? If you can assure us on that, then I would have no reason to move. Otherwise I was going to move my amendment.

MR KAVUMA: It is true we discussed this matter, and this is why I went back and did a bit of homework.  Now actually the intention in this amendment is to facilitate these people to be somewhere nearer than the rest of the group who have finished and have nothing to do apart from waiting for the results of elections.  These we have said, they will in a number of metres away.  But we want these other people, the monitors, and the candidates’ agents, those who care to be around, to be nearer than the other crowd.  That will be arranged administratively.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 59 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.
    
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 59 be amended do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 60

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 60 be amended by deleting sub-Clause 1 and inserting the following new sub-Clause therein; and this reads;” except when required under section 37 of this statute, no person shall vote or attempt to vote more than once at any election.  This is intended to cure an apparent contradiction in the law.  We very well know that there will be separate voting exercises, and it was necessary to remove this contradicting by introducing this amendment.  We know 37 deals with those special interest groups.  So it is again to remove the uncertainty which was apparent in the law.  I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the Question that Clause 60 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 61 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 62 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63 sub-Clause 1

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 63 be amended in sub-Clause 1 by deleting section 69,and inserting section 59. This is intended to cure a typing error in numbering the relevant section.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the Question. 
     

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 63, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 63 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 64 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 65 be amended in sub-Clause 1 by inserting after the words “voted in the name”, and we insert the words, “whole Number”.  Mr Chairman, this is intended again to correct a typing error, and also to require that the number must be taken into account when dealing with this section.  Because every voter is going to have a number duly appearing on his voters’ card. So when he comes the two should be able to help us to properly identify the voter.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 65, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 65 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66 sub-clause 1

MR KAVUMA:I beg to move that Clause 66 be amended in sub-Clause 1 by inserting immediately before the words “on the voter’s behalf” the words “if necessary” and after the voter may, we insert, “subject to sub-section 3 of this section”.  Mr Chairman, this is intended to try and treat the problem which was experienced in some areas where some people who were clearly known to be people who do not suffer from any disabilities claimed to be -(Interruption)  

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of procedure -(Interruption)- circulated an amendment on 66(1) which enrolls deletion, and I thought since this  departs most from other amendments, I thought, it would be considered first.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you have an amendment you have got to stand up immediately but you do not have to wait until somebody else is talking. Proceed please.

MR KAVUMA: As I was saying, this was intended to cure a mischief which appeared in the last voting for the CA where people who were known to be suffering from no disability whatsoever, came around and demanded that they needed to be assisted. So, we are saying, it must be necessary for that voter to be assisted and it will be subjected to the provisions of sub-Clause 3.  In sub-Clause 3 I move an amendment to add at the end of that sub-Clause the following.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with sub-Clause 1 first.

DR TIBERONDWA:I thought we would get rid of his amendment in Clause 1 and then I bring another amendment in Clause 1-sub-Clause 1.

THE CHAIRMAN: Exactly.  Thank you. I now put the question that Clause 66 sub-Clause 1 be amended as proposed by the Mover of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA: I wish to move an amendment on sub-Clause 1.  I wish to move that in sub-Clause 1 among the disabilities we remove illiteracy.  I bring this amendment, because I think that with photographs, illiteracy will not become a problem.  In other countries where elections have been carried out, other African countries there has not been any assistance of any voter except those without hands, and those who are blind.  I think with photographs, Mr Chairman, we can make everybody vote and if there is any disadvantage, it can be spread equally. It is very difficult to determine whether a person is illiterate or not. In the last CA elections, this very privilege was abused in this way.  People would be fixed in advance with privileges and then they would pretend to be illiterate so that the person who paid would choose somebody to vote for you.  So, this is a very serious matter, all the other things like blindness, like old age are acceptable but illiteracy is a very difficult thing to decide.  So therefore, I want to move that illiteracy be removed from the list of disabilities.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to oppose the amendment move by hon. Tiberondwa. Illiteracy cannot be judged on photographs or no photographs.  A person who is illiterate is one who is incapable of reading prints.  Now I know for example, my mother visits me, and I have albums at my house, she cannot even identify her own photograph where she is a member. Because hon. Tiberondwa’s point has some validity in the fact that, in the experience we had last time, people misused to a certain extent this illiteracy by picking friends or foes to prove to them where they have actually voted.  

However, if hon. Tiberondwa could have said that, if hon. Tiberondwa had said that the agents of the candidates involved in the election should be involved and are the ones to assist the person who declares to them that he is voting for X or Y.  In that case, since that his illiteracy stops him from having a secret ballot, both agents should be there to know that the right person has voted in the right place.  Because in the past, some people could actually mislead the illiterate voter by voting to a wrong candidate of their choice on his behalf.  But if the other two candidates’ agents are there.  If hon. Tiberondwa had moved that, he would have sympathy, but if as it is, he moves the way he does, I certainly would not support him and I recommend hon. Members to reject his Motion.  

MR GASATURA:I wish to support the amendment which I also had circulated-the amendment by hon. Tiberondwa which would otherwise read where a voter is for any reason of disability other than illiteracy. Mr Chairman, we saw in the last election and the hon. Minister indeed did concede that this has been abused.  I know one area where in some two or three parishes women were going to overwhelmingly vote for one candidate who had impressed them. But the husband -(Laughter)- clearly the candidate had performed very well, but the husbands a few days before got together and decided that they are going to vote, everyone for his wife who suddenly had become illiterate and this included, I am embarrassed to say, a wife of a Deputy Headmaster of an A’ Level School who herself had a grade 111 teachers’ certificate; and any woman who refused or would refuse to be voted for, would suddenly be kicked out of the relationship.  Mr Chairman, of course, I hear hon. Karuhanga having the same fact, making the same argument.  But strange enough today, coming to the wrong conclusion. It should be removed after all, the law of the average and hon. Karuhanga as an accountant when he still practised it, should know that if there are 1,000 illiterates in Nyabushozi, there is no way of telling whether all the 1,000 would have voted for Karuhanga or a meris somehwere and, therefore, in this case, for the law of the average we allow the illiterates to use their eyes to point on the picture.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  I would like to remind Members that the reason why photographs were introduced in the voting system was exactly because of illiteracy.  So that people can identify candidates by photographs rather than by names. So really there is no reason why illiterate person can be assisted again after all, we have already assisted him by introducing the photographs. Now, the clarification I wanted from hon. Karuhanga was whether he also did show his mother his one photograph. Because the mother may not know how she looks because she does not see herself. (Laughter) Whereas she knows what Karuhanga looks like, and she could have identified hon. Karuhanga.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA: I was aware of the problems which we experienced last election, and I had said that when we go through these amendments on this Clause, we would have taken care of these problems I would, therefore oppose hon. Tiberondwa’s amendment.  First of all, we must be realistic about our own society. A big percentage of our people are illiterate.  I have know people who are even very very illiterate who have become excited at the time of -(Interruption)

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, hon. Tiberondwa has a doctorate in Education, and when I was holding a conversation with him in one of our talks as an expert, when I was talking to hon. Tiberondwa with a Doctorate in Education, some time back, he told me professionally that even reading of a photograph is itself illiteracy exercise that an illiterate person, you can put a photograph of a Cock, and a photograph of a cow, to reduce a whole cow into a small thing, is in itself education. I am surprised and he agrees that he gave me that information.  Now for political expediency, -(Laughter)- to stand around disfranchise send, an illiterate person in bush without technical assistance, if they are lucky to identify the photographs, they are not likely to know where to put their mark. So I was just giving that information.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to tell lies about me when I am present? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not in order. Proceed please.

MR KAVUMA: I was saying, we must be realistic about the society we are legislating for.  It is unfortunate, quite a big portion of our people are illiterate.  But I was saying, even illiterate people at time of election some them become so excited that they cannot even exercise their powers of being illiterate.  They misread, they even look at photographs and they cannot recognize them.  So, it is necessary because as a state by our own constitution, we have an obligation to facilitate all Ugandans who are entitled to vote, to vote.  Therefore, since we have a percentage of over 45 per cent, of illiterate people, our law must appear to be providing for assistance to facilitate them. Hon. Ongom says that they have already been assisted.  We are saying, this is not far enough, we should out of our way to facilitate this person to be able to cast his vote.  We have provided for as we shall later, offenses committed by people who pretend to be illiterate to cure the problem that be devilled the election exercise last time; and Mr Chairman, when you have a problem say, a bad toe on the leg or on the foot, you do not cut off the entire foot, you try to treat it, so that the toe becomes well, and then the entire foot moves.  So, we shall not run away from the problem of illiteracy by saying, we shall shun our responsibility to assist them.  We must only make law that will enable them to be assisted, while we provide for those who may intentions of abusing it to be dealt with firmly with the law. I therefore, beg to oppose the amendment Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.


(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 66 sub-Clause 3

MR LUKUMU: I beg to move that Clause 66 sub-Clause 1 be written as follows: Where is a voter is by reason of blindness, illiteracy, old age or any disability, unable to fix the authorised mark of choice on the ballot paper, that voter shall be assisted by the presiding officer in the presence of all agents of the contesting candidates.  Mr Chairman, I feel strongly that we have a good number voters who still need to be assisted during the process of voting. To assume that even these photographs cater for the illiterate is not to be realistic. As hon. Karuhanga put it, although he did not put it rightly enough, there are those voters who cannot even identify photographs of their own son or daughters.  So, I think it is only necessary that they be assisted; and it is not easy, it is not possible for most of our voters to be able to identify photographs even if they are not blind of candidates.  In the first place, in some cases, there will be so many candidates with photographs that may be so different from the actual candidates. I think it does no harm if a voter is assured that his vote goes to his vote goes to his right choice. This point of secrecy should not subordinate one’s actual choice. Where you are subjected to disability surely, you lose your privilege of secrecy, therefore, you should be assisted and since all candidates’ agents will be present, there is no way you can be cheated. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, in framing this legislation, all these options were considered.  There is evidence that last elections in some areas the presiding officers were the worst culprits in abusing the law.  They took it upon themselves to vote for a candidate of their own choice by even forcing innocent voters who came to vote, to vote for people whom they did not want to vote for.  

So, the law is removing this mischief by excluding the presiding officers in this exercise of assistance.  But as I said, it is putting in place safeguards, and one of them is, we have allowed in the law the candidates or candidates’ agents who care to be around, to be in the vicinity**, to be able to see when this voter is being assisted.  Not to assist, but to be able to see so that they can go and make complaints if they think there is a case to warrant that kind of complaint. I do not want to involve the agents themselves, because this is a matter of election day administration, the officers charged by that duty are election officers and not our individual candidate agents.  So, I really pray to this House to see that this is the best we can do and carry the provisions as they appear in my amendment, they will take care of everybody’s worry without interfering with the administration of the election.

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification. Because this issue of involving the presiding officer participating in election himself, in electoral process undermines the impartiality of the electoral commission and the presiding officer who is the servant of electoral commission. I do not see why we should involve the very person who is supposed to be impartial in guiding or taking someone to vote.  I think the very voter who is under disability, should exercise his right to choose who wants to assist him.  In view of this amendment, is it not undermining the impartiality of the electoral commission.

MR WAPAKABULO: I oppose the Motion, I have personal experience that in the last CA elections the biggest thieves of votes were the presiding officers; and I recorrect in Mbale Municipality where one candidate was N0.9 here and the another candidate was N0.3 up here.  When a person would come and say, they want N0.9, the turn the thing like this and this person thought that turning the form was part of that process, and therefore, they would gladly see this person and say, put here.  They were also photograph blind which goes to under score the question of having illiteracy there.  So, I would like to oppose the Motion say, we should let the voter choose who should assist him or her in that situation. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 66 sub-Clause 3

MR KAVUMA: In 3 I beg to move an amendment to add at the end of that sub-clause the following words; “except that the candidate’s agent may be present when assistance is being given to the voter”. Mr Chairman, this is safety valve I was talking about moments ago.  In order to facilitate these agents who will care to be around to see what is happening when somebody is being assisted, they are being allowed to be somewhere near so that they can effectively monitor and then they can take appropriate action at some other time, if they think something went fundamentally wrong.  I beg to move on that too.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, I wish the Minister to make more clarification when he says that the agent may be around.  How far does he come to the table where the voting has to take place.  Because we will have confusion in the voting area. Because one; we have already agreed that, where somebody has disability, he is free to bring his own persons of his own choice.  Now why do you say candidates agents should involved around the voting area.  Because it will create confusion in the whole process on the pretext that the man has to see. So long as I come in, I pick my voting card, and they I say, Mr so and so is the one to assist me.  Why do you want this agent to keep hovering around all these tables.  There will be a lot of confusion though I would have liked to support the Minister to avoid this confusion, let the people stay out, only these assistants who have come in to assist the disabled should be the ones to come.  But we should not encourage it to say, they should keep around the tables there will a lot of confusion, Mr Chairman.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to support that idea; and if it is in order to make it whole, we would require to remove the last two lines.  Where it says that, or the voter may request another person present at the polling station to assist such a voter in that behalf.  If the voter has a disability, either he is blind, or he is illiterate in sense understood by us, or in the sense understood by the Minister for Education and sports, in whatever sense, if he is illiterate or too old he should come with a person to come and assist him.  These problems would not arise.  But provided that he comes with a person, or he can ask another person, that means that, there are these people who have been bribing them, and I will be taking a chew from the bribers and say-they will tell him let me assist on that kind of thing. If the voter is unable to do a thing himself, let the law allow him to bring his own person, and let that person be sufficient.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, we have experienced situations where at a polling station there are only about four or five people who vote for the entire parish.  Because they have been organized and you find a person voting for about 100 people.  I have great experience and my Brother hon. Amanya Mushega here knows it. (Laughter) I do not want to mention names.  I think, unless probably we limit that may be an assistant may assist not more than 10 people, but we have had very terrible situations where one person sits -(Laughter)

MR AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is hon. Tiberondwa in order to drag my name in his other activities of I do not know whether IPC or other things, that I was present when his people were voting for 1000 people? Really is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, he is quite in order. Proceed, proceed.

DR TIBERONDWA: The amendment would be alright if the number of the people to give the assistance was limited.  But we have had situations where one persons sits at a polling station and the voters are told when you go there, let so and so vote for you, and he votes for 10,20, 30 100 people there with everybody looking; and the law actually as it stands allows that kind of situation to continue. I do not think that hon. Abu Mayanja is aware of a situation like that. It does not happen in Busujju, but it happens in Bushenyi. (Laughter)

MR ABU MAYANJA: If hon. Tiberondwa had followed me, I am entirely with him. The whole purpose of my intervention is to prevent that mischief.  If every voter comes with his or her own person from his home to come and assist him or her, it can be his wife or her husband, it can be his daughter, it can be his grand daughter or a servant, or a friend.  If he comes with such a person then, every voter will be assisted by one particular individual. The question of one individual assisting more than one voter would not arise.
MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I am prepared to withdraw this amendment so that the agents are not involved in the exercise; and I so withdraw.

Clause 66, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I am sorry but we were going Clause by Clause, and we had not done these other Clauses and I had amendments on Clause 66 (5). Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we delete sub-Clause 5 and insert the following new sub-Clause 5. A person commits an offence who (a), pretends to have a disability for the purposes of sub-section 1, when he or she does not. (b); contravenes sub-section 4 of section.  This is again to cater for the situation which has been worrying many Members and quite justifiably where a graduate comes and confesses his illiterate.  We are making provision now in the law, that if he does it, then the law will follow him, and the consequences will be a punishment.  I beg to move.

MR ABU MAYANJA: This is merely to point out something so that the law may be good if possible.  I have just noticed that, in sub-section 2, it says, it shall be lawful for any member of a voter’s family to assist a voter. But in sub-section 1, the person to assist him is not limited or restricted to a voter.  So, can the Minister please, agree that we change this-it will be changed by the writers so that this word is not limited to a member of the voter’s family which I think was put there in advertently.

MR KAVUMA: I am sorry can I follow hon. Mayanja. I have not followed him quite properly.

MR ABU MAYANJA: It is like this.  In sub-section 1 we say that if a voter has a disability, he can be accompanied by a person whom he brings, and that person need not be necessarily a member of his family. He can be accompanied by a person of his or her choice to assist him. Now, when you come to sub-section 2, it says , it shall be lawful for any member of a voter’s family to assist a voter under subjection one; not withstanding that he is under the age.  Really what this one is doing is about age. In other words, a child of 15 can assist somebody to vote. But now you are limiting it to only a member of his family.

MR KAVUMA: We should also know the kind of our people. The most trusted person in terms of this problem is a very close member of the family.  So we are making it easy for them to make their obvious choice.  But, doing it otherwise could also have problems. You could have again people who specialize to become assistants.  So we are trying to limit the scope of those who may want overstretch this to un imaginable proportions. Let this voter come with a member of his family.  But I think we have also left that where this member, we have reopened this, if he is really in dilemma he can publicly shout there that I need assistance, and then he can choose.  But to leave it like hon. Mayanja is proposing is    opening a very big gate for likely abuse of the provision and I oppose it.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. Minister that a member of your family is not always with the same opinion. So somebody with disability if he picks a member of the family, that member of the family may be having a different opinion.  So it is better    this person to take his own choice from anybody whom he thinks is of the same opinion.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 66 sub-section 5 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put he question that Clause 66 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 67

MR KAVUMA: I beg to move that Clause 67 be amended by inserting the following Clause immediately after that Clause.  The words I see to add, are that, “the following new sub-section 2, -this will be the following sub-section 2. Two; the commission may if it thinks -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of procedure.  Mr Chairman, I have an amendment which I think should come before this one and then if it is defeated, we can come on to this one.  My amendment is that clause -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But if you have submitted your amendment, when we come to that Clause, you have to stand up.

DR TIBERONDWA: I stood up but you asked the Minister first. Usually the Minister takes precedence as far you are concerned, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then Minister move. You just move.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, the new Clause 2 I am seeking to add goes, “the commission may, if it thinks it appropriate take such steps as may necessary to enable soldiers, members of the police force, prisons and other security personnel whose functions relate to the conduct of elections to vote by proxy.  Mr Chairman I have received very strong representations from both the Commission and members of this disciplined forces that, it sometimes so happens that on voting day they are not at their usual place of aboard, and it is very easy for them to go on operations on duty by order.  

So, Sir, since the Constitution requires us to facilitate -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to bring the idea of voting by proxy here when it was rejected in the report, and especially, when my Amendment was proposing that the whole of this clause be deleted.  Because voting by proxy is a very dangerous thing at this stage, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please; the report was rejected.  So, you do not have any point there, proceed please.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, this proposal is intended to enable us as the supreme legislative body of this country to make a law that will enable us to comply with the constitutional provision that we must facilitate all Ugandans who are entitled to vote.  Some members of our society are by the nature of their duties, may be called upon to be in places other than their usual places of aboard.  It is, therefore, intended, that these Ugandans should be facilitated to cast their vote; there is no harm, there is no problem in this provision, why?  Because this proxy is going to be exercised in such a way that the voting is going to be taken in the locality where this person resides or where they got registered; or he does is to appoint either a brother or a wife who is well known in that area, to come and cast his vote on his or her behalf, because he himself is unable to be present.  We must also look at our background in this country.  This democracy we are trying to enshrine in our Constitution and in our law, is largely the result of people who have shed their blood, who have spent years in dangerous occupations struggling to make sure that Ugandans can have their democratic rights restored to this nation.  It will be very unfair of us legislators if we were going to disenfranchise these policemen, these prisons officers, and the like, simply because they are on duty to make sure that what we do here enjoys stability and security of the nation.  It is for that reason, Sir, that the Amendment in precise terms says that the Commission may, if it thinks appropriate, take such steps as may be necessary to enable soldiers and other security personnel - this we have in mind the police and the prisons, to vote by proxy so that the rights they are fighting for us all here, they should also be able to enjoy them.  I will borrow from the leaf of the South Africans; when the South Africans were voting they even extended this vote to their soldiers who were in other countries; it is very important even if for educating our soldiers, our police and the prisons to know that when democracy is in place it is democracy for everybody; that is one of the only way they will be psychologically treated to the fact that they must defend whatever results come out of the democratic process the Ugandans have chosen to follow.  I appeal to all progressive forces in this House, and they are many to see this Amendment as a progressive step to further consolidate the democracy we have been yearning for for the last many centuries.

MR ASIKU:  Mr Chairman, before I get convinced, I just wanted to seek clarification from the Minister.  If I am a soldier and I am fighting in North during that particular voting day, and I ask my brother to vote for me in Buganda here, I am wondering how my brother be restricted instead of voting for A of my choice he may also chose to vote for a B which is his choice!  How do I guarantee that one so that he votes exactly as I want in this particular arrangement.  My second clarification is how will the  - how do you prepare for the voting in emergency case where you move away from your side, you are saying the voters should vote; in which case it appears that a certain area will be near the war zone where you give them time to vote!

MR KAVUMA:  In response to my hon. Member’s request for clarification, I will say; in law we have what we say once you appoint or you chose you agent, your agent binds you in the act you authorise him to do.  Since you are in a position to exercise you right directly, personally, you are now being given an opportunity to look around among the people you think you can trust and chose one of them to do it for you.  But once you have done that whether he betrays you that is no longer a problem to the law because he is your authorised agent.  Secondly, Sir, this question is very simple.  All these people in the disciplined forces have their numbers, even if you had a doubt and you wanted to see whether, actually, this is the right person voting for the chap who is away, you can crosscheck at the point of identifying the voters and you get satisfied that there is no chini, chini business.  These records are going to be open for public inspection, the whole exercise is going to be very effectively monitored; but the call to us is not to disenfranchise a number of Ugandans who have manifestively demonstrated willingness to fight and die to sustain the democracy they are enjoying and we hope to enjoy in the future.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Amendment.  Mr Chairman, the right to vote for a candidate of one’s choice is a very fundamental right, that no Uganda as far as is possible should be denied the opportunity to do so; and especially, although when the Minister was making his statement some people were murmuring, but there are people who take for granted what is obtaining in this country.  There are people who do not realise the amount of sacrifice certain members of our society are making on behalf of all of us here and in the villages.  

Mr Chairman, it might not be possible for us to be here debating as we are doing if the functions some of these people are carrying out were not being carried out, and therefore, I would like to appeal to my Colleagues to understand and appreciate why these people should not be denied their right to vote.  The only question you can put, and surely if anybody cannot find a single person among 17 million Ugandans whom they can trust to vote on their behalf, those people have a serious problem.  I believe anybody on duty, and people are talking about necessarily fighting, no, people need not to be fighting; there are people by nature of their job who must move, they have temporary homes of aboard all the time, and they are under command, they have no choice to be where they would like to be and vote.  So, those people definitely should not be denied their right to vote.  

I am sure the Commission can make arrangements, maybe, if to be necessary, Mr Chairman, if it is reasonable people should know in advance that so and so is not in his place where he should vote because of the nature of his job and his duties, so that - people are fearing that, you know, if he is in one place how do you make sure that his wife has voted and he has also voted?  Of course, even if you are not on duty you still can do that, and we must make sure we do not it.  But definitely it is gross injustice on our part to deny these people their right to vote.  I support the Amendment, Mr Chairman.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Sir.  I support the Amendment and I would like to urge the House really to support this.  The soldiers are citizens of Uganda, okay let us take them; my brother here I am sure he will not be on the battle front, but let us assume he was sent on the battle front, and he registered, and I am asking the hon. Minister not to send him on the battle front yet; he has complied with the requirement under Article 17 of the Constitution that it is a duty of every Ugandan citizen to register for electoral purposes, he has registered; then duty calls, he has to be on the border of Uganda and another country, we are saying that to hell do not exercise your right to vote;  and yet the Constitution here says the State shall make sure that there is machinery in place to facilitate the people of Uganda to exercise their right to vote.  

So, I would like to suggest, Sir, that we support this; the arrangements will be made by the Electoral Commission, and independent body; it is not the Minister who is going to conduct this election, they will design the forms, they may go and collect them, maybe, before and they will contact the army people or the Police to see how they can carry out the proxy vote in this case.  I do remember a real life situation -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, that being the case, if the Commission is going to do this, rather since the Commission is going to do it, would not my hon. and Learned Friend both of them agree that this Amendment is improperly worded when it is left to the discretion of the commission to decide where to allow it or not to allow it, when we know that there will be soldiers, policemen who will be on duty away from their stations to guard ballot boxes and that sort of thing.  So, this thing should be worded in such a way that the Commission is directed to make these arrangement, and not just to say if it thinks it appropriate.  Because we already know that the situation is - I hope I have made my point and the hon. Wapakabulo can help me with the rest.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I think I will leave the question raised by hon. Abu Mayanja to the Minister to handle, but of course, you could find a situation where, if you are talking about large numbers, you may find that it may not be necessary to put that machinery in place; but anyway the Minister will, I think, respond to that.  I have no problem with it, but the important thing is that to make sure that these people are able to be given a chance to exercise their right to chose as required of them by the Constitution.  I was quoting a real example in the last CA election where because one neighbouring country intent on disturbing elections, the Army Commander there tried to shift soldiers by taking those in morning to vote and take them back, but by the time they brought the last lot it was 5.30 p.m. and the substantial number did miss out to vote.  But with this in place they could have left proxies to people who are able to vote on their behalf subject to arrangements made by the Electoral Commission.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I know we have caught on the idea of trying to emphasise things in our law; but those who are conversant with the interpretation of the law, when you give a discretion you are not terribly watering it down, you are only saying, we are leaving you room to make your judgement and if you see circumstances warranting you may do it.  Because as legislators here we may not know; if there is only one person to be covered and you say you shall, then the Commission must go into all the problems of - you know, just caring for one person.  But the way we have put it may allow the Commission to sit and judge the situation at the moment and take an appropriate action, and your Commission, Sir, -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the clarification I am giving is not between ‘may’ and ‘shall’, it is that I said the thing should be redrafted to say that the Commission shall make arrangements or may make arrangements to make it possible for soldiers, nurses, whatever number of people you want; because the thing here it says that the Commission may not think it necessary or it may think it necessary in respect of Tiger Battalion in Mubende but not in respect of other things; but this is the same thing.  So, there should be a uniform law, this is what I am saying.  

But while I am on my foot, I want just to make this information; in the previous law of elections, we had a provision - I am speaking from memory and it is 1961, so I may be faulty; but there was a provision to provide Policemen and others who went to guard ballot boxes and papers and to keep law and order, away from their station, to vote first.  Yes, they voted the day before;  the provision was that they could vote the day before, that ensures that it is, actually, their vote.  So, I would like to know whether the Minister has considered this alternative and why he thinks it is unsatisfactory.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I will concede to hon. Mayanja’s advice on the drafting, but I will not go along with the proposal that we say maybe they will vote the first day or something like that as was the exercise there.  Because the very nature of the duty which requires you to be away may not allow you to be there the previous day; but the way we have put this one is flexible so that the commission can make these arrangements to facilitate these people to vote.  So, I will take into account the advice given on the improvement on the drafting without going against the principle in the Amendment, and I concede that much, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  So, do we move with hon. Abu Mayanja’s Amendment?

MR KAVUMA: Sir, he gave advice - we do not have a problem, Sir, because he is giving advice in terms of improving the formulation by saying ‘shall’ so that it is more definite for the Commission; and it is in that spirit that I am accepting the advice.  So, Amendment remains mine, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)
                  

MR KAVUMA:  Point of clarification.  Sir, we are doing one part of the clause, Sir; and this is where the advice came in.  I have got another Amendment, Sir, -

THE CHAIRMAN:  An additional Amendment you mean?

MR KAVUMA:  Yes, Sir; 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed with your additional Amendment.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, Sir.  The additional Amendment I seek to make, Sir, is in clause 67, I wand to insert the following words at the end of that clause; ‘But the Commission shall publish in the gazette a list of the restricted areas under this section.’   Sir, this was expressed by Members of this when we were discussing this Bill here and also in the committee whose report we have abandoned so that the Commission should guide and gazette these restricted areas, and I am conceding to the demand by this House, Sir.  So, I had two Amendments, that was the second, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)
            

Clause 67 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 68 sub-clause 1, be amended in paragraph (a) by deleting the words ‘any of the person’s names’ and instead insert ‘one of the person’s names’.  Sir, the way it stands, and this came from the contribution from hon. Members both here and in the committee; the way the provision stood could leave room for abuse of the electoral process.  So, we are now improving on the drafting so that the voter who is going to be affected must be a voter who was on the register; we are avoiding a situation where a voter who did not appear from the register at all comes and then tries to use the law to get a right to vote.  It is an innocent Amendment, I pray the House to accept it.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, in paragraph (b) I move to delete the words ‘wrong name’ here I am accommodating again proposals from hon. Members notably, hon. Atubo who guided us on this when we were scrutinising the committee.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 70 paragraph (b) at the beginning of that paragraph, we insert the word ‘warn or’.  Mr Chairman, this again is an attempt to accommodate views expressed by hon. Members and the idea is that before anybody gets arrested, he should warning, it seems more automatic but Members felt it should be properly put in the law so that the Presiding Officer knows that before he invokes his powers he should give a warning to a chap whose decision may be - who may be affected by the decision of the election officer.  I beg to move, Sir.

                 (Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 70 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7l

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 71.5, after the words ‘shall state’ we insert the word ‘publicly’ Mr Chairman, again hon. Members wanted the officer here to warn this chap publicly which obviously would be the position, but for the sake of accommodating Members and for clarity and certainty, I beg to move that we insert the word ‘publicly’ so that this officer will have to declare publicly about the officer being appointed to help him, Mr Chairman.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 71 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in sub-clause 1, of clause 76 we delete the word ‘doubts’ we do not normally talk about doubts, we express complaints; and it is intended only to remove this which had come in by way of a typing error.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78

MR KAVUMA:  Clause 78(2), I beg to add at the end the words, ‘and it shall be witnessed by the polling assistants’.  Mr Chairman, this is intended to ensure that the officer who is carrying out this duty does not carry it out solely alone.  He should be witnessed by those presiding officers who are there to assist him. Again it is an accommodation of view expressed by hon. Members.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 8l

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 81(2) in paragraph (c) we delete the words ‘if any’ Mr Chairman, these documents must be in place, there is no choice they must be there; so, this ‘if any’ is there by mistake and it is misrepresenting the situation as we want it to be.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8l as amended, agreed to.

Clause 82

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 82(1) we delete ‘is’ and insert ‘shall be’.  Mr Chairman, this is the normal way of drafting, so we are improving on the draftsmanship of this clause and I beg to move, Sir.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 83.1 immediately after the word ‘shall’ we insert the following words; ‘in the presence of the candidates or their agents or such of them as wish to be present’.  This is to give an opportunity to candidates or their agents who so wish to be around and be able to follow the matters being provided for under this section, especially, at the opening of the envelopes containing some of these results of the election.  I beg to move; Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I have another Amendment and this seeks to add a new sub-clause, immediately after sub-clause 1, and the new 2 would read;  ‘The Returning Officer may open the envelopes and add up the number of votes cast even though some of the envelopes have not been received if the candidates or the candidates agents and a police officer not below the rank of Inspector of Police are present.’  Sir, here the rationale is that sometimes it takes too long for all the results to be delivered at the returning officer’s place, but in order to cut down on the amount of delay that would accrue from the time of completion of the voting and declaration of the results, which normally puts those interested in the election at very great tension, we want to allow the officer in the presence of the candidates or their agents and in the presence of a police officer to be able to open and start counting and tallying as other results come in, in order to economise on terms of time, and I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 85 be amended by deleting sub-clause 2.  Mr Chairman, the reason is that this matter was discussed and Members expressed very strong views that if we leave this kind of provision in the law, we are going to be -(Interruption)- the right of people who want to follow the results of an election; there was a feeling that this matter should be left to the general law regarding costs, and I am conceding to that proposal through this Amendment.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move several amendments to clause 87, in sub-clause 1 to delete the words ‘any other event’ and insert ‘any other reasonable cause’.  Fear was expressed that the way the clause was drafted anybody could claim in their own thinking about a small excuse which may not even be related to the sort of things we are trying to avoid here and he causes a bit of chaos on the polling station by taking steps he should not take.  So, we are improving on this by saying instead of any other event which seems to be very broad, that it is any other reasonable cause.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, immediately after subsection 2, I move to insert the following new subsection 3, ‘where counting is adjourned under this section, the ballot boxes shall be kept in safe custody and the candidates or their agents shall be entitled to be present to keep watch on the boxes until counting resumes.’  Mr Chairman, again because of passed experiences there were expressions both here and in the committee that the candidates who care or through their agents should be given an opportunity if they want to be around were these boxes are kept, so that they know that nothing happens to the contents in the boxes until the counting resumes, and it is in that spirit that I accommodate those sentiments, Sir, in this Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend clause 90 by deleting sub-clauses 4 and 5.  These are provisions which were dealing with courts, the argument I advanced earlier on applicable to this in that we shall leave this question of the costs to the normal law governing costs.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 90 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93, agreed to.

Clause 94, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96, agreed to.

Clause 97

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that we amend clause 97 by deleting from the words ‘as the case may be’ to the end of the clause; they are unnecessary and superfluous.  So, I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 97 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 98

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 98 sub-clause 3 (b) -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I intend to move an Amendment to create another sub-clause 2 before the present sub-clause 2.  As it stands at the moment, the clause 98.1 talks of any person who either before during an election with intent; now, the penalty given seems to be very lenient as far as the candidates themselves are concerned, so that I would like to bring another clause 2, which says;  “If the person who commits the offence under clause 1 about is a candidate is liable on conviction to disqualification and imprisonment as in clause 1, above.”  

Mr Chairman, for the candidate to indulge in bribery and so forth, to me is more grievous than any other person even their agents, that is why I think that we should introduce another penalty for a candidate.  The whole thing, Mr Chairman, in the previous Bill which we passed, the presidential election I suggested that such a provision, in fact, be deleted; but I was opposed here on the ground that I want people to indulge in bribery.  That is not the case; in I fact wanted the whole thing 98.1 to be deleted because it is very difficult as we know now to decide as to people are involved in bribery or not. As we stand now, we know that people are already engaged in campaigning and in many cases like in Gulu people are already engaged in bribery, and we know it is taking place!  Money is changing hands frequently in Gulu, and it is not a secret in Gulu any more that people are being given money, by agents of one candidate, I do not want to mention; it is a bit tricky, and -(Interjection)- yes, but let me now come to the substantive Amendment I brought.  

Mr Chairman, I think, that if a candidate engages in bribery and it is proved, he should actually be disqualified rather than just be fined UShs 200,000. I think, this is lenient and for a candidate it is a serious offence, Mr Chairman.  So, I hope that Members will support this Amendment.  Thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I think, this additional burden is not necessary because, if a person is already sentenced and is paying fine or going to prison, that one is already indicative that he is a criminal and, therefore, cannot offer his candidature; I think this is just clear.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I oppose this Amendment on the ground that when the law governing the CA elections was made, we had not gone into the new Constitution.  Now, the new Constitution has set qualifications and disqualifications, and we can now not say in this law that this punishment we want to give will lead to disqualification; that will be tampering with the Constitution; we must wait until these provisions are amended and we can, maybe, rectify if there was any cause for that.  

Secondly, I am uncomfortable to hear from a seasoned legislator that some people are giving money and he knows the law is there, he has not reported them so that action get taken.  Secondly, as we are concerned really, and on a serious note, I am not aware of anybody who is now a candidate, either as a parliamentary candidate or a presidential candidate.  The date for nomination has not been declared and, therefore, there is no candidate who is bribing or doing anything!  

So, Mr Chairman, I think for those reasons I would want to oppose the Amendment, it is unconstitutional -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Whereas it is true that at the moment, since we are not yet registered, there are no candidates, but people have already declared their candidatures and people are nominating their agents; these are in papers and everywhere, and the agents are campaigning obviously, I mean, this is not a secret!  Everyday we read in papers agents appointed here and there, and these are the people that are bribing others.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Point of information.  About six months back we heard an hon. Member who declared that he wanted to be a candidate for presidency, the same fellow chickened out.  Now can we say this fellow was a serious - maybe, he negotiated; was he a candidate?  He was just hopeful and we do not have candidates as yet.  Hon. Tiberondwa wanted to be and he withdrew; now can we say that he is a candidate?

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, we delete all the words after section 48.  Mr Chairman, these words are unnecessary and superfluous.  So, we are removing them, they are not of any useful value.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 98 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 99, agreed to.

Clause l00, agreed to.

Clause 101, agreed to.

Clause 102, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105, agreed to.

Clause 106, agreed to.

Clause 107, agreed to.

Clause 108, agreed to.

Clause 109, agreed to.

Clause 110, agreed to.

Clause 111, agreed to.

Clause 1l2, agreed to.

Clause 113, agreed to.

Clause 114

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 114 subclause 3, we delete the words ‘stated to be in’ and insert the words ‘stated to be vested in’. That is normal drafting practice; we do not say ‘stated to be in’, but we state that ‘the right in property vests’; it does not just be in.  So, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 114 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 115, agreed to.

Clause 116, agreed to.

Clause 117, agreed to.

Clause 118, agreed to.

Clause 119, agreed to.

Clause 120, agreed to.

Clause 121

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 121 - I withdraw this Amendment, Sir.

Clause 121, agreed to.

Clause 122

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after 121 we add a new 122 which reads:  “Whenever any matter is required to be published in the gazette it shall where possible also as soon as practicable be published in a newspaper circulating in the relevant area.”  Mr Chairman, this is intended to ensure that this information which is so vital to all people concerned in the election is not only restricted to those who may get access to the gazette but it is also given a wider circulation in papers where they exist and it is possible to publish it in newspapers so that a wider cross section of our people get to know about this information.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The new clause 122, agreed to.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in sub-clause 1, of the old 122 we delete the words ‘the minister may’ and insert the following words ‘the minister may with the approval of the legislature and on the recommendation of the Commission by statutory instrument....” The idea here, Sir, is the accommodation of the desire expressed by hon. Member while debating this Bill that these regulations should be subjected to the approval of this hon. House, and I am conceding that, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 122.2 paragraph (b) be deleted and we insert the following new paragraph ‘The duties of election officers including the manner of identifying voters for issuing them of ballot papers and the questions to be put to them.”  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Old clause 122 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 123, agreed to.

The First Schedule I

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, in the First Schedule, I beg to move that we remove the words from women representatives to the end of that paragraph and insert ‘district women representative’.  Mr Chairman, this is again to rectify a printing error where these district representatives were portrayed as women representatives, when actually they are district women representatives.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Part II

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that again immediately before the First Schedule, we insert the following introductory words;  ‘First Schedule and Second Schedule’ those words are necessary as a way of introducing these schedules and they should be before we go to the First Schedule.  There is no big matter of content; it is a method of introducing the schedules, I beg to move, Sir.

HON. MEMBERS: It is not clear.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Let the Minister make it clear to you.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, there is an Amendment number 60, which says immediately before the First Schedule, insert the following new First Schedule and Second Schedule; these are introducing the schedules, Sir.  So, I am only now referring them here so that we introduce them properly as we go to legislate about them. Then, Sir, immediately after the First Schedule we shall insert the following new schedule which appears on the next page, which is page 18, and this is the schedule which is dealing with oath of election officers which we talked about in the body of the statute where we supplied an omission which had accrued in that statute.  So, what does it mean, Sir?  There is going to be a new First Schedule, and that first schedule is going to be dealing  - we are also adding a second schedule which will be dealing with oath of election -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Kavuma, are you introducing a new schedule; before we go to the Fist Schedule you want to introduce another schedule in between?

MR KAVUMA:  No, Sir; what I am doing, I am introducing the schedules, and among the schedules -

THE CHAIRMAN:  The schedules are already here!

MR KAVUMA:  There is a schedule which is not there, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, what I am asking; are you talking about this schedule which is already here, or you are bringing a new schedule?  Inform the Members.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, there are two legs to this; there are existing schedules in the Bill now, but they were not introduced in the main body of the Bill.  Secondly, we shall be introducing a new schedule which will become the new 2, in line with the provisions we passed in the body of the Bill which relates to an oath of election officers, and we shall come to it, Sir.  So, all I am doing is to say that immediately before the First Schedule, we insert the following new First Schedule and then a Second Schedule and then we continue; then immediately after the Fist Schedule -(Interjections)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I think, what the Minister is trying to do is to introduce a new schedule altogether, and then renumber.  So, let him tell us the new schedule and then we can renumber accordingly.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence, Sir.  There are schedules in the Bill, and there is a schedule labeled First Schedule, now that schedule deals with rules for election of women.  But I am saying we are going to introduce a new First Schedule and that new one will be dealing with constituencies; now that is a direct consequence of our having passed the provision regarding to constituencies.  Then after that we shall be going on with these other schedules which appear in the Statute.  So, now I beg to move that immediately before the First Schedule we insert the following new First Schedule, and that will be dealing with constituencies, and then a new Second Schedule which will be -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, let us first deal with the new schedule.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, this is a schedule regarding constituencies; we did circulate them and Members have them, that is the new schedule we are introducing, just tally the drafting with what we passed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I now move that immediately after the First Schedule we insert Schedule 2, which will be dealing with the oath.  I move Sir that we insert that schedule.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Old First Schedule, Part I

MR KASAJJA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have an amendment on the old first schedule. The amendment is on rule number 3 and I beg to move that we insert another paragraph (c) to deal with the election of women and this is to do with  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall come to that let us finish one.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I wish to draw the attention of the Committee that the heading to that original schedule one will now change by leaving all the words after - by renaming it the rules for the election of District Women Representatives full stop and all the other words will go. That is in accordance with what we passed and it was wrong to have put them as Women Representatives.  

Then Sir, in one I beg to move that the words from Women Representatives to the end of that paragraph be deleted and we insert ‘District Women Representative’.  This is because now this schedule will be dealing with according to the amendment we are going to propose will be dealing only with election of District Women Representatives.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, then in the same schedule I beg to move that we delete Rule 8; 9, and 10 appearing in that original schedule. I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman, my amendment is on the old first schedule and it is on Rule number 3; which reads that, “The Woman Representative for every District shall be elected by an Electoral College comprising”.  So, I am moving an amendment after (b) to add another category of voters that is (c) and it is going to read; “All members of the parish councils and sub-county youth councils within the district”, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, time will come for you to say yes or no, but listen to him.

MR KASAJJA: Mr Chairman, I beg the Members to listen to my amendment.  Mr Chairman, this one is in line with the electoral colleges that we have passed and I supported it, Mr Chairman.  So, what I am doing, Mr Chairman, is to give an opportunity to another category of voters in the district and that is the Youth Councils.  Now we are widening the Electrol College so that instead of having only the counselors of RC 2 and RC 3 and then only members of the Women Councils we are adding on also the Youth Councils at both the sub-county and the Parish level that is the amendment.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 

MR KAVUMA: It was brought to my attention, Sir, that there was a problem when there is voting by Electoral Colleges, some times the Member who stands who is also a voter because he does not belong to that College does not exercise his or her right to vote, now since he is a Uganda he is entitled to vote and I am seeking to add with your permission, Sir, and that of the House a provision to say that, “nothing will prevent a  contesting candidate who stands to vote”.  That is a principle behind it, sir, it will be properly drafted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Original first schedule as amended, agreed to.

Original Second Schedule


MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the second schedule in paragraph 1(g); we delete the word ‘military’ and insert the following words ‘Military, Police or Prisons, College, or, Mr Chairman, the idea is, that these institutions have their Colleges and we have mentioned only the Military academy, these disciplined forces the Police and Prisons are the ones we are now seeking to add and I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KISEMBO MULEJU: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment which I want to add immediately after sub-clause (h) to be (i) which should be reading as follows; “Any person holding a post Junior Secondary certificate or a Diploma or a Degree acquired from any recognised college, University or Institution shall be taken to be holding an ‘A’ level certificate.”  

Mr Chairman, there are many Ugandans who did Junior Secondary education and continued to acquire other qualifications as I have mentioned in this amendment.  It would be not in order to stop these people who have such qualifications from standing because they did not sit for ‘O’ or ‘A’ level and, ‘A’ is of recent; those whom we are talking about are the ones who did Junior Secondary Education.  

Mr Chairman, I have mentioned that these qualifications will have come from a recognised college and this amendment of mine is not subjective it is liberal and I would actually request the Minister to accept this amendment because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR KISEMBO MULEJU: and the hon. House is going to allow many people to stand for these elections as I have already said, Mr Chairman, it is not subjective and at the same time it does not open - I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 2; we delete the words ‘and who is in possession of an ‘O’ level certificate and shall be taken to hold an ‘A’ level so that we stop at the word ‘recognised university’.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the second schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)



The Title


MR KAVUMA: Sir, I want to be guided because really what I want is - it would follow under the recommittal proceedings.  Does that come after that Title?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE  MINSTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma):   Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered and passed the Bill entitled the parliamentary Elections Interim Provision’s Bill with some amendments. I beg to report, Sir.



MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER  OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, there one or two provisions where I want to seek your indulgence, Sir, to go through a procedure of recommittal in the Committee and these are concerning with the commencement date which we cannot leave an attended to in this statute because it must be related to the Presidential elections Bill.  I beg to move, sir that these provisions do go through a recommittal stage in accordance with our rules, Sir.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995



THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that immediately after clause 1 we insert the following new clause.  Clause 2; this statute shall be deemed to have come into force at the same time as the Presidential Elections Interim Provision Statute.  

Mr Chairman, as I did explain to this hon. House, there some provisions in this Bill which are going to apply to the Presidential Election Statute, now Sir, in order that these laws come into force at the same it is necessary that we cure that likely loophole by deeming this statute to come into effect at the same time as the Presidential Election Statute comes into force and I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Kavuma): Mr Chairman, in clause 12 we delete the entire clause 12; as it appears in the draft, I will explain here, Sir, when we are dealing with this clause we had two sets of amendments, one was the one dated 19th and the other one was the one dated the 22nd, the one dated 22nd is the current one we have been using and it is the correct version.  Now on the one dated 19th, there was a spelling error which mentioned only deleting sub-clause 2; and it appeared as if we wanted to delete only sub-clause 2; of that clause 12.  Mr Chairman, that was an error, but when we pronounced ourselves we only deleted sub-clause 2; from that clause, the correct position as it is portrayed on our amendment dated the 22nd in amendment number 6; which requires us to delete the entire clause 12, and the reasons, Sir, are, that this clause 12 was originally designed to cater for a situation where the commission demarcates constituencies.  

But, Sir, and  hon. Members as you remember because of reasons given which we were convinced about we now guided the Commission about the constituencies to apply to this election, therefore, the entire clause 2, became irrelevant and, therefore, I beg that we do delete the whole of that clause.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, this is the last one I am going to seek your indulgence and the House.  Mr Chairman, in this clause 33; sub-clause 1; we did pass a provision on the basis of the amendment Tabled by hon. Manzi Tumubweine, Sir, the administrators of the elections have since then looked at this clause and they have appealed to you, Sir, in this House through me to assist them because the formulation we put in the new clause makes their work almost impossible.  So we are seeking to improve on the amendment as we passed it and also improve on the text of what was originally there so that we cure two mischiefs.  One to reduce on the chances of voters being confused, but secondly also to ensure that when the commission organises these polling stations and centres it should take all steps necessary to avoid a situation where the provision could lead to abuse and the recommended formulation, Sir, goes like this.  That we insert a new sub-clause 2; to read as follows; “subject to sub-section 3; each polling division shall have one polling station and where it is not possible to have a separate polling station for each polling division a polling centre servicing more than one polling division may be, created at a single location so that voters from one polling division vote at a distinct polling station within the polling centre.”

Three were there is more than one polling station at a polling centre the Presiding Officer shall ensure that steps are taken to inform voters as early as possible of the particular polling station at which they are required to vote. That the polling stations are separated by a sufficient distance and that the circumstances of voting are such as to guarantee orderly voting without confusion.  

Mr Chairman, with that improvement the two problems we had would be cured,;there would be no confusion because it would be required by law for the election officers to ensure that there is order at the polling division.  Sir, it is from their past experience that in some areas it was more convenient for people from different polling divisions to walk to and vote from a single location because of the settlement pattern obtaining in that particular locality and this may be, more applicable to urban areas.  Sir, in other areas especially heavily populated places, I will give example of Kisenyi and Katwe, there is usually one location which is convenient for more than one polling division e.g. a school, a play ground, or a sub-county headquarters and there, may, not be another suitable area within the area in spite of the heavy population in that area.  

Mr Chairman, another reason is for purposes of delivery and retrieval of election materials it may not be possible for each polling station to have it’s own location in such case the polling station have to be located at a convenient place.  With these reasons and with the improvements we have effected I am sure the mischiefs are being catered for we should not give a commission a duty that will become by law impossible to perform and as you know if an slight difference emerges from the arrangement we have stipulated in the law it could be declare narrow and void as contrary to the law.  

So, I beg hon. Members to take in good faith this improvement and we help to make the work of the administrators of the elections orderly and easy and possible without fore going on the principle of making sure that there will be a minimum confusion.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR ONGOM:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Now that the Minister has taken us back and selectively trying to re-adjust what we had already passed, could this chance now be opened to every Member to bring forward whatever, has already been approved so that it can be adjusted obviously as you can see from this particular amendment it goes completely against the spirit of the amendment that we passed and Mr Chairman, if Members also agree like the Minister of certain amendment can they be allowed now to introduce it, Mr Chairman

THE CHAIRMAN: No.

MR ONGOM: Then we are no long being fair, Mr Chairman, if we are not allowed.  For instance we have just passed an amendment which obviously is against the constitution provision, can that also be revisited?  It is the clarification, I am seeking, Mr Chairman, I want your ruling.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I had moved my amendment on that and the last improvement is on clause 48.19; and that is the last one, Sir.

MR WAPAKABULO: Point of clarification.  Sir, my Colleague did read out  the piece relating to the Presiding Officer having to notify the electorate in good time.  Was he trying to impose a duty on the Presiding Officer or on the Returning Officer?  Because I was not quite clear on that one.

MR KAVUMA: It is the Returning Officer who is in charge, so it should read the Returning Officer.  I thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33 as amended, agreed to.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, the last one is on 10.19 and it is in the interest of all Members to have this one -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You told us 2,12,and 33, and we stop there.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

(Question put and agreed to.)



REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House have considered clauses 2,12,and 13 of the Bill entitled: The Parliamentary Electoral (Interim Provisions) Bill, 1996, and passed them with some amendments.  I beg to move, Sir.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)


BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1996



THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Parliamentary Elections (Interim Provisions) Bill, 1996 be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Title settled and Bill passes -(Applause)- and with that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m. thank you.


(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 March1996 at 2.30 p.m.)









