Thursday, 20 February 2003

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today the House is full because we have special guests from Busoga, and Magogo Parish in Kisozi, Kamuli District of Buganda -(Laughter)- of Busoga. I quite appreciate this slip of the tongue. It is because for us here we are used to Masaka of Buganda and Mengo of Buganda for example, but for those of Busoga, I am not used to. (Laughter). Anyway, I meant Kamuli of Busoga. 

Before I proceed with the matter that has brought our brothers from Busoga District here, I want to inform you that one of our members, Dr Johnson Nkuuhe, Member for Isingiro South, has been appointed to serve two important international organisations. He has been appointed to the United Nations Task Force on the International Advisory Board, housed in Netherlands -(Applause)- and also to a similar international organisation in Netherlands. I think he will be able to give us detailed information about the nature of his work later on. Congratulations. (Applause).

Honourable members, about seven and a half years ago we had a Constituent Assembly, which promulgated the current Constitution. Many of us here - including myself - were delegates to the Constituent Assembly. Among the provisions of that Constitution is Article 178, an article that was intended to allow districts in Uganda to corporate. 

As you may appreciate, under the present arrangement in particular, under Article 5(2), Uganda is made up of districts. This means that the biggest bricks to make up Uganda are in form of districts. However, it was realised that perhaps it was in the interests of the districts to form an organisation, to corporate, for their development. Therefore a provision was put there for that, and everybody saw it was a good provision, but it has taken over seven years for districts of Uganda to articulate the provisions of Article 178.

And today, under the Constitution, the districts of: Bugiri of Busoga, Iganga of Busoga, Mayuge of Busoga, Jinja of Busoga and Kamuli of Busoga, came to my office and informed me that they have decided to corporate in terms of Article 178. They gave me a charter under which this corporation is to be run.

On your behalf I congratulated them, and I wish them success. (Applause). I believe that seeing is believing, so I thought it a good idea for the documents I received to be put before you so that you can scrutinise them, as legislators, and perhaps advise accordingly.  

But as I said earlier in the day, we should not be negative. We should be helpful, especially to these pioneers so that we encourage them and help them to succeed rather than fail.

I note that in Article 178 there is a provision which we should have dealt with. We can make a law to allow these districts to raise some funds for their activities. I do not know why we did not do that earlier. Perhaps it is because there were no co-operating districts earlier. Because I think the ones concerned should have now utilised those provisions if they had been there.

I did not want to express my feelings about these provisions, but I posed some questions on the matter; questions that I think we could ponder on, especially at this time when we are talking about the review of the Constitution. One of the questions asked was, “why has it taken so long for districts to come up and utilise that provision? Is it because they are scared or is it because people do not believe in our good intention - those of us who made the Constitution? What can we do to help?” That is what I wanted to inform you about. 

As you appreciate, we have a number of Members of Parliament from those districts. Among them is Her Excellency the Vice President, who is a Member for Kigulu South. (Applause). We also have the Deputy Speaker, who is from Kamuli of Busoga. (Applause). 

I said I want to exhibit this charter, so I now ask the Member of Parliament for Kigulu South to lay the document on the Table. (Applause). 

(Dr Wandira Kazibwe, MP for Kigulu South County, laid the Busoga Charter on the Table).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for allowing me to seek clarification. It has nothing to do with the Busoga Charter; we only welcome it. My clarification is on a different matter. 

I am a Member of the National Executive Committee of the Movement and I come from Sironko District. Mr Speaker, I seek clarification on what all of us have read from the press about the National Executive Committee meeting and deciding on the future of the Movement, its death or its life. 

It is now crystal clear that the matter of political pluralism is set and it is at hand. Therefore, to avoid any undercutting, every district and institution that is represented on NEC should be represented fully. Then when we reach a point of decision, nobody will blame another saying, “I was not there, and somebody must have undercut us.” 

The matter is this. The National Executive Committee has gaps in it. There are institutions that have not filled up their places -   (Interjections)- I am seeking clarification.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr Speaker, this is a National Parliament, certainly not an organ of the Movement. The way the honourable member is proceeding, it is like he needs a decision on matters concerning the National Executive Committee, from here. Is he in order to reduce this august House into an organ of the Movement?

THE SPEAKER: If we had allowed the member to finish his clarification, I would be in position to know that. I am saying this because he is saying there are gaps in the Committee. I do not know whether the gaps arise from this House or from outside it. Of course if there are gaps arising from this House, then he is entitled to seek the clarification on that. For those gaps arising from outside, I am not the one to interpret them. I can only confine myself to situations arising from the House.

MR KIBALE WAMBI: Thank you for your wise ruling, Mr Speaker. The matters I am referring to are within the ambit of this House. A former member of NEC, hon. Mugisha Muntu, was representing the Army but he left. There are a number of other districts whose members have left and sooner or later NEC is going to meet. May I get clarification as to when the elections for members of NEC will take place, Sir?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, some time last year, and it is recorded in our Hansard, we appointed people to represent Parliament - from various districts - to NEC. This was done here and it was recorded. Therefore if there is any vacancy arising from the team that we sent from here, then when I am notified about it, appropriate arrangements will be made to deal with the situation.

MR MARTIN WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the people of Busoga for their efforts that have resulted into this charter. At the same time I feel sad because a charter, in my view –(Interruption)

MR KIZIGE: I would like to be clarified. Are we going to debate the charter? Is it procedurally proper to do so after it has been laid on table? 

THE SPEAKER: No, no. I only allowed the member to make his clarification.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was saying that I feel sad that a charter, in a number of respects, defies the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and other laws of this country deposited before you. 

I come from Bugiri District. I have had the privilege of very carefully reading this charter. Mr Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to culture. Honourable members may not know but within Busoga there are many other ethnic groups. One of the things that this charter does is to compel everyone to pay allegiance to the Kyabazinga, who is the King of the Basoga. I think this is unconstitutional and it makes me feel sad  –(Interruptions)

MR KAYONGO: Mr Speaker, we have a common saying that when you go “e Bulyambwa…” -(Interruption)- so the honourable member, if he joined the Busoga territory, let him be humble and behave.

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to use a language that is not understood in this House? Not everybody understands the language he has used.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will only deal with the point raised by hon. Wandera. He was going on in detail about the charter. I believe the House cannot be the court to adjudicate on disputes about the legality and constitutionality of the charter. If the charter has contravened certain provisions of the Constitution, any person affected by that contravention is free to go to the appropriate forum for redress.  

As of today a charter allegedly prepared under the Constitution was presented to me and I have informed the House of what happened. Of course this will not prejudice your right, or the right of any group within the territory of Busoga, to go to court and say, “This charter is doing this”, and the court will definitely give redress.  

However, I even received minutes of local council meetings of areas in the territory that has come together, saying that they approve of this. So, you can even go to the councils involved, since you are an ex-official member of these councils, and pursue your complaint.

MR WANDERA: I would like to inform hon. Tom Kayongo that the Samias in Bugiri are not immigrants. We are in Busoga because of the arbitrary boundaries of the colonialists, and we have the right to have our culture respected. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I quite appreciate this as a new development in our country. 

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I want to give you information that one of the most prominent Samias, and who is a former Presidential candidate, hon. Aggrey Awori, lives in Bugiri District. Therefore Busoga does not discriminate against any person who lives in the area.  

MRS RUTH TUMA (Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say, “Bravo” to the people of Busoga. You have utilised Article 178 very well. The aims and objectives of the charter are very well spelt out. Culture and development go hand in hand and are fundamental for the well being of the region. 

Culture will strengthen and consolidate the Busoga identity. Most of our cultural language has disappeared –(Interruption)- what is the problem? Mr Speaker, can I be protected?

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MRS TUMA: You are all aware that the cultural walls have collapsed because of globalisation. The onus is on us the people of Uganda, in our respective cultural entities, to resurrect it. The UNESCO policy is to promote mother tongues in education up to primary four. I am sure the Busoga Region will utilise this charter to make sure that Lusoga becomes a language of medium and instruction in Busoga. 

I do not mean to say that we are going to be isolated. In fact the language is going to help us relate better with other districts of the country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am a son of Busoga and I am a direct descendant of Mwondha Okaali, who settled in Busoga around the year 1400. He had come from Bunyoro. (Laughter). 

I stand up to clarify on one or two issues. This charter is for Busoga, not necessarily for Basoga. Busoga is a geographical entity and it has been so for a long time. We are now looking for a legal framework that addresses us as such.  

There are many other issues that the charter will handle. Quite often you find a grader seated idle in Bugiri because Bugiri District may have no fuel, yet Mayuge District could utilise the grader. These are some of the attributes that the charter can deliver to.  

As for my friend, hon. Martin Wandera, it is not possible to represent a tribe. I hate the day when anyone of us will stand in this House to represent a tribe. It is not possible to represent a tribe. At most we have constituencies.  

MR WANDERA: Mr Speaker, this is the preamble of the charter: Article 46 says; “The Kyabazinga is the constitutional and cultural leader and number one citizen of Busoga. He is a cultural leader of Basoga.”  For him to be number one over Martin Wandera who is a Musamya, is unconstitutional. Is it in order, therefore, for my colleague, hon. Mwondha, to mislead this House and represent me as a tribal leader?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have carefully listened to hon. Patrick Mwondha. At no time did he say what you are saying. He was only saying that a Member of Parliament of any given constituency does not represent one tribe; he represents everybody in that constituency. That is the import of his submission.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want this to go on record because I come from a family that has ruled Bukooli for a very long time - the Wakooli family. We have lived in Bukooli as brothers with all the other tribes. In fact Bukooli has the largest collection of tribes in Uganda. I am proud of that. 

Despite that, I can only represent Bukooli North, not the Basoga there. This is because the Basoga are all over the world. There are some in Australia; can I represent them here? There are some in Buganda, but I cannot represent them here too. That is the point I was trying to make.   

Mr Speaker, I want to say, with all the ancestral basing; all the hierarchy of clan leadership and clan anthropology; all the authority of the anthropology in Busoga, that I endorse the charter. Thank you.

MR SPEAKER: I am going to limit observations on this charter to two more people. 

MS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, we have been given the Order Paper and the issues on it are very clear. We were told the people of Busoga were laying on Table their charter, to which some of us have not been privy. Honestly, and I am raising a point of procedure, is it in order for the whole House to sit and start listening to a debate on the Busoga charter, which we have not had a chance even to look at? 

We congratulated our colleagues for having come up with a charter. If they have got their internal problems, then honestly it is not right for us to sit and listen to those problems

THE SPEAKER: I have said that I am limiting observation on the charter to just two more people and we close it.

MR LATIF SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a brief comment on the Busoga Charter. If the Busoga Charter contains views from the people of Busoga, right from the grassroots up to the top, that is their own affair. 

If you can recall, on 28th January, the Kattikiro of Buganda brought the views of Buganda to the Constitutional Review Commission and indeed the contents were the aspirations of the people of Buganda. To our surprise, Mr Speaker, some prominent leaders, including the Vice President, had negative statements concerning Federo. The views that were presented to Mr Ssempebwa were those of the people in Buganda. The same way, the views that have are in the Busoga Charter are those of the people in Busoga. I request –(Interruption)

DR WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the date the member has quoted I was in Cabinet and I saw the people of Buganda, mobilised by the Kattikiro of Buganda, taking their views to the Constitutional Review Commission. 

At another function the people of Busoga came with the Kyabazinga of Busoga to Kampala, which is not of Buganda, to celebrate Busoga victory and enjoy the air of the whole of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, as a citizen who originates from Busoga and who represents the people of Busoga, I have the right to pronounce myself on the aspirations of the people of Busoga as they give them to me. Is the member in order to misrepresent my address to the people of Busoga in Kampala, which is not of Buganda, about what they want?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not widen the issue. The issue was on the Charter of Busoga, a fact we have recognised. 

The Member for Kawempe North said that the Vice President commented on issues of Buganda. I was about to ask the member to substantiate on whether his case is that the Vice President said what she did in Kampala – a part of Buganda. Are you stating a different matter from that? 

The issue should not be where you said the statements. Whether you were in Arua, in Yumbe or in Lumino, the concern is to talk about other issues. But as I have said, we should not really expand this. I would rather we closed this matter here. The understanding is that we congratulate the people of the districts of Busoga for invoking the provisions of Article 178, and we wish them well.

MR AWORI: Point of clarification; it is not on Busoga.  

THE SPEAKER: What is it?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, it is a matter of constitutional interpretation. This Government is very clear on the matter of affirmative action, especially pertaining to Article 30 of the Constitution, which deals with the rights of women. 

I was horrified this morning, when I saw the list of promotions in the Police Force. Mr Speaker, out of the 38 promotions there were only 8 women –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that kind of debate is allowed only for urgent matters. If there are irregularities in the promotions in the Police, you can follow up this matter either by a formal motion or by other means. 

I have noted your concern but I advise you to make a formal motion in order to deal with the matter.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (RATING) BILL, 2003

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Philip Byaruhanga) Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Local Governments (Rating) Bill, 2003 be read for the First Time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the information I have from the office where these Bills are sent before they are distributed to members is that it has not been properly forwarded to the clerk. Under those circumstances we cannot have it read for the First Time, as it does not comply with the Budget Act. Please comply with the Budget Act, and we shall accord you time when it can be read.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON THE SALE OF UGANDA COMMERCIAL BANK LIMITED

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Speaker, I rise to clarify a matter relating to the testimony I gave to the select Committee when I appeared before it in respect of this matter. I also want to clarify on the legal opinion I gave subsequent to the signing of the UCBL sale agreement, as read out by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I am doing so just in case a wrong impression has been given to this House that my testimony before the select Committee is in contradiction with the legal opinion given after the sale agreement had been signed.

My testimony appears on page 20 of the Committee’s report. It is paragraph 4.6.4, and with your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to read it:
“The second legal issue was the almost absent role of the Attorney General in the sale process. The Attorney General’s Office testified that they were left out of the entire sale process, except where the Minister of Finance sought a legal opinion on the already signed agreement. According to the Attorney General’s Office, their exclusion in the early stages of the sale process was on grounds that matters under discussion were extremely confidential.”  

I would like to draw the attention of honourable members to the testimony, namely that the Attorney General was excluded from the entire process. What I did tell the Committee was that the Attorney General, or his office, was not involved in the negotiation process and the drawing of the agreement. Those are events that preceded the signing of the agreement.  

The effect of my testimony before the Committee is that the sale agreement was negotiated, concluded and signed without legal advice from the Attorney General as stipulated in Article 119 (5), and which I would like to read, with your permission:

“Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without the legal advice from the Attorney General, except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” 

The effect of this provision is that before the agreement is concluded and signed, the advice of the Attorney General should be sought. Generally the Committee is right in saying that that is the evidence the Attorney General gave.

The legal opinion, which the minister read out, was given because the parties to this agreement had already made a provision in their agreement that the legal opinion of the Attorney General would be a condition precedent for the agreement being binding. This is a common conditionality in many agreements where the Government is a party.  The reason is to ensure that the other party, which is negotiating with Government, follows the internal consultations and requisite procedural requirements so as not to jeopardise the rights of the other. 

In this case, Standard Bank Investment Corporation had agreed with Government that the legal opinion of the Attorney General must be prepared and filed in order to make the agreement binding. Consulting the Attorney General or his Office on the process preceding the signing of the agreement is different from a legal opinion, which is always given after the agreement has been signed.  

One of the things -(Interruption)– yes, that is the case. That is why – I am explaining this so that you are in position to debate this motion appropriately. A legal opinion is normally given after the agreement has been signed. Let me explain. The point I am making is this. A legal opinion, the one I am describing, does not deal with the substance of the agreement. It only deals with the procedural aspect of the agreement. Namely, is the person who signed the agreement the duly authorised officer of Government? That is the case.  

I will give you an example. When the Government is borrowing, it does so with the approval of Parliament and it is normally a requirement of those agreements signed with the World Bank, IMF and so forth. In order for the agreement to be binding, the Attorney General’s opinion must be provided. That is where and when the opinion of the Attorney General is provided, after the agreement has been signed. What I am saying is that there is no contradiction between the testimony –(Interruption)- no, I would like you to look at it again. 

Hon. Mwandha, the advice that I am talking of in the Committee’s report has to do with consultation before the agreement was signed. I think that is what the Committee said and I am not disagreeing with them. All I am saying is that when it comes to filing a legal opinion, that is a different requirement. That requirement is after the agreement has been signed because the parties have agreed that in order for the agreement to become binding, a legal opinion of the Attorney General is required. That is the law. 

I just want to dispel the impression that my testimony to the Committee was in contradiction with legal opinion given. That is all I want to do.  

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, according to our Rules of Procedure, rule 157 is the one responsible for setting up the Ad Hoc Committee on the Sale of Uganda Commercial Bank. I thought that by implication of rule 192, this report should have been fully reported before the House, but we summarised it and so some of the points were missed. 

The minister gave what appeared to be a rebuttal. I thought the normal procedure would have been for members to contribute and the minister to respond after the contributions. In light of the fact that this was not done, I seek your guidance on procedure. Would it not be better to allow the members who were on the ad hoc Committee, who normally wait until the rest have contributed, to contribute, so that clarification is done before this report is fully debated?

What I have in mind, Mr Speaker, is that the House commissions this report. It should not appear like it is an adversarial confrontation where people have to defend themselves and therefore hide the merits and the truth of this report. I need your guidance, Mr Speaker. (Applause).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report of the ad hoc Committee was presented. Subsequent to that, the Minister of Finance represented Government and Bank of Uganda, because they cannot come here, to make a response to what was in the Committee’s report. It was when the minister was presenting in response to the accusation of not consulting the Attorney General that the State Minister of Finance came up to say there was a legal opinion from the Attorney General. 

He was trying to say that it is not true that the Attorney General was not consulted, and that if he was then it was to a limited extent. The Attorney General has now come up to agree that indeed he gave an opinion on the document that was signed eventually. 

During the negotiations he was not consulted, and yesterday the Minister of Finance confirmed that. However, when he was consulted on what had gone on, he recalled the documents. Although he did not draw them or participate in the negotiations, he looked at the documents and their contents and he did not see any loss in them. I think that is what the Attorney General is saying.

So, when you are debating this issue, you should be aware of this. He is not contradicting the document, and he is not denying what was put in the report. He is just clarifying on the matter so that you start debate on that understanding.

MR WACHA: Sir, I am getting lost. Can the Attorney General reconcile what he is saying with what is provided for under Article 119(5) of the Constitution? It says: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney General….”

MR FRANCIS AYUME: You see, I was exactly stating that. Article 119(5) - I even cited it - provides exactly as my colleague hon. Ben Wacha has read. It therefore means that before the agreement was signed, when the preliminary steps were being taken, Article 119(5) should have been complied with. That is what I am saying; and that is what I exactly told the Committee. 

The effect of my testimony is that prior to the conclusion and signing of the agreement, the Attorney General ought to have been consulted for advice. I was comparing that situation to one where the Attorney General is to provide a legal opinion. That is legal opinion with capital “L” and capital “O”. That one is different because it is always provided after the agreement has been signed. 

Then if the agreement is concluded and signed by the rightful person that is, the person who represents the Government - in this case the Ministry of Finance - and there are no more legal formalities to make the agreement any more binding, that is a formal Legal Opinion. What transpires prior to that is routine consultation, which Article 119(5) requires to be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask this, learned Attorney General. When was this agreement effective? There is a difference in the signing and effective date. The effective date is not necessarily when you sign the agreement. You can sign it at a future date. So, what is the effective date?

MR AYUME: Mr Speaker, I cannot remember, off-hand, the effective date. What I know is that the agreement would not have been effective if one of the conditionalities, such as a legal opinion from the Attorney General, were still pending. The fact that the Attorney General filed his legal opinion, it fulfilled one of the conditions for the effectiveness of the agreement.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, for us in the Ministry of Finance we are enjoined by the Constitution to refer matters that have a legal aspect, to the Attorney General. We referred these transactions to the Attorney General and he gave us an opinion, which we laid on the Table. Therefore in the Ministry of Finance we are satisfied that the Attorney General participated and gave us a go-ahead to continue with the transactions.  

THE SPEAKER: Would you help us with this question, which the Attorney General could not answer; what was the effective date of this agreement?

MR MUSUMBA: The effective date, and the effectiveness of this agreement were after the opinion of the Attorney General had been given.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, here with me is the agreement. I can lay it on the Table, for hon. Musumba to read to us that particular provision, because it talks of a closing date, which is in here. This agreement was signed on 14 December 2001. In any case, the legal opinion of the Attorney General was subsequent to that. In fact, the parties had already performed some of the obligations then. 

For example, Shs 98.6 billion had already been transferred from UCB, prior to the closing date, to Bank of Uganda. So the agreement was already being performed even by the time the Attorney General was giving his legal opinion.

THE SPEAKER: As I see it, each of you has got his own opinion on this aspect. Therefore we can proceed and debate the motion because the Attorney General only came in for clarification. It is for you to assess the impact of that clarification one way or the other but it does not prevent you from debating the motion.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What the Attorney General pointed out is just one of the issues in the report. Actually there is no great contradiction because he repeated what the Committee found out. The procedural point, on which I am rising, is related to what Prof. Kamuntu has just said.

Mr Speaker, during the Sixth Parliament, I happened to sit on two select Committees of Parliament. One was investigating the Uganda Railways Corporation, and another one investigated the privatisation process. This ad hoc Committee was put in place to investigate another arm of Government, in this case the Executive, which is not a small matter.

Procedurally, I was taken aback when a member rose and said we should just go to the conclusions and recommendations; conclusions arising out of what? This report is a very important report! It was given to Members of Parliament before we went on recess. Some people did not even get copies because that time we did not have enough photocopying facilities. Now that we are back after recess to start debating the report, which I believe some of my colleagues did not read, you want us to go to the conclusions and recommendations? 

That will deny this House a chance to have an insight of what the Committee’s findings were and why they came to the conclusions they did. So, it now becomes a court process. We have the ad hoc Committee, which was acting on behalf of this Parliament. The Committee is now the accuser, the Executive is the accused and the two are there in the door. 

The chairman of the ad hoc Committee, to which I was a member, pointed out that there are important issues in this report, which have not been answered to. He called us the members of the ad hoc Committee today, we had a meeting and we found that out. There are issues in this report where exhaustive information has not been given to this House. 

Now, what are we going to debate? Are we going to debate the accused and the accuser? Are we going to debate the minister’s answer? Are we going to debate the Committee’s report, which the members have not been privy to? Is it not possible to allow the Committee chairman to point out those issues, which he thinks were misrepresented or not answered to? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I personally do not see any problem. A report was presented, but before we started debating the report hon. Eresu came up and said, “let us hear what the minister has to say.” So the minister presented his case. What we are going to do is debate the report as it is, taking into account what has been said by the minister in his submission, plus the documents we have here. 

No conclusion has been reached. We have not started the debate. We are now going to start the debate, taking into account what has been said by the minister. You may agree with the minister or not, and then you make your conclusion on the motion. So the debate can start.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, now that the issue is like that, I beg the indulgence of the Chair. Let members of the Committee who are privy to this vital information be allowed to take part in the debate.

THE SPEAKER: What was presented by Prof. Kamuntu was your report. Whatever you thought was important was included in the report. We are not hearing evidence here; the evidence was compressed and put in the report. If there are clarifications to make, or if other members do not appreciate the import of the report, you can always come in.  Meanwhile, let other honourable members start the debate.

MR DANIEL KIWALABYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of us did not get the chance to get this report when it was distributed before we went for recess. We had hope that enough copies would be availed but they have not been availed to some of us still. Can we have some copies?

THE SPEAKER: If there are a few copies, then let those who have the copies debate. Meanwhile we shall arrange to avail those without copies with some.  

MRS ANIFA KAWOOYA (Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to debate the report. I have read through the report and having had it for some time, I am conversant with it.       

I wish to thank members of the Committee for their good report, and the minister for his explanation. There are about two or three comments, which I want to make - I am sorry I am having flu, but not a virus. 

Mr Speaker, I want to begin with the conclusions of the Committee’s report. I find the Committee’s conclusions numbered 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3 contradicting the spirit of conclusion 7.4. This is in connection with the method, which was used in the whole process. 

When you look at conclusion 7.2, the Committee says that the method used had the inevitable limitations of failing to generate competitive bids that would have assured the public that Uganda Commercial Bank Limited was sold in a transparent manner and at the best possible price. 

And when you go to 7.4, the Committee concludes that although the sale method used had the merit of getting potential credible investors, it does not assure the public that all possible buyers were reached. On one side the Committee observed there were shortcomings and in the other they observed that the process was a bit fair. I want clarification on that.

I move to recommendations. In recommendation 8.1 the Committee asked for partnership of the three arms of Government. In their recommendation 8.1.2, they are calling for Parliament to make a law, which is enforcing the resolutions of this Parliament. Under the same spirit of working together and partnership, I would have been happy to see the Committee call upon the Executive to make their decisions enforceable. So, this to me looks contradictory. 

They are calling on Parliament to make the resolutions of Parliament enforceable and for partnership, but they have not even given the Executive chance to also have their decisions enforceable. To me the Committee is not calling for actual partnership. 

When I move to 8.4 - maintenance –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarification from the Minister of Finance. Yesterday –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The person on the Floor is hon. Kawooya. Why do you not allow her –(Interruption)-

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, it is in the same spirit of her contribution that I would like to seek clarification from the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not allow her to conclude?  

MRS KAWOOYA: Mr Speaker, I said I am making my observations. I began with the conclusions of the report, now I am on recommendation number 8.3, which is calling for independence of the central bank. 

I agree with the Committee’s recommendation. If there is a gap between the laws, which are governing banking institutions, the Constitutional Review Commission (CRC) should look into this matter. The Committee in its recommendation 8.3 is saying that this should be given correct interpretation. It is the Constitutional Court, which can give the interpretation. This is a right recommendation to the CRC and I agree with them.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I see there is a problem here because the sentence says; “This should be given correct interpretation in the upcoming constitutional review.” I do not know whether it is interpretation or amendment because the constitutional review process is not one to interpret the law. But I think it should be revisited.

MRS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is saying the constitutional review, but it is a legal matter that is why I am bringing in two aspects. I have said this is a recommendation for a constitutional review, which can be taken to the Constitutional Review Commission. This needs interpretation, which can be given by the Constitutional Court. So, in both ways we could have a clear interpretation on this matter.  

Mr Speaker, recommendation 8.4 is on maintenance of branches. I agree with the Committee’s findings when they say that in the 52 upcountry branches, there was uncertainty and 47 of them seemed not to be operational. Then the minister came in and said they are given two years to look into the operations of these branches. 

The Committee then moves further to say, “The Committee therefore recommends that all branches of UCBL at that time of sale should be maintained by the buyer….” The clarification I am seeking is; if they are not operational, they seem to be sick, and they are not monitored to see how they are going to operate, how can the Committee then say the buyers should take them on? Is this not forcing the buyer to take on something whose condition is not known?  

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I move to 8.13 - displeasure with the Ministry of Finance and the Governor Bank of Uganda. I want to go back and support the Committee where it calls for support of partnership - the spirit of working together. But in recommendation 8.13 the Committee is calling for expression of displeasure in the people it is calling upon for partnership. If there are human errors that were –(Interjections)- I said, human errors, which are bound to be there, they do not necessitate that we should express displeasure in these two people. 

First of all the Committee observed that there is a gap in the law. They also observed that even the evaluation report that came in said the process was clear and fair, and the minister came in and said they worked within the legal framework and powers that were bestowed upon them.

So, I call upon this august House to look at this and streamline a policy, which will not bring in gaps within our laws. The whole problem of the sale of the bank was to me laws that were contradicting each other. We are asking which law precedes the other; the PERD law or the financial institutions law? What interpretation should we use? 

I want to thank the members of the Committee for the observations, but I call upon them that we should not express displeasure in the people who did a very good job. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Prior to joining this Parliament, I had served as a political instructor teaching the Movement’s good ideals for 7 years. However, sometimes I feel ashamed to discuss Uganda politics with my former students because there are problems in this country. Before we debate let us note the following: 

• The minister had informed this House that he would ensure that the whole process would go on well and that he would continue briefing this House. But the contradiction of not consulting the Attorney General in the process is one of those wrong things I do not commend.

• Although the bidding bank was Stanbic South Africa, in the end the paying bank was Stanbic Bank, Uganda, whose directors are different from those of South Africa. One of those directors is Karuhanga Barenzi.  

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance yesterday ably displayed some drama, and I would recommend him to the National Theatre. (Laughter). He really displayed some drama and although he was giving us some things that were lies, the Bakayimbira Dramactors would take him on very well. 

Up to now no one knows where the US $19.5 million they said was paid for UCBL is. Is it with the Bank of Uganda or it is on some people’s accounts? No one knows. It has not gone to the Government; it cannot go to DRIC because it was not sold under the PERD Statute, it is just there somewhere. For a whole year we do not know where this money is, and I think that is a very big anomaly. 

Personally I feel that UCB was not even sold. It was donated to some political vultures. I will substantiate this. This bank was valued by KPMG in December 2000 and it was sold a year after that. KPMG was the appointed auditor of UCBL and the one valuing for the seller, so you can see the conflict of interest. That is why I feel – a professional valuer would not give a very wide range of the cost of the bank - from Shs 45 to Shs 60 million. 

Mr Speaker, before the bank was sold, UCB transferred money, Shs 9.278 billion, to Bank of Uganda. That was part of the total purchase price. Money came from UCB to Bank of Uganda to purchase UCBL - to buy itself. You people should be ashamed of some of the things you are doing. KPMG valued the bank, on 31 December 2000, and the bank was sold in December 2001. In that year, according to the audited accounts of UCB, UCB made a profit of Shs 23 billion. That was not put into account when the bank was being sold, that one was donated. 

Further to that, in the contract the bad debts were worth Shs 24 billion, left to Stanbic bank. It is now the one getting the property of those who had got loans from UCB, and this is not included in the sale price. They are claiming people’s property. If you had perhaps said the Ugandans who had borrowed money should return it before, I would be assured that you had sympathized with Ugandans. But the buyers are now collecting Shs 24 billion for the bad debts, and it was not considered in the price. That is why I say that this thing was just a donation. 

There was also a tax loss of Shs 70 billion, which was carried forward. This one will go to Stanbic. So when I compute all those and consider what was paid for UCBL, I see it was just donated.

Mr Speaker, how shall we continue like this? I call upon Members of Parliament; let us not get ashamed to debate this report. This report looks like a post-mortem, but we are debating and putting it on record for our grandchildren. Our grandchildren will recover this bank from the vultures. Let us put it on record. For once stand up and be counted among the people that were against this robbery by some political vultures.

Let us put it on record because things cannot continue like this. The minister was able to tell that this one was cleared by DFID, that the DFID report –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable member mentioned that according to the contract, UCBL had to transfer Shs 9.27 billion to Bank of Uganda prior to the taking over of that bank by Stanbic. But the minister, is his submission, did not mention the Shs 9.27 billion. He mentioned - I think - Shs 8.6 billion. Where is the difference? What actually happened?  

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Byaruhanga. The information I want to give is in connection to the Shs 9.5 billion that was transferred. I have a copy of a letter from the Attorney General, hon. Francis Ayume, in reply to the ad hoc Committee when it sought advice from the Attorney General about the transfer of this Shs 9.5 billion to UCBL. Allow me to read you the Attorney General’s advice to the Committee:

“The issue of transferring Shs 9.5 billion from UCBL to Bank of Uganda. Information available from the Bank of Uganda indicates that this was excess cash in Uganda Commercial Bank belonging to the Government of Uganda as a shareholder in UCBL, which is the buyer. Standard Bank Investment Corporation Limited did not wish to form part of the assets of UCBL, which it was purchasing. Accordingly, it was agreed by the parties in terms of clause 7(1)(5) of the sale agreement, that in the event there was more tax due to URA than what was actually paid as at the end of the closing of the financial year of the bank, namely, 31 December 2001, then this amount of money would be used to meet the deficiency.”

The Attorney General said that it was therefore an anomaly to have included it in the total purchase price of the agreement. Honourable members, this is the information I wanted to give you.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, that being that, when Stanbic was bidding to buy UCBL, the headquarters building was not included in their bid. Bank of Uganda has donated it to UCBL. By 30 June 1996 this building was valued at Shs 14.1 billion. So, what price was paid for UCBL? The bid documents do not include the UCB headquarters building.  

In his answer, the Minister of Finance should have at least attempted to answer some of those queries for the people of Uganda to understand. You see, the minister was wrong. When I saw the minister sweating yesterday, I really sympathised with him because he was sweating trying to protect some dubious things. I do not know whether he is one of them, but let it be put on record that when the Ssendaulas of this world are no longer in Government, the people of Uganda will follow this record and recover this stolen property. We cannot keep quiet. 

Members of Parliament, in this House there is no Movement, no Multi-Parties and no Reform Agenda. It is the people of Uganda who voted for you. Follow the Movement, be sycophants, but the people of Uganda count on you. Members of the front bench, I hope you would join us in fighting this fraud because I do not need you to be part of them. 

In summary, time will tell who is right and who is wrong. For those who will be alive, the Bakiga have a saying “ekikuru nobuhangazi, embeba ekarya ahamuguta gwa kapa.”  You know the cats normally chase rats, but one rat survived so long that it found one cat dead, ate its skin and said, “At least -(Laughter). Let us hope that we shall live and fight this fraud. Thank you very much.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE (Bunyangabu County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Batooro have a saying that “ekihandikire tikijunda,” meaning that what is written does not rot. Therefore, all the evidence surrounding this question is in writing. Denials and defences will not help us. I think one day as, hon. Byaruhanga said, history will judge us and those who have done wrong will account to the future generation.(Applause). 

I would like to thank the Committee, which in my opinion has made one of the best reports since this session began. (Applause). I would also like to thank the Minister of Finance for having made a defence after this report was presented. That is a sign of responsibility. When allegations are raised, they should be responded to.

Mr Speaker, I never believed that history repeats itself but I am now inclined to believe, after reading this report, that history does repeat itself. I can see a repeat of Westmont, in Stanbic. I can see a Westmont in Stanbic. The circumstances, the fraudulent transactions that took place in Westmont - I was a member of the select Committee which probed Westmont, and our report is in the library for everybody to read. I can see the same conditions that prompted Government to rescind the contract with Westmont and the arbitration that resulted, repeating themselves here.

Let me allude to the Westmont experience. Government sold 49 percent shares in UCB to Westmont. Westmont mismanaged UCB. The Committee has reported to us that the loss that Westmont caused to this Government, cumulatively, is over Shs 118 billion. The Committee went ahead to inform us - and these facts were not disputed by the minister in his defence - in my practice, Mr Speaker, what is not contradicted is admitted. 

I was saying that the Committee in its report said that the arbitration process alone cost the Ugandan taxpayer Shs 11 billion. It is in the report in terms of costs. The minister, in his defence, does not tell us that when Government pursued Westmont - and rightly so - and following the arbitration, it prayed for damages in this case. Why were the damages not prayed for? Is it because Government was not entitled to damages for breach of contract by Westmont? Is it because of collusion by the Ugandan team, which negotiated with Westmont in this arbitration was wrong? Damages were not awarded!

Mr Speaker, costs were not awarded. I understand the arbitration settlement says that each party will bear its own costs. This is after Westmont had robbed the Uganda Government, made it a loss worth Shs 118 billion, and on top of that the arbitration process cost the Uganda Government Shs 11 billion. 

What is interesting to note is that the cost of the 49 percent shares, which Government was pursuing from Westmont, is Shs 11 billion. That is very interesting because the cost incurred by Government in pursuing the arbitration case is also Shs 11 billion. So, what Government recovered - in my opinion - is zero. This is very unfortunate and I can see this repeating itself. 

These issues were not answered by the minister. Why were damages not awarded? Why were costs not negotiated even when Government had spent a lot of money? Who was responsible for what the Committee calls – the Committee calls the Westmont experience a “fiasco” and indeed I agree with them. What action was taken against those people who were responsible for this fiasco? That explanation has not been given; as representatives of the people who I believe were the principal shareholders in this bank, we demand for that explanation.

Mr Speaker, I will now move to the question of whether Bank of Uganda can liquidate a solvent bank. That is a very serious issue for us to discuss here. Bank of Uganda, according to the report, took over the management of Uganda Commercial Bank after Westmont management had caused all this loss. In my opinion, under section 31 of the Financial Institutions Statute, this takeover was proper. Bank of Uganda was in order to take over Uganda Commercial Bank after Westmont had mismanaged it. That takeover was within the law. That is my submission and I am happy to note that actually Bank of Uganda, after taking over the bank, managed the bank and returned it to solvency.

The Committee has reported on it and the minister does not dispute it. In fact he agrees that by the time UCB was sold by Bank of Uganda to Stanbic, the bank was solvent. Mr Speaker, I have read sections 30, 31, and 32 of the Financial Institutions Statute. They are long sections and I will not belabour to read them again here. But they are available for us to read. The principle in all those sections is that Bank of Uganda can liquidate a bank or a financial institution, which is insolvent. That is what the law is saying. 

However, I have not seen it anywhere in the Financial Institutions Statute where the Bank of Uganda is authorised to liquidate a bank that is solvent. 

There is a second instance, Mr Speaker. The Bank of Uganda can make an arrangement of acquisition of a financial institution by another financial institution. The Bank of Uganda has that discretion. But even that process of acquisition by another bank presupposes that the bank in question must be insolvent. The question is: can Bank of Uganda liquidate a bank, which is solvent? The answer is no, in my opinion. 

That leads me to another question. Does the Bank of Uganda have the authority to sell - after it has taken over management of a bank and returned its solvency? Does it have the power therefore, apart from liquidating, to sell this bank? I have read the Financial Institutions Statute; I have read the Bank of Uganda Act, and there is no authority in these laws, which gives Bank of Uganda the power to dispose of a bank, which is solvent, such as the Uganda Commercial Bank.  

The minister submitted in his defence that indeed the Financial Institutions Statute is silent. Yes, the Financial Institutions Statute - I agree with him - is silent. But silence and permission are two different things. While the Financial Institutions Statute is silent, it does not permit the Bank of Uganda to sell a bank which is solvent. 

Mr Speaker, selling a bank is not a small matter.  In my view it is a fundamental matter, especially a people’s bank like Uganda Commercial Bank. Therefore the Bank of Uganda, in doing this, had to satisfy itself that it was actually following the law. 

I have read the PERD Statute and I think that statute is the law that was applicable to the sale of this bank. I would have expected the procedure to be as follows: Bank of Uganda takes over the bank because of mismanagement; Bank of Uganda injects capital into the bank; the bank becomes solvent; Bank of Uganda, and Government - if convinced that this bank could not be managed again by Government - would have handed over this bank to DRIC to privatise this bank under the PERD Statute. That is my opinion.

After that transgression of the law; the Westmont experience; liquidating a solvent bank; using non-existent provisions in the Financial Institutions Statute; avoiding the right law which is the PERD Statute for reasons not given; I now understand why the Attorney General was avoided. It is because the Attorney General would have informed the Bank of Uganda about the right procedure.

Mr Speaker, I move on to the role of the Attorney General in contracts of this nature. The role of the Attorney General is provided in Article 119(5) of the Constitution. I would have read it if I had time. The advice of the Attorney General in perusal and drawing of agreements where Government is involved, or bodies where Government has an interest, must precede the conclusion of the agreement. That is my submission. Article 119(5) is very clear and it does not need a lawyer to interpret that.  

Mr Speaker, the question is - and the Minister alluded to this - was the Bank of Uganda independent of the Attorney General’s opinion? Does the independence of the Bank of Uganda extend to the avoidance of advice from the Attorney General? The answer is no because this advice, in my opinion, is mandatory. 

The Supreme Court of Uganda has already pronounced itself on the role of the Attorney General. I do not think there can be a higher authority on interpretation of the law than the Supreme Court of Uganda. Mr Speaker, with your permission, let me read the decision of the Supreme Court of Uganda on the role of the Attorney General. 

The case was between Bank of Uganda, who was the appellant, and Banco Arab Espanol, the respondent, Civil Appeal No.1 of 2002. This is a Supreme Court decision, and I am going to read to you page 15. This is the leading judgement of His Lordship Justice Kanyeihamba, Justice of the Supreme Court, and he says:
“In my view, the opinion of the Attorney General, as authenticated by his own hand and signature, regarding the laws of Uganda and their effect and binding nature on any agreement, contracts or other legal transactions should be accorded the highest respect by Government and public institutions and their agents. 

It proceeds to says: “It is also my view that it is improper and untenable for Government, Bank of Uganda or any other public institution or body in which Government of Uganda has an interest to question the correctness or validity of that opinion.” That is what this authority is saying.  

It goes on to say - I will not read the whole text - “The legal opinion of the Attorney General about the legality of an agreement is a condition precedent.” A condition precedent means that before an agreement is actually concluded, the Attorney General “must” make his input. 

I have heard arguments that Bank of Uganda is independent therefore it cannot be subject to the advice of the Attorney General. But the subject of the sale was not Bank of Uganda. If I were to believe that Bank of Uganda is immune from the Attorney General’s opinion, which I do not, then I still hold that the subject of this sale was not Bank of Uganda but the Uganda Commercial Bank in which Government at that time had 100 percent interest. 

Therefore, Bank of Uganda and indeed the Ministry of Finance were irrevocably enjoined, under the law, to seek the advice of the Attorney General and to allow the Attorney General to peruse the draft contract. If the Attorney General okayed the contract, then the Bank of Uganda would go ahead and conclude the contract.  

In view of those arguments, Mr Speaker, I am inclined to conclude that this transaction was void. I may not have to challenge this transaction in court, but I think Government should take note that this transaction was done illegally. It can be made void, it is challengeable and it is potentially revocable. 

The opinion of the Attorney General, which came subsequent to the agreement, makes it unfortunate because we are killing the institution that we are supposed to protect. Bank of Uganda cannot be, and will never be independent of the opinion of the Attorney General. Parliament of Uganda must be bound by the opinion of the Attorney General. If the Attorney General gives us an opinion in this Parliament, although we are independent, we are enjoined to follow that opinion.  

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform our colleague holding the Floor that we should make a distinction between the two steps involving the Attorney General in the matter of UCBL.

The first one is to do with whether or not the Bank of Uganda would resolve the UCB in the manner that it did. In particular, after the Bank of Uganda seized the UCBL, nursed it and gave it milk and it resurrected and became solvent, could then the Bank of Uganda go ahead and handle it in the manner it did, namely selling it? For that indeed I was consulted and I gave the opinion that the Bank of Uganda had the power to do so.  

I want us to distinguish that from the agreement to sell, which is another subsequent transaction, and which in my opinion is the subject of this debate. Was the Bank of Uganda right in taking over and selling it? That opinion was given, that the Bank of Uganda was right. But as to how to do it, which is the subject of this debate, is a different matter.  

MR MWESIGE: I thank my senior colleague, the learned Attorney General, for his opinion. I cannot contradict your opinion but I would like to humbly disagree that without prejudiced opinion, in as far as the Financial Institutions Statute was silent on whether Bank of Uganda could sell a solvent bank and to the extent that the PERD Statute has a clear procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I see that the problem is from the decision of the Supreme Court that you quoted. You said the Judge said; “Institutions of Government, including Bank of Uganda are bound to abide by the advice given….” The Attorney General says he was consulted and he gave them a go-ahead. That was a legal -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: It is legal but, Mr Speaker, the Attorney General said Bank of Uganda can sell the bank, but he did not give them the method of sale. This meant that Bank of Uganda could still sell the bank, using the PERD Statute.  

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you but he says he doesn’t agree that Bank of Uganda could sell a solvent bank. According to the law, which you have stated, Bank of Uganda is bound by the advice given by the Attorney General. That is the problem.  

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I am talking about the timing. I am looking at the contract and not outside it. The question is whether this contract was entered into prior to the advice of the Attorney General and in accordance with the law and the Supreme Court decision. 

Two, even if Bank of Uganda had the authority to sell, which I have disputed, can the Attorney General’s opinion, which comes subsequent to the conclusion of the contract, validate a contract that is invalid?

THE SPEAKER: He said the consultation on whether Bank of Uganda can sell a solvent bank was prior to the one that came –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Speaker, let me state my opinion. My opinion is that –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my colleague for giving way. I am a member of that Committee and I was present when the Attorney General came to testify. I recall the Attorney General vividly say that he had not been involved in this transaction from the start. He said, “I was only involved at the end.” It is very unfortunate that I am not a learned fellow, but somehow I understand it when such a learned man comes here and diverts us from what he told the Committee.  

Secondly, section 119(4), which I do not think I read upside down, says that he should draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and other documents by whatever name called, to which to Government is –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, I am sorry to intervene again. My understanding is that there are two situations here. One is of finding a buyer and negotiating with him, which the Attorney General has said he did not participate in. Subsequently, he said he looked at the document, and before the bank decided to look for the buyer, it consulted him on whether the Bank of Uganda could sell a solvent bank. On that he said he gave advice. That is what I understood from the explanation. So, you should separate the two.

MR MWESIGE: My opinion, which I would like to go on record, is that if it is true that actually the Attorney General approved Bank of Uganda’s sale of a solvent bank, that was very unfortunate. That approval and sale is not contemplated by the Financial Institutions Statute because even the Attorney General’s opinion must also be within the law. It cannot just come from the blue. That is why the Attorney General can be challenged in the courts of law. 

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Speaker, I do not wish to disagree with the honourable member holding the Floor that any advice or legal opinion from the Attorney General must be within the law. That is how we operate and it does not need anybody else to inform us. 

But here is the question of a bank that has been resuscitated by the Bank of Uganda - let us not forget the circumstances. We are not talking about a normal bank, which is solvent, that the Bank of Uganda went to take over. Obviously that is not according to the law. We are talking of a situation where a bank has gone insolvent, the Bank of Uganda picks it up from the dust, nurses it, and makes it solvent. The question at that moment is, can the Bank of Uganda go ahead to sell? We should confine ourselves to those circumstances. It is definitely a controversial issue.  

I wish also to agree that in the Financial Institutions Statute that area is grey, and I have never withheld my feelings on that in this House. I think when the first debate started, it was specifically on that issue. I stood here and maintained my position that, yes, considering the circumstances, this was a bank that was already in the hands of the Bank of Uganda as a receiver. 

Then the question is, what would the Bank of Uganda do in the circumstances? Return it to the very persons who mismanaged it? That is how I argued it here. I have been fortified by the decision of eminent lawyers who were hired by the Bank of Uganda, funded by DFID, and they said that –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, if I can read it, with your permission, because this is a very controversial issue. 

I gave a legal opinion, my learned friend said I was wrong, I did not act within the law, but you listen to this. Some other person may also come and say, “The Attorney General, the hon. Member for Bunyangabo and another lawyer are all wrong; I am right.” That is why we have one spokesman for the Government - in the legal field - only one person, and that is me.  (Laughter).

This is what these eminent lawyers said: “When the Bank of Uganda takes possession of a bank pursuant to section 31 of the Financial Institutions Statute - that is seizure - it is obliged under section 323 to make an inventory of the assets of the bank as soon as possible. If, as a result of that inventory, the bank is found to be insolvent, then section 33 of the Financial Institutions Statute operates to constitute the Bank of Uganda as its receiver.”  

Section 33 goes on to explain that the Bank of Uganda may do qua receiver. Sub-section (2) provides that as receiver, it may either arrange a merger with other financial institutions or proceed with liquidation of the financial institution. Further, and importantly, sub- section (4) sets out the following:  
“Where the bank of Uganda arranges an acquisition under sub-section (2) of this section, it shall negotiate, with the acquiring financial institutions, the terms and conditions of the acquisition.”   

The Bank of Uganda’s obligations in conducting liquidation are spelt out in sub-section (5). As might be expected, the Bank of Uganda is required, inter-alia, to realise the assets, make, if appropriate, a call on the contributories, and wind up the financial institutions.  

Now listen to this. “What we are dealing with in this instance, however, is not a liquidation but rather a statutory receivership under section 33(1), triggered automatically by operation of law. The statutory receivership, in our view, continues until the Bank of Uganda has exercised its section 33 powers to appoint, where it has completed a merger or winding up, or until it has released a bank from its seizure.”

The receivership – that is where the answer is – section 31. “The receivership does not fall away however upon the bank, at some later stage, becoming solvent while still under the receiver’s control. The toothpaste – listen to this honourable members – The toothpaste cannot be put back in the tube once it is out.” 

What these eminent lawyers are saying is that the process of receivership goes on, and that includes the power to sell the bank. Thank you.

ENG. HILLARY ONEK: I would like to ask the Attorney General to clarify to us, Mr Speaker. Under what circumstances is a company taken over, or a bank for that matter, by a receiver? I thought in this case it was the fraudulent sale of UCBL that prompted Government to repossess it from Westmont, and not solvency. Can I get a clarification?

MR AYUME: From the papers that we have gone through since this matter started, the reason - and the only reason - for the Bank of Uganda pouncing upon UCBL was that it was insolvent.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I note that the Attorney General takes comfort in citing this report and he calls the consultants “eminent lawyers”. I would like to draw his attention to the contents of page 10 of the same report of those eminent lawyers. 

Page 10, Article 22(2) says; “neither Messrs Rex or Morrison are qualified Ugandan lawyers. In reviewing the laws of Uganda and the legal opinion to which we refer in our report, particularly in the legal issue sections below, Charles Morrison has applied his experience of English law. However, we should stress that none of the opinion expressed in this report should be considered as an opinion under the laws of Uganda.” Can I seek some clarification? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, honestly, this kind of debate is not going to take us very far. In the first place, we are not a court of law that will pronounce ourselves one way or the other. As you have been told, the Attorney General is the Principal Legal Advisor of Government. He has expressed his view and we are not in position to say this or the other. We can only ascertain the correct interpretation perhaps by resorting to a competent forum to determine on this.  

However, when you say these were people talking about English law, any interpretation of cases even on matters in Uganda always borrow from similar provisions in other jurisdictions. So, you cannot say this is foreign. We all know that even in the judgement, which my learned friend must have referred to, there must have been cases deciding for others, which is called “persuasive decisions.”  

In the view of the Attorney General we may not really exhaust this. We shall continue to disagree with him but I would rather we continued debate on other issues. Subsequently, it may be necessary, for good governance and future matters, to take this matter for authoritative interpretation and decision, and for guidance.

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, in conclusion I would like to say that it is good this report has been debated. It is also good that this Parliament, in its wisdom, did stay the enactment of the Financial Institutions Statute until this report was debated and finalised.  

I recommend that the findings of this Committee and what this Parliament will resolve, should find their way into the Financial Institutions Statute. That will avoid the exploitation of the lacuna in the Financial Institutions Statute, which is creating all this confusion. The Financial Institutions Bill, which is now before us, should clearly provide that before the Bank of Uganda takes a decision on the resolution of any financial institution, it should get the advice of the Attorney General in accordance with the Constitution. 

It should also be clear in the law, what should be done about an insolvent bank. There is actually no mention of what happens to a bank, which has been taken over for mismanagement, but which becomes solvent later on. The law should be very clear on the fate of a bank, which becomes solvent in the hands of the Bank of Uganda. 

Finally, I think it is good governance that the Executive takes the resolutions of Parliament very seriously. As the Committee says, we are partners in the governance of this country and if resolutions of Parliament are not respected and not considered in the formulation of policy and law, I do not think that is good for our country.

I do not of course agree with the Committee, with due respect, that the resolutions of Parliament should have the force of law. I do not agree with that because that would paralyse Government activity. Every other day we are resolving on a matter. If every matter had to have a force of law, I think that would not be good. 

But as the Committee recommends, the Executive should take the views of Parliament, especially the recommendations of this Committee and what Parliament will eventually resolve, into consideration in determining the future policy governing the banks in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee for this report. Looking at the composition of the Committee, its members are from various political backgrounds and since they came up with a very good resolution, it shows how nationalistic they really are. I thank them. (Applause).

I support the recommendation of the Committee. When I read through the report and the minister’s answers, there are issues that come up very fundamentally. These are the issue of not respecting the Constitution, which was very well articulated by my honourable colleagues; the question of not respecting the rule of law and other institutions of Government, and the question of lack of transparency and accountability all came out very vividly.

Mr Speaker, let me start with the process. I was perturbed by the minister’s response on page two, which contradicts the policy of liberalisation. Liberalisation is something that the Executive brought to this House and the House adopted it.  

In the last paragraph of page 2 the minister says, “The Bank of Uganda could have sold UCBL to unsuitable buyers for a high price but this would have risked a repeat of Westmont. With the buyer mismanaging UCBL or even looting its asset such that the eventual losses incurred by UCBL would render the sale price meaningless.”

Let me turn to page five where the minister responds about the tendering method. He says; “It is extremely unlikely that any other suitable buyers would have come forward to bid for UCBL if Bank of Uganda had adopted another method.” It defeats my understanding why someone would operate on assumptions. We have a policy and the minister is telling us here that it is “unlikely”! Why do you assume when you have a policy? We have a policy that talks about privatisation and liberalisation based on competition and you come and tell us it would have been unlikely? It does not give us a logical conclusion. 

You are assuming that if there was a higher bidder something bad could have happened. I think this contradicts the principle of liberalisation, which is a Government policy and thereby shows me that there was something hidden. To elaborate on that, the Committee also said that only one Mzungu called Wendy, without a legal practising certificate, sought for bids privately on behalf of twenty four million Ugandans. An illegally practising Mzungu is making decisions on behalf of twenty four million Ugandans! (Laughter). 

Mr Speaker, this shows that the whole process of the sale of UCBL was fraudulent. It was not transparent and there was a hidden motive. The hidden motive –(Interruption)

MS RWAKIMARI: Thank you very much for giving way.  Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the current speaker that selective bidding is one of the internationally recognised and accepted methods of procurement. It is normally done in cases where the service is specialised. I feel that in this case banking is a specialised service, which required some kind of selective bidding. 

There are many reasons why selective bidding is carried out. For example it saves time, it saves money and since the suppliers are already known, I feel that in this case selective bidding was very welcome. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were giving information. Why do you not allow her to complete? 

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the member who has just been giving information. I am now confused. Hon. Rwakimari has said there is selective bidding and it is internationally accepted. She pointed out reasons and justifications for selective bidding. I would imagine that while selective bidding is allowed and is sometimes preferred, there are certain regulations, which govern the method and procedure of selective bidding. Can she give us the regulations and the methods, which justify selective bidding?  

AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Speaker, one of the disadvantages of selective bidding is precisely corruption. (Laughter).

MR MWANDHA: I want to give further information. The lady in question, the so-called international consultant, Wendy Abt, was recruited to value the bank, source the buyers, negotiate with them and eventually advise on the final dealings.  But I want to tell the honourable member and the House that this lady was also a consultant in Tanzania and because of her misdeeds she was flushed out of Tanzania. She was deported and she is a persona non grata in Tanzania.  

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much for that information. Let me also inform my colleague from Ntungamo that this particular person whom you claim would have been very perfect in selective bidding, did not have a legal basis to do that in this country - according to the report.  Therefore this issue should not have arisen in the first place. 

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of institutions respecting other institutions of this country. In this report it comes out very vividly that the Executive itself has failed to live up to the fundamental principles of the Movement, and that of building independent institutions of this country. If the Attorney General could not be respected, if the resolutions of Parliament could not be respected, I want to know at what level the existing arms of government are performing their role. 

I want to know whether the partnership that the minister was yesterday dancing about on the Floor of the House, comes into being. He vividly talked about partnership, yet the report is really contradicting the issue of partnership. They did not respect the resolution of Parliament but went ahead to undermine the institutions of Public Enterprises Reform and Divestiture, DRIC and all the other institutions that have been mentioned in this report. The question of abrogating the Constitution comes in.

When the tax exemption was carried out by the ministry, when they were selling this bank, Article 152 and 86 were violated. If the Executive cannot respect all this -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you for giving way. I am a member of the ad hoc committee and I remember vividly that when we raised this issue of tax evasion, they admitted it was an oversight. The issue of net negotiation does not arise, and URA was not consulted. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, this only confirms my point that the question of respecting institutions, the question of lack of transparency -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, hon. Amongi, for yielding the Floor. I would like to give you some information. Here with me is the contract for consultancy services between Bank of Uganda and Bigerm Danner and Neal Curtin. On page four of this contract, Article 1.7 says: 
“Taxes and duties: Unless otherwise specified in the scope of work, the consultant shall not be liable to pay any Ugandan taxes, duties, fees and any other imposition levied under the laws of Uganda.”  

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, could someone help me? What do the laws of Uganda say as far as taxation is concerned? Could hon. Katuntu help me on this, please? 

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I think the Attorney General is well versed with that, but I have an idea. Under the Income tax Act, 1997, section 86, which hon. Betty Amongi has quoted very clearly, all non residents who come here and provide services and whose income is earned - I am not reading it verbatim but I am summarizing it - would be liable to pay tax. 

This is a direct tax. Nobody pays somebody else’s tax; you pay it yourself. Under section 122, within 30 days you are supposed to notify the Commissioner General of URA of such an issue. Should you fail, under section 125, you are held liable. In fact, Bank of Uganda –(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Let me help my honourable friend -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if somebody is giving information you should allow him to finish the information he wants to give. If you find that he has left something out that you know that is when you should come in. 

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been aided with the book and I shall read the provision verbatim. Under section 122; “Every person who enters an agreement with a non-resident for the provision of services by the non-resident, which services are paid for from income sourced in Uganda, shall within 30 days of entering such an agreement notify the Commissioner General in writing.” 

Section 86, which I will recite from my head, says that subject to this Act, for taxes imposed to any non-resident person arising out of income from a Ugandan source, the tax payable by the non-resident person under this section is calculated by applying the rate prescribed under part IV. 

Part IV says that non-residents will be subjected to interest at the rate of 15 percent.  

Section 125 of the same law says that a withholding agent, who fails to declare tax in accordance with this Act, is personally liable to pay the commissioner an amount of tax that has been withheld. In this case Bank of Uganda failed to levy tax, and those who are involved are criminally held liable. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
     
MR SABIITI: Article 164 of the Uganda Constitution states: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she had ceased to hold that office.”

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not allow her to complete? She was about to complete her contribution.

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for all that information. It really proves my point that there is indeed an abrogation of the Constitution by this sale. I want the legal spokesman of this country to inform me; what happens if a minister or the Governor of Bank of Uganda abrogates the Constitution, which is supreme? 

Two, I want to state this very clearly. If I were the Minister of Finance –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean if they contravene the Constitution?
 
MS AMONGI: Okay, contravene - whatever legal term it is.  

Secondly, the issues raised in this report are very open, and there is evidence to them. I humbly request the minister and the Governor of Bank of Uganda to resign and save the face of this country. Let them stop the cries of the people of Uganda otherwise our tears will haunt them forever. I thank you.

MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I am one of the Members of Parliament who followed the committee’s work right from inception because my constituency had very special interests in this UCB saga. 

I wish, from the onset, to thank the chairman of the committee and the committee members for a job well done.  

Mr Speaker, when I was at college, I got exposed to literature and video on Mafia dealings. I read a lot of literature about Mafia, their deals and transactions, and I watched a lot of videos about Mafia transactions. All along I thought it was fiction but I can now confirm that UCBL is a classic example of a Mafia transaction.  

Why do I say so? Mafia do not respect rules of procedure. Mafia have no room for transparency. Their major concern is having their way, and I see all these in the UCBL deal. Mr Speaker, the Mafia thrive because they are normally protected by those in very high offices. In the Ministry of Finance and in Bank of Uganda, there is a mafia racket and I want to put it to the minister now, hon. Gerald Ssendaula, that he is a Mafia. (Laughter). 

The hon. Minister of Finance -(Interruption)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof Apolo Nsibambi): Is the honourable member in order to describe our Minister of Finance as a Mafia?

THE SPEAKER: Please, this is quite un-parliamentary. We need to be courteous to our colleagues. If you are not courteous, they will not be courteous to you. Please, continue to be courteous. I rule you out of order. Please withdraw.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I have described the Mafia. They have no respect for public opinion.

THE SPEAKER: I have ruled you out of order on that.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker if it is your opinion that -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This is not conditional.

MR MABIKKE: In the interest of debate and a harmonious relationship, I do withdraw the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Please apologise, it is as simple as that. Honourable member, be courteous.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, if the honourable minister has been hurt by my description, I wish to say sorry -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is the dignity of the House that is at stake, and the kind of language we use here.

MR MABIKKE: I wish to apologise to the honourable minister for that, Mr Speaker. 

HON MEMBERS: Withdraw!

MR MABIKKE: Yes, I did withdraw, Mr Speaker, and I do apologise to the honourable minister.

MR SSENDAULA: Mr Speaker, if in the opinion of hon. Mabikke I am a Mafia, then I do not really value his apology. He already has his mind set that I am a Mafia. Accordingly, I accept his view and I think we can move forward because that is his point of view about me. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No, I have said it is the dignity of the House, the language we use, and our behaviour that I am concerned about. You may not be concerned, after all you are not the one who raised the point of order. But it is a concern of the House that the language used should be proper. Please, withdraw and apologise.

MR MABIKKE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I have said, withdraw and apologise.

MR MABIKKE: Yes, I did that, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, repeat it.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I did apologise to the honourable minister and I withdraw my statement. Thank you very much.  

In spite of all that, I wish to say that there are laws and interpretations of them, as we have heard from the long debate this afternoon. We have had different interpretations from the hon. Attorney General and from some of our learned colleagues. Even if we assumed that Bank of Uganda had powers to sell Uganda Commercial Bank, that power should have been exercised in the interests of the owners of the bank. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that this Parliament made a resolution on the sale of UCB and it did ask Government not to sell. I remember very vividly that the resolution was passed on a Friday but on Monday the newspapers were screaming with headlines that in spite of the parliamentary resolution, Government had proceeded with the sale. 

As if that was not bad enough, revelations from the committee report indicate, as all of us have now ascertained, that the most important person, who is the chief advisor of Government, was found unworthy of being entrusted with this matter because it required utmost confidence. This was in total disregard of the provisions of the Constitution, which have been very ably debated.  

I have interacted with many Members of Parliament and most of them have told me that, “hon. Mabikke, whether we talk for very many years, whether we shed tears for so many years, this transaction is complete. This transaction cannot be reversed, it is sealed.” In fact one honourable minister boasted in the corridors that, “however much you make noise, however much you shout about this, we have got the power. We used that power and you cannot reverse this transaction.” I do not need to name him but he is right here and he knows the statement he made in our corridors.  

UCBL may have gone but I wish to remind honourable members that the National Resistance Movement Government is not the first Government in Uganda, neither is it going to be the last. Even if it takes us 40 years to reverse this transaction, we will do it. Even if it takes us 70 years to reverse this deal, we will reverse it. Yes, hon. Kagonyera, looking at you, you will not be around then but I will be. (Laughter). 

This is people’s property and at one moment in time it will be reclaimed, no matter what it takes. We have got a very good example of our neighbours in Kenya. Uganda is not the first country to undertake privatisation. Privatisation has been conducted in many other African countries but they have done so with a spirit of patriotism. The National Resistance Government has not conducted privatisation with a spirit of patriotism. 

As I speak now, the new regime of NARC in Kenya is reversing all irregular transactions that were done under KANU.

MR MAFABI: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I want to cite for you other experiences. In Mexico when the government changed, the Opagis of Mexico - the ones in charge of privatisation - had to go to exile. 

There was also a Professor called Prof. Stingliss - the hon. Ssendaula of Mexico at that time – who said that, “privatisation is briberisation.” Thank you.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much for that information, honourable member. Mr Speaker, I wish to summarise because apparently whether we debate for 100 or 20 years, under these circumstances, we will not be able to change much. If there were justice and fairness in this country, the hon. Minister of Finance should have resigned. The Governor of Bank of Uganda should have resigned, and all those people who were related to this fraudulent transaction should today have been prosecuted. 

However, because of the kind of dispensation that we have, because of the protection that these people enjoy from very high offices, they are here dancing on the Floor of Parliament. They are here giving flimsy excuses, covering up and engaging themselves –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The problem is, when you continue with that kind of language you are insinuating that some people here are criminals. We shall get into problems again. As I have told you, you have to be courteous. However eloquent you may be, please be courteous to your friends. Be courteous because they should also be courteous to you. You are free, as a citizen, to prosecute anybody if you think he is a criminal, but please make your point without being discourteous to others.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise counsel. I wish this to be put on record. The beautiful debate we are holding now, all this data we have about UCB should for the time being be put on the shelves. Time will come when we will revisit this matter. 

Mr Speaker, in 1972 Idi Amin chased away Indians. He confiscated their property. Some of their property was irregularly sold but years after that, Indians reclaimed their property. 

In Zimbabwe, 100 years ago, the British came and took the indigenous people’s land by force. One hundred years later, Zimbabweans are claiming this land and are taking it back. I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, -(Mr Musumba rose)- would you like to clarify to me or to the Speaker?

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker, what hon. Mabikke is saying could have serious consequences on the investor confidence in this country. Therefore I want to seek clarification. Is hon. Mabiike threatening prospective investors, and is his intention to keep away investors from this economy? What is the basis of his saying that we will, at some point in time, expropriate property of investors, contrary to what the Constitution provides? Can hon. Mabiike clarify whether his intention is to threaten investors and keep away investors from this economy?

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, honourable minister. My understanding of an investor is of a man or woman who has got good money and who brings it here to start his own enterprises and investments; not a person who comes and fraudulently takes over the property of Ugandans. 

My submission is not intended to scare away any genuine investors, but I am sending a warning to fraudsters. I do not want to repeat that word.

Mr Speaker, I want to summarise by saying that in every fraudulent transaction there normally are losers. If it is true that UBC was sold fraudulently, yes, those who bought it will lose it at a time “t”. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned. This debate will continue next week on Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 February 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)


