Wednesday, 24th February, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order).


 BILLS
SECOND READING

(THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY BILL, 1992)

(Debate continued from 23rd February, 1993).

MR. MARWAS (Dodoth County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like first of all to refute the Motion put forward by the First Deputy Prime Minister that back benchers should be having a hidden agenda for discussing the Bill the way they have done. I have risen with keen interest from orders both within and outside this House, and I have my opinion is that in the majority of cases, there is a feeling of great confidence, mistrust and insecurity in the coming leadership, especially in the Members of Kitante Road Tower.  

As we discuss this Bill, we should discuss it with several minds.  There is also confusion between the incumbency and the current system in place.  It is one thing to have a President, an Army Commander, and a National Political Commissar who are enlightened, act responsibly, and command respect and support as of now.  But it is also another if the system in place gives us confidence and security, which I think is another way the system minus the incumbency is transferable from one leadership to another.  I know there are people who are not opposed to other divergent views and it is, therefore, not necessarily true to say that Members of this House who differ from the way the affairs of the country are run, are anti-President or anti-NRM.  They fear that saying no in this House is tantamount to telling the NRM to put the political theme as conceived and unfounded.  I know Members of this House act the way they do out of conviction, reason and principle.  

There is also a school of thought, featuring in the current debate, which I think is equally wrong to say that there are some people who do not support the current leadership and think that the only way you can remove the present system and, therefore, the NRM from power is through multi-party politics. Such people think that the incumbent President has no popular support countrywide and, therefore, in a multi-party election he stands no chance of winning and neither does the system.  I did not subscribe to this school of thought after all, with due respect to the multi-party die-hards maybe in the House or outside the House; these parties are even sectarian in nature and practice. So, claiming that the system has changed, I do not subscribe to it, after all, a democrat in ‘egumire’ House and the congress men and women in Uganda House can tell me when they last had elections which are democratic to fill their rank.  

I should be told if it is not true, that after more than ten years, Milton Obote is still the leader of UPC; Kawanga is still for DP; Tiberio is still for Liberal; and Nkangi is still for CP.  What else do we need?  My conviction is that the present system’s survival depends mainly on the incumbent President and it would most likely collapse after his departure.  The arrangement appears to be centred on a personality and it is hard for me to imagine personally how such a system could be transferable from one leader to another, after all, I do not see anybody else now in the system who is as challengeable as President Yoweri Museveni.  

However, let us bear in mind that the Bill we are about to enact into law -(Interjection)- however, to provide for our body for the promulgation of our Constitution should not have loopholes for manipulation.  This will ensure that the Constitution we shall make and the whole system of Government we shall adopt should be able to guarantee the country’s development and stability.  It should go further to facilitate smooth transfer of power form government to government and from one leader to another.  The Constitution or political system we shall adopt should not seen to be for NRM, CP, DP, or whatever you want to call it, but it should be a system for Ugandans now and tomorrow.  

I wish to make Members remember that if the Bill has loopholes, someone somewhere is bound to manipulate the Constituent Assembly, which Assembly may come up with the Constitution, and which will establish a system which is not democratic and which does not facilitate a democratic change of leaders and governments.  Historically, and to be sincere, it will be a disaster because in the long run force by some other people will be used again to change the leadership of the country.  I think it is very important for us to study seriously the political situation and circumstances that ushered in the Amins and Okellos.  It is also important for us to reflect in our sober minds the political factors that led to the abrogation of the 1967 Constitution and gave the then leadership absolute power.  Because absolute power corrupts absolutely.  Let there be no fertile ground again for such to happen.  Our greatest concern should be that let there be no other dictator to rise from the goal of this country again. (Applause)  So far, is there anything in place to suggest that Ugandans are taking any precautions to prevent this from happening?  The new dictator could be in the making, and he could be belonging to UPC, DP, NRM, or whatever, and this is a fact.  But we must take precautions not to allow that to happen.  The new man who could be there to overthrow the government can be in NRM or out of NRM. What we must do now is the question if we are to leave no loopholes.  We should not take anybody for granted, whether they have divergent views or not, but we must be prepared to listen.  We may disagree, but we must always be prepared to listen to every view given by any Ugandan.  When Members of this House accept to discuss issues, they may disagree, but they must always remember to listen to one another.  The political system to be adopted must be a step higher, which will ensure that an individual does not come to power and exercise that power absolutely.  Having said that, it is up to us to make sure these things happen.  My time is short; allow me to stop there, Mr. Chairman.

MR. S. LUBEGA WAGWA (Butambala County):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, before I say something about the Constituent Assembly, allow me to say something about cotton marketing in this country.  The people who have grown cotton are now crying and they are about to throw it away because Government is not ready to buy all the cotton except in the four areas of operation of unions, which was announced over radio.  Now, people in Teso, in Mubende and other places are crying, because they do not know where to sell their cotton.  I am appealing to the Minister responsible for Commerce, Industry and Cooperatives to take serious steps so that the farmers are not disappointed.

MR. MORO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would also like to inform you that the point made by the hon. Member there, is a very important one, and applies not only with cotton, but also with tobacco -(laughter)- I was at home and the Master Growers came to me in one society, the Midia Society, they realised Shs. 204 million out of that tobacco, but unfortunately all this money was transferred to their accounts, no money has been released to them.  The money which has been released to them is in bits of shs. 5 million and  shs. 3 million. As a result, what each individual gets is so little that most of the children of the farmers in the Master Growers are still at home; they have not gone to school.  So, I am of the same opinion that the Minister for Cooperatives and Marketing either pulls up his socks or resigns so that we get another one.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  Thank you for that information, but I am sure the Government will take some steps after bringing this information to its knowledge.  I stand here to support the formation of this Constituent Assembly because after consulting the people I represent here, they are in agreement with some of the contents of some of the Clauses in the Bill.  The people I represent here were at first not ready to support this Bill, but after discussing it with them, we realised that it is important that they support it, simply because so many people have been saying that we were elected by a few people, just a few, and they wanted everybody to come in, and now when this Bill is passed, these people, the politicians who have started moving around saying that we were not popularly elected, will realise that they should be involved in the Constitution making, that is why I am supporting this Bill.  

Regarding the composition of this Bill, it seems that for 80,000 inhabitants to have one representative, is not okay, the number seems to be too big, because some of us have to travel or to move a long distance to meet our people.  So, I am suggesting that instead of 80,000 inhabitants per one representative, it should be 50,000 inhabitants for one representative.  It depends on the distance, because we have to consult our people, it takes me more than ten days to cover the whole county. So, if we reduce the number it may give me or to others who will come in, room to consult the people they represent here.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)- 

DR. CHEBROT:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, permit me to remind the hon. Member holding the Floor that, I have read through this Bill and there is nowhere in that Bill where it states that the minimum number for a constituency is supposed to be 80,000.  I have not found it anywhere in the Bill.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  It has been stated here that the number may be about 80,000 inhabitants per one representative.  Mr. Chairman, on women representation, I strongly support the idea of having 39 representatives for Women.  In other words, one woman from each district.  I also support the trade unionists to have at least two representatives.  When it comes to Members of the Constituent Assembly appointed by the President, I really had a problem with my people, they were supporting very strongly this number after realising that this idea of having a new Constitution was initially started by this Government. So, if they are denied that opportunity, it is going to be very unfair for the people of this country.  So, I strongly support the idea of having 15 Members appointed by the President in consultation with Cabinet.  

Sometime back when many people had lost their morals we appealed to religious leaders to rehabilitate the morals of our people, and they have done a very good job, and whenever you meet these religious leaders, they talk about the morals of these people, and they have been involved in the rehabilitation of the morals of our people, and sometime back they had a discussion on UTV, because they wanted to have representation on the Constituent Assembly.  So, I appeal to hon. Members of this august House to allow religious leaders to have at least, two representatives each.

MR. MBURA-MUHINDO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that right away when we came in 1989, a Member from one of the religious congregation had been duly elected to this House, and they were two, but one of them had to be removed, not by us, but by the very authority where he belonged.  So, can we have more clarification on that?

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr. Chairman, let me say something on Clause (6) Sub-Section II, ‘Members of the National Resistance Council’, supposing most of the Members go back and contest and 50 per cent go through, that means the National Resistance Council will not have the quorum because most of them will be Members of the other big Assembly.  Now, even if there is an important Bill to be discussed here, it will be very difficult for you, Mr. Chairman, to have a quorum and nothing will move.  That also happens to the Constituent Assembly, if there is an important Bill and people are here, others are wanted, they will not be able to raise a quorum and in my opinion, I really feel that it is not going to be possible to run the two Houses simultaneously.  It will not be possible so long as 50 per cent here go back and contest and they go through.  They will be Members of the Constituent Assembly and when there is an urgent matter to be discussed here, it means that one Assembly has to stop for the time being. That is why I am saying it is very difficult to run the two Houses simultaneously.  

Let me briefly say something about the appointment of the Chairman.  After realising and recognising the great work performed by our present Government and after observing the qualifications set in this Bill, I strongly support the President to appoint the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly.  I have looked at the qualifications and I am in full agreement with those qualifications.  So, I think it is the Government, the President in consultation with the Cabinet, that has to look at those qualifications and appoint a Chairman.

Mr. Chairman, regarding the appointment of the Commissioner.  I have no quarrel with that one, but I looked at the duties of a Commissioner, he has to appoint the returning officers and presiding officers.  But history has taught us that some of these people who may be appointed may cause problems to this country.  Recently when the DAs were the returning officers, they caused problems in some of the districts.  So, I want to caution the Commissioner to be careful and where possible, he should avoid the involvement of the DAs on this exercise; I do not recommend them to be mentioned anywhere -(laughter)- no; they should not.  They should not be because we are looking for a fair election, and these Das, once they hate somebody in a district, that is the end of that man. They have started, you see, saying something against some of the Members who would like to stand.  But these DAs are against some of the people who would like to contest.

Concerning the payment of 100,000/= some hon. Members here were saying that it is too little, but the people I represent had a problem with this amount. For some of us and some of the people we represent it seems it is too much.  This amount is too much because they have to contribute this and it is non-refundable.  Secondly, they have to move attending these candidates’ meetings or campaigns and somebody who has no money will not be able to contest, because this exercise we are now trying to put in a form of a law is going to prohibit very many capable people.  If somebody has to cover about 50 Parishes, he has to move after depositing all this money.  So, the people I represent are suggesting that the figure be reduced to Shs. 50,000 only.

There are some Clauses which have either confused me and there are contradictions in some of these articles.  I think the Minister, as stated in his opening remarks and the way he has reacted to some of these issues raised, I am sure he will come again to clarify some of these Clauses such as the Clause on the NRC Members and the ten people. This means that if the ten people are appointed here, then that should be the end.  Then what is the use of sending us back and saying you have to stand and after failing there you come here and then go to a Constituent Assembly.  That means you are getting more chances than others.  I think in this case, let us all go and stand and then these ten places go to the women or to the youth; let them go to the youth, do not give two chances -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please try to wind up.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks, I wish to support this Bill.

MR. OPIO G. (Samia-Bugle County, Tororo):  Thank you, for giving me permission to speak on this Bill.  Before I go to the Bill, I would like through you, Mr. Chairman, to thank the Ministry of Local Government for having carried out the bye-elections in Samia-Bugwe. (Laughter)  The elections were free and fair -(Laughter)- and the attendance of the Electoral College was 98 per cent.  Therefore, the people of Samia-Bugwe agreed with the Minister of Local Government when the Ministry’s representative stated that the elections were free and fair and were carried out in a very good atmosphere.

At the same time, through you, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to register with the Minister of Local Government the plight of the employees working for the Ministry of Local Government in Samia-Bugwe and Tororo districts as a whole.  These people have not been paid since last July.

I would like to register this concern, and if the Minister of Local Government does not solve this problem in time, the chiefs in Samia-Bugwe and Tororo District as a whole may not be in a position to collect the graduated tax.  So, Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr. Bidandi Ssali):  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to advise the Member that in order to save on his time in the House and also the time of the House itself, the tendency or practice has been that any Member of Parliament who has an issue on Local Government has an open door in my office.  However, I would like to congratulate my officers for being so disciplined inspite of having not been paid, to have carried on the elections very amicably.  But come to my office please. (Laughter)

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have learnt that the Minister of Local Government’s Office is open.  I will start carrying out the dialogue.  However, the people of Samia-Bugwe would like me to speak also in Parliament on this issue. (Laughter)

Just before I go to the Bill, the people of Samia-Bugwe requested that before I debate the Bill, I should also raise an issue of Busikho T.T.C.  On the 10th of May, last year, Busikho T.T.C. was among those T.T.Cs to become the model T.T.Cs.  There were to be four model T.T.Cs in the country, one in Entebbe, one in Gulu, one in Bushenyi and one in Samia-Bugwe, and a letter was written and signed by the Director of Fourth IDA to that effect.  The people of Samia-Bugwe are now expressing their concern to hear that the model T.T.C. has been transferred to another county, although within Tororo District.

MR. DAVID PULKOL:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the Member currently holding the Floor that the issue of a T.T.C and particularly a model T.T.C for Tororo District in general is being reviewed and a criterion has been developed as objective and as transparent as possible, in which the number of primary schools to be serviced is taken into consideration, the centrality of location and many other issues are being taken into consideration.  So, the hon. Member should not really panic at this stage.  The best advice is for him to come to the Ministry of Education and we discuss this issue on great details and be able to reach an understandable position for the good of our country.  Thank you.

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, we have been discussing this issue with the Ministry officials.  But we got a letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports telling us that the matter is final.  We are now going to take the advantage of the Minister’s response.  We are very glad that the matter is still under discussion.  But there was a letter which was written giving us the model T.T.C. and I do not know whether that letter was written before the dialogue.  We, however, thank the Minister for opening the dialogue.  With those remarks, Mr. Chairman, I would like now to go to the Bill.

Mr. Chairman, we people in Samia-Bugwe feel that the definition of the electoral area as stipulated in Rule 2.2 is unfair.  We are saying that the Rule, if followed, is going to end up with over representation in some areas and under representation in some other areas.  For example, my neighbour Kapchorwa District has a population of 116,000.  They have three counties.  This means that they are going to have three representatives.  Bukoli County, my other neighbour has a population of 240,000.  Now, if we follow a rule of 80,000 which is stated in the Bill, we are going to end up with three representatives for Bukoli County as well.

We are saying that Kapchorwa District with a population of 116,000 and Bukoli County with 240 will have the same number of representatives when Kapchorwa is only a half of Bukoli.  We have nothing to make us quarrel with Kapchorwa.  We too have nothing to make us favour Bukoli.  But we are after justice.

Therefore, we are saying that the administration area which is likely to be fair is to make the district the electoral area.  Within the district, we shall decide whether a district like Kapchorwa requires one or more delegates depending on its population and other factors.

There is also a question of the special bodies to be represented.  We people in Samia-Bugwe believe in competition.  We believe that competition leads to better results.  We believe that the proper utilisation of resources should be when we are competing.  We are, therefore, saying that let every lady, man, and youth above the age of 18 years go back and stand, and those who will be elected will come to the Constituent Assembly.  Those who cannot stand the heat, let them get out of the kitchen.  If you want to be elected, go through the normal electoral process, that is, stand and get elected if the people decide.  People who are led into the Constituent Assembly without contesting, sometimes you find that you have wasted time to bring them in.  Let them be tested before they come to Parliament.

When it comes to the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, the people of Samia-Bugwe believe in democracy.  They say whoever has been elected to be on the Constituent Assembly has a right to be elected as Chairman by his colleagues.  That will be enforcing the democracy we are fighting for.  We are not going to accept giving away our democratic right by allowing someone else to appoint the Chairman.  So, the people of Samia-Bugwe are saying that the Chairman should be elected from the elected delegates by his colleagues.

When it comes to the contentious matters, the people of Samia-Bugwe believe in basic human rights.  We believe in the right to life, the right to property, the right to equal protection before the law and we believe in freedom of association.  We want the right of association to be enshrined in our Constitution.  It is a God given right and, therefore, we are saying that because this is a basic human right - that is, the right to choose who to associate with, the people should choose who to associate with when voting.  

I heard the hon. Member from Nakaseke who was saying that the people of Nakaseke would not like to hear about political parties.  That is not democratic.  I am one of those who believe that if anybody opposes the idea I support, I would fight to make sure that such a person retains the right to oppose me.  That is his right.  I would, therefore, appeal to the members who believe that there should be no opposition even of one man, to realise that this is his democratic right.  Therefore, the people of Samia-Bugwe are saying that they are politically mature.  They know that there are parties.  They know there is UPC, and they know that there is DP, they do not know about CP, but they know that there are no party believers.  So, they are saying it is time not to tell people lies, not to say that you are not campaigning when you are.  Let us be frank.  One of our problems in Uganda has been pretence.  People know there is something and yet they want to pretend that it is not there, and this has led to problems.  There was a problem in 1966, you remember.  People believed that there was no problem but there was a problem.  Let us now be mature.

Let us decide on the Uganda we want through the Constituent Assembly.  We are saying there is even no need for a referendum on political parties.  The referendum cannot be held on the basic human right - a right of association.  Let us be frank.  Let the people elect according to how they think they should be electing.  

With regard to who should have the power to appoint the date when the Constitution will start operating, we are saying that this right should rest in the hands of the Constituent Assembly.  Let the Constituent Assembly decide when the Constitution which they have adopted should be in operation.  We would, therefore, like to leave no chance to delay the implementation of the Constitution.  So, we people in Samia-Bugwe are saying that the power to decide on the date should remain with the people in the Constituent Assembly.

On the question of residence, we people near the border move up and down and we are saying that the residence should not be the deciding factor.  I may be leaving in Kampala.  If I can go and register in Samia-Bugwe I should be allowed to stand in Samia-Bugwe.  So, we should not have a residence factor restricting where people should vote or be elected.

With regard to municipalities, we are saying that once the municipality has been created, we should allow that municipality to have its own candidates.  There are very many problems associated with the municipality which cannot be catered for by a member from the rural area.  So, we are saying that we should work hard to make Busia a Municipality so that we also have a Member of Parliament for Busia Municipality.  With those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me this chance to speak.  I support the Bill.

MR. KISEMBO (Burahya County, Kabalore):  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this Bill this afternoon.  I thus stand to support the Bill.  Let me take this opportunity first and foremost to thank you on behalf of the people of Burahya County in Kabalore District.  The people of Burahya continue to believe in democracy, unity and development, and that is why it has been very possible for me to join you and hon. Members in this august House.  Turning to the Constituent Assembly Bill, the people of Burahya do support the Bill because they totally believe in democracy and transparency.  Mr. Chairman, since the Bill seeks to have elected members to constitute the Constituent Assembly, the people of Burahya have the following recommendations;
	
-	That Historical Members be allowed in the Assembly because of the nature of the circumstances that led them to be historical, which circumstances are all known to us -(Applause)- and this, will help in avoiding complaints from the Members - that they were left out in the Constitutional making as Ugandans, after all, this question of historicals is ending in 1994.

Turning to political parties and interested groups, people of Burahya do say that let them go back to the people and battle it out there, otherwise, they should not be given free privileges to come and join this House.  On the question of Women, the people of Burahya do support that all the 39 Districts be represented. (Applause)  One woman per district, because I have also learnt from the hon. Members that these hon. ladies have contributed very greatly in this House.  I believe that by now, the hon. Members of this House, are quite aware that our President has had all along good intentions for this country, that is why he risked his life to go to the bush to fight for democracy and unity which we are now all enjoying.  It is in that regard that the appointment of the Chairman should be done by the President on the advice of the Cabinet.  While others say that the President has appointed a Chairman, and that the Chairman should get instructions from the President, but that would not be the case.  Having known how the President has contributed to this country, the people of Burahya say, let him be given that authority to appoint the Chairman, and then the Vice-Chairman should be elected among the people elected from the constituencies.  

On the municipalities, people of Burahya do say that the municipalities should be left as they are because, for example, you will find that my county surrounds the Municipality of Fort Portal.  Now to get one sub-county, or two to be added on the Municipality, it will definitely bring chaos because they believe that it should be only the representative of Burahya County.  

Concerning the system of elections, the people of Burahya County support the lining up system.  Because, ever since - I think it is high time for us Ugandans to choose our own system, let us not be told what system to follow.  If really this system of lining up has been so good and so transparent, there is no reason why we should go to ballot boxes. I would like to give you a very recent example.  When the Government declared the elections, especially in my Constituency, there were about 11 contestants, but when we reached the very day, we had remained five, although there were other people who were trying to make candidates compromise that others should stand, and others should not.  But the people rejected that idea and I disassociated myself from that until when we went for elections and won. With that example, if the system had not been very transparent, what would have happened?  No wonder, even those people who had wanted a certain meeting to be held, would have been the first people to say that the elections have been rigid.  But in this case, there was nobody complaining because the elections were held in broad daylight, and they counted us, repeated and then the results were declared.  So, it is on that note, that the people of Burahya do support the system of lining up.  

When you refer to Rule 17, Election Rules, you will find that there are so many places here. The people of Burahya say that while others wonder how would one be represented in every sub-county, the people of Burahya believe that any candidate intending to stand, can have his representation in every sub-county, and when they line up, the votes are counted and then added together, and whoever gets the highest votes becomes the Member to represent the county.  So, with that, Mr. Chairman, I do strongly support the Bill and thank you very much.  

BRIG. MOSES ALI (Moyo East, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am here standing on behalf of the people of Moyo, especially East Moyo, and indeed, I have consulted them very extensively with my colleagues and what I am going to say is exactly what they have advised us to say and in that case, we are going to save time in the House, especially, now. Since the debate started, there is a lot of repetition and everybody is taking his or her right to deliver the message that they got from the constituencies, except the historicals of course.  The people of Moyo accepted the Constituent Assembly and they also say that the level of constituency representation be at the county level because they it is a legal entity. Whether there are ten people or 200 people, they are all counties.  There are no decisions whether there are larger counties or smaller counties, legally they are all counties. Therefore, we expect that counties be considered and this issue of dividing or uniting other counties should not arise.  

Equally, the municipality must also be recognised as an electoral area because already they are gazetted, and when we are coming to discuss the Constitution they should also be represented so that the views of the women are covered properly throughout the country.

When it comes to NRA, my people are a bit doubtful; on the argument that they will not have the excuse of misbehaving later on does not arise, because there is no guarantee; who will stop them from doing what they want to do?  Whether the House is full of them or not, I think there is no way of stopping them from whatever they want to do.  So, this argument should not carry water and, therefore, our people advise that the NRA should be represented by three of them, and the rest of the generals should go to the people; they must go and stand, and they should go to stand; the people’s power is rather more permanent, if you just keep here with these suggestions, it is limited, you must go to the people according to Moyo people.  So, there is no need to use NRA because NRA is not going to be the constituencies for you, you are too many for NRA.  So, they recommend only three people, the rest should float with the rest.  

On the representation of NRC, the people of Moyo did not see the logic of special members, after all, everybody should go and stand this time.  They say everybody should go and stand and that is where everybody should have a chance.  So, to say 10 people out of - how are you going to choose these 10 people out of over 200 or so, and what are they going to represent us for?  I think there is no logic in that.  So, NRC should actually be dissolved, and people go for a fresh mandate this time with our brothers the historicals; we will welcome them and they can come and challenge us so that we come back with a fresh mandate.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my fellow Brigadier -(Laughter)- who happens to have been a struggler and having led one of the groups that was opposing some dictatorial tendencies in this country, that history which he made in Moyo and Arua is the continuation of what he is talking about.  This history, which is of the revolutionary nature, is exactly the same one that enthroned him and he became a historical Member of NRM, and that is why he opted to come and join that revolution and his whole army was co-opted in the NRA. (Applause)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  So, this is exactly what I am saying, that do not use NRA as a Constituency.  Let the people rule themselves; you have fought for them, we are all grateful, and we are sorry for those who lost their lives. But for how long are you going to cling there?  For how long and what justifications do you have?  You should go to the constituency like I did. (Applause)  So, I am both a historical and at the same time a representative of the people; double qualifications. (Laughter)  

The Trade Unions and political parties should also be represented, and the youth should be represented at district level.  Because the future is theirs; let them get acquainted, and let them come and learn how the Government is run, or how the country is run. Let us not give them only this little number; what are we afraid of?  We should get youth at district level, and as we get old and out of the way, they could get in and take over the responsibility smoothly.  So, our people asked for representation at district level for the youth.

Concerning the Presidential nomination, the people of Moyo are again doubtful as to which section of the population is going to be represented by those who are going to be appointed.  I do not think - because this is a Constituency Assembly, so why should the President be given 15 people.  So, there is really no need for the President to nominate all the 15, but they could give him two, at least.

Again, people said that the Chairman should be elected by the House so that the Chairman is responsible for the House.  But if he is elected or appointed, then his allegiance will cease; he will no longer be controllable by the House.  So, both the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman or Vice-Chairman should be elected by the House.

There are also some issues that have been cropping up here, which my people did not actually talk about; the issue of referendum.  We did not discuss it because it was not part of the Bill, we read in the document we got yesterday, it was referred to although it was expressed that it was a minority view which should not be ignored.  Now, the document we are going to discuss is very important and whether they are going to be multi-party or not, again it was to be discussed by the Constituent Assembly.  Now, some ideas are coming that we should go for the referendum first. How do you go for referendum before you disagree?  You go to a referendum after you have disagreed and that is after the Constituent Assembly has discussed, and if there is a disagreement, that is when then people go for referendum as it was done in the lost counties.  It was provided before in the Constitution that the problem would be solved by referendum when both kingdoms were not agreeing.  So, the referendum decided after not before; you cannot go to a referendum before you get independence.  So, I think the tendency of bringing in a referendum is rather confusing; this is my understanding, and we should make it clear that our duty now is to pass this Bill which Bill if passed, is going to discuss the Constitution, and it is after that then we shall consider whether there will be referendum or not or whether there will be parties or no parties to be discussed, and people go for referendum.  But if you say we go for referendum now then there is no need for the Constitution.  Whatever the result, there is no need for the Constituent Assembly.

MR. TUMWESIGYE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Constitution has a lot of provisions and in fact, the multi-party movement provision is just one of them.  Therefore, it is not correct to say that if you go for referendum now what shall the Constituent Assembly be about?  The Constituent Assembly will be about many other provisions that have to be decided by the Constituent Assembly. (Applause)

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, I think to be brief, in my understanding, a referendum is carried out after people disagree, and that is after people have discussed the Bill, and the Constituent Assembly. That is my view and the views of my people, and I want to thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this chance and I also want to thank Brig. Kyaligonza for congratulating the Muslims on the month of Ramadhan yesterday, because I think that is very good of him to recognise it, and I am sure though not a Muslim he has a broad mind for others. (Laughter)  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SSEMOGERERE (Busiro County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since I have not seen many of my colleagues this year, I hope I will be permitted to wish them a new year.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for giving me the Floor and I will try to be brief.  I have asked for the Floor to lend my support to the principles behind this Constituent Assembly Bill.  I believe that the intentions are good, and it does not necessarily mean, therefore, that everything is perfect and that it cannot be improved upon, and I believe that it is also in order for Colleagues as they debate, to debate constructively so that they can persuade those who do not agree with them on a similar point. It is also my prayer, that we use this exercise to promote a spirit of appreciation of view points which are not necessarily our, in the hope that we can lay the foundation for a peaceful democratic Uganda -(Applause). 

I have just come back from the O.A.U Council of Ministers, and on our agenda, ever since I have been a Foreign Minister, and even before then, there have always been cases of conflict in Africa, and we even have a Committee set aside to deal with something like that; the Committee of Mediation and Reconciliation.  I was myself, one day asked to chair a meeting of ministers on conflicts, to Mauritania and Senegal, and the first time when we went to see the President Otaya of Mauritania, we were received very well by the President, but he never listened, he was not disposed to our proposal for dialogue with President Diouf ­(Interruption)- Oh, this is open okay, it can be said.  Eventually, when we continued to persuade him and President Diouf, eventually they found common ground to settle their differences, but at the heart of the matter, were disputes about human rights.  We had refugees from Mauritania and Senegal, and we had refugees from Mauritania, and when we looked at the root cause of these problems, we found rightly or wrongly accusations of suppression of basic rights.

Currently in Africa, in the registration of Liberia, Somalia, Mozambique, Angola, and South Africa, there is a problem of basic rights.  Rightly or wrongly whoever you talk has that complaint, and it does not matter whether it is multi-party state a one party state, a movement or colonial state; when you have these political conflicts you find a party which is aggrieved that its basic rights are suppressed and it is going to resist, and many times they resist violently.  Across the border, in Rwanda we have the conflict of one system, and if you re-examine it up to the heart of the matter, you will find that there is a group which feels that they have had their basic rights suppressed, and they are resisting, and resisting violently.  For that reason, in many African countries, and certainly in our country, it is advisable to go through a process similar to what they are now going through to enable different people in the country to agree on how to live together.  Whether they have a common accord or whether they have violent political differences, how do they live together without any group feeling so suppressed to the extent that they may even resort to war? It can be only simply pathetic, and I believe that it is at the heart of this exercise, and ultimately, when we go through what we are now going through and agree on how to enact a new Constitution, that I believe is going to be the most single important question.  How shall we have a Constitution, a law of all laws that governs our conduct; where all of us feel we are accommodated regardless of our political views, and regardless of our differences?  For that reason I, therefore, appeal to all Colleagues in this Chamber, in the legislature, in Cabinet and in the country generally, that this is a time for us to really develop a spirit of accommodation, and of understanding, even with those with whom we may disagree bitterly with. (Applause)  If we do that, I think we will have assisted the process tremendously.  

Because, many of us who are here, when the 1962 Constitution was about to be conceived, drafted and approved, many things were said about that period, and even about Ugandans who went to Lancaster, and to Malagala House to debate and promulgate or at least agree on the Constitution of Uganda, and it was even said that those people who went were not well educated like we are, which is entirely untrue.  Many of those people who are in London, Lancaster, and Malagala were far more educated, and intellectually were much better than some of us. You could not fool them with their intellectual competence and you cannot say that they did not represent their people; many of them were elected in their local legislatures, and some had even been elected before, to go their local legislatures and subsequently elected from their legislature.  You could not find fault with them about not knowing the feelings, the views and the wishes of the people they represented.  But I think the biggest fault - and this is directly related to my own area here in Buganda - the biggest fault, or the weakness at that time was for the authorities that categorised certain people as unpatriotic, disloyal, and as enemies of Buganda just because they disagreed, and when you critically examine where the differences were, you go back to what I said at the beginning; disagreements on how to interpret the basic human rights and how to develop a constitution which everybody could see as safeguarding these basic rights.  This was at the heart of the matter, and now in 1993, I wish we could develop a culture in the Assembly and in the country, where we listen to arguments from those with whom we who disagree with violently, but I do not want him to tell me that the people of Burahya said this unanimous.  I want him to tell me that I hon. Kisembo, I believe we must have this kind of provision for these reasons, and he stands to be counted for these reasons not to say, ‘Ah, ah, I was only telling you what Burahya people were saying’.  

Yesterday, I had the Council of my Constituency Busiro, I think the second largest constituency in the country, and we are close to 300,000 people there. I had the RC IV from eight sub-counties, and they spoke frankly about all these things. It was clear that many as we were, everyone had his own views on a number of things. I was, therefore, asking those who were addressing me not to say we believe; we say so because we had not checked even those who are present here in the Chamber.  It is a temptation always to say, I am speaking for everybody.  I think he is going to be careful.  Let us sort our things, and stand on our feet, and argue and listen; perhaps we can be persuaded to change our position.  

So, it is very important to me that we develop this relationship and we create a very constructive atmosphere because it will make it easier for us to debate meaningful amendments if they are necessary to be made.  

In Africa today, we have several patterns of political change; some are violent, and even have two or three years ago everybody appeared to be unanimous in supporting the leadership for that country.  We have attended many conferences and there has been so much demonstration of support, but that support was superficial; it was not genuine.  So, when we look at how we can end this exercise, going through this process ultimately, we are going to have a Constitution and that Constitution should not be conceived to cater only for the incumbency; for those of us who are here. (Applause) 
I have been talking to many people some are colleagues here, others are in the Cabinet, while others are in the Chamber; even people in the countryside, are suggesting that this Constitution should be seen as a Constitution for the present and the future generations, and not only for those who are now in office.  This has been a mistake in many African countries, especially soon after independence, the individuals who were in power after the colonialists had been sent away, people just placed full confidence in them and they framed laws believing that they had got this person who will be there all the time and when for whatever reason they are no longer around, they did not know what to do.  One of the laws that were made in this country very early after Independence, in 1963, was an amendment of the law governing the Public Service Commission, in the 1962 Constitution. It had been provided that this Public Service Commission will be executive, and would deliberate and then make appointments.  In 1963, for whatever reasons, it was decided to amend our Military Service Commission so that it is only advisory to the Prime Minister, because people were comfortable with the President, and if he became President, it would be amended again so that he could have the executive powers as the appointing authority. But the Public Service Commission would be only advisory, and he can delegate to them, but can also decide otherwise.  As we know, time came when Milton Obote was no longer President and Idi Amin became President, and he found that law there, and one day he was attending festivities of congratulations somewhere in Kyagwe, and he announced the dismissal of 20 Permanent Secretaries -(Laughter)- I heard it over the radio; 20 Permanent Secretaries, everybody was shocked; but he found the law there.  However, those who made it never thought Idi Amin would ever be a President and would exercise those powers.  

So, this is what I want to warn Colleagues with national interests about; do not merely state that you want a Constitution simply because of the incumbency, because anything can happen.  Just now, a Member contributing thought that I was disagreeing with his proposal that since our President has been so good  -which I agree - let us give him his powers. But what if tomorrow he resigns?  Well, I hope not. But supposing -(Interjection)- supposing for one reason or another he says I am fed up with these people, and I am going to retire?  Are you going to say because you made this law in your favour you cannot go?  Somebody else will take over and may be the man will dislike and will find that law there.  This is a problem and we must not be emotional about it because we are putting down a law to protect everybody; to safeguard us against the turmoil we have gone through, and which other countries have gone through, regardless of whether you are a multi-partyist, because many people think every evidence we have had in Uganda is because we had political parties here.  Apparently, even all the nine years when Idi Amin ruled, it was a problem of multi-parties.  Even when the parties are suppressed by an army or by a President, the blame is on the multi-party.  Although I am a firm believer of the multi-party system, I am not saying so because of my own implementation, I am being honest about it, and I am appealing to you to be honest about it.  This is a law you are putting in place hopefully for ourselves, but certainly for our children, our grandchildren and so forth.  

Mr. Chairman, the thrust of this Bill is to have or not to have a special body elected or not elected for the purpose of debating a Constitution for the future of our Country.  I am strongly in support of having a body elected to do this job.  To have this special assignment even if some Members here are to stand and be elected to that body at the same time remain Members of NRC, I support that election.  

The question of how these two bodies can operate simultaneously is an administrative issue, and people can sit down and see how this can be worked out.  But the reasons for an elected Assembly are compelling, first of all by being anticipated over and over again without protest from the past, and when at the eleventh hour, you suddenly say no, even your legitimacy is lost.  Secondly, it does not help for that body to delegate on the future Constitution.  People charged by the country with a specific mandate that now you are going to specifically deal with this problem and they know that they have got the confidence of the people to do that job.  But you use the same legislature as we now have for example, it is already shadowed by many other things which were done legitimately on the basis of consensus by the rest of majority vote, and so on, and it is always a problem because you always have that conflict of interest, and you are the one who moved that Motion on land, decentralisation, or on whatever other issue, and you are in the same chamber, and it looks odd and the cause of conflict if you are to take up a new position.  

However, under the arrangement that somebody is going to seek a mandate specifically to deliberate on the Constitution, with the opportunity to even indicate his leaning on a number of crucial matters, that person will be very free and will, therefore, be most useful in that exercise.  

For those two reasons, Mr. Chairman, I strongly support the provision for the election of a special body to form a Constituent Assembly, and to deliberate specifically on the Constitution.  What I think is important in addition to that, and where Members should really be honest and make very good contributions, is on how to ensure that the election will be free and fair and will be very soon.  

Last year, together with my Colleague, the then Minister of Foreign Affairs of Nigeria, we led an OAU delegation to the talks in Johannesburg, the CDESA talks, through which we hoped there would al be peaceful change from the apartheid system to a democratic system in that country.  The CDESA talks were short-lived, but the real issue behind them was the ‘sublimate’, what they now call the ‘leveling of the playing field’, whereby the ANC and the PS, even chief Buterezi’s Nkata and so on, complained that there were no equal rights and opportunities, to propagate their views and organise themselves and so forth.  That all these things were lock-sided in favour of the apartheid regime, and this partition was sustained internationally.  We discussed it in the OAU Meeting in Dakar, and we supported the argument and consequently resolved to seek a special session of the Security Council, the Council of Africa, and there I was among nine ministers who were asked to go and represent Africa’s case. Among the things we talked about was the need for leveling the playing field.  The controversy is now going on in the talks in Arusha, Kinshasa, Lome, and Togo, when you examine them after having agreed to meet, these parties are looking forward to what to do in the elections and so on, and that issue has come up; is the playing field levelled? 

I, therefore, think Colleagues should contribute towards this objective.  I say so because even the Government might be cheated sometimes by allowing some of the authorities like the DA, a cadre or an officer from the NRM Secretariat conducting himself in such a way as to bring prejudice for and against the citizen of Uganda simply because he disagrees with their position, and using that office to do so this. We have to discuss this frankly in national interest and it must stop; it must be avoided and we, therefore, need to construct a law which guarantees that the playing field will be levelled.  

On the question of representation, the Bill provides for an electoral system. In consonance with the British system, people stand in constituencies which are demarcated by the electoral authority, and for those of you who have been following politics in Uganda, when you look back at the elections of 1958, 1961, 1962 and 1980, you will find that there were many controversies about the demarcation of these constituencies.  The kinds of argument I have heard from the hon. Member Opio are not new; they are there.  However, to tackle that subject, two things are necessary; one is how to ensure that the authority demarcating constituencies is really above reproach, as seen so by the contending party with full transparency, and that the authority demarcating will be able to tell you the criteria for demarcating those constituencies and there is also a likelihood for a consensus on that criteria, nationwide.  

The second alternative is to look for an electoral system that simplifies matters and promotes equal representation.  I think the hon. Opio went half way to oppose what I personally believe strongly will be a superior electoral system; and the polite one, or the winner, takes over that we have two, the proportional representational system whereby you take as given, the administrative unit because that administrative unit is established on a different criteria, sometimes on political considerations for administrative convenience, or on economic considerations and so forth.  You do not worry about that, you take as given whatever they have decided to be a district and then you work out proportionately and guarantee that even the smallest will be represented in the most fair way by apportioning seats to the various districts, and if I use the present set up, if you take the smallest district and you guarantee that that district will be represented by one person or two persons, whatever you decide, and then you work out the formula to cater for all the other districts on the basis of their proportion. And then you decide on a fair formula to cater for that, which will be transparent, and there must be no question of under representation and no opportunity for the authority to cause problems in one area in order to favour a particular candidate or a particular organisation. 

I, therefore, invite Colleagues to spend some time thinking about it because even in Britain today, it is a matter of controversy, and they still use this winner take all system - this Single Member Constituency Approach.  The Liberals - the liberal party Members in Britain and Ghana had far more votes put together than what the Consecutive Party got.  But because of the way the constituencies are demarcated, historically and so on, the Consecutive Party, regardless of the number of votes they got, have the majority of seats in Legislature.  May be in England it does not matter very much because it is about - 80 per cent of the people are generally homogeneous in culture and so forth, and they already have a problem with the Wales, Scottish and the Irish. But here in Africa, we are very heterogeneous that the groups which feel left out can be a source of problems.  

Therefore, you should go for an electoral system which caters as equitably as possible for different areas, and different groups and so on, and then we can look forward to a healthy Parliament, a true representative Parliament in the future, and relative peace Uganda.

Lastly, I want to say something on the referendum which has been proposed.  I do not want to spend much time on that, but to talk of a referendum uproar before we have the time to debate and analyse issues and so forth, and as hon. Moses Ali has said, if we have disagreed and even when you disagree again, you may not think that it might be the best solution; you find some other formula to dissolve the differences.  Therefore, to have a referendum uproar is really ‘putting the cart before the horse’.  This exercise is supposed to help us sit down and analyse things as objectively as possible, and educate ourselves, to the extent that it is even conceivable that what I believed in a year ago, and what was carried in my memorandum two years ago, may now be a matter of doubt. Speaking frankly, I found yesterday in my meeting with the whole of the RC IV -  because I know the kind of memorandum they sent - in our discussion yesterday, they convinced me that sometimes we underestimate the intelligence of our people.  They were to be explained to, and they are also to explain their point of view.  In that exercise, you find that somebody will say ‘Ah!’ I had a wrong understanding - a wrong conception of this matter.  We have to explain all these things, and we have to explain what a movement is; is it ideologically different from a one party system? We have to explain what is wrong with a multi-party system because these are the issues.  Well, you ask people about it, and as I said earlier, from their memories they say, ‘oh, we had enough with parties, and when you ask him in his experience, what are the specific things he can mention?  He will tell you about Luwero, although its was not a multiparty culture in Luwero, it was a very denial of multiparty culture in Luwero because these Luwero people voted for DP, and these people harboured the NRA there, and then the NRA was used.  Well somebody wanted to stay in power and so forth.  Even the UPC supporters were killed and so forth.  There was nothing to do with the multiparty culture. If it has been a multiparty culture that would have been in a well administered place; they would have even had their own local government, and they would have had Luwero District Council run by the victorious party there. 

But it was not so here in the City Council. We had so many problems and we had DP winning all the four seats in Kampala here, but the City Council was solely in the hands of appointed people; you can even say that it was in the hands of UPC, but you cannot say it was in the hands of people appointed by the Minister, the Mayor and all those below him, appointed people in their own colonies.  This had nothing to do with the multiparty culture.  

For several years, as a leader of the opposition, a respectable Mayor from the Atlantic came to visit me in my office and we talked about the situation as it was there, and he said that they understood that there was rigging of elections and so on, but said that I could do like he was doing in Atlanta.  You run those areas where you have the majority, run them so well that they become a model as I have done with Atlanta, but I said it was not possible here in Uganda, because Mpigi District is for DP, Luwero is also for DP, just like Mukono. But we do not have the authority, and we have no say about the district councillors, and no say about the chiefs, or about anybody.  So, it was the denial of a multi-party culture, and it was a very irresponsible way of dealing with political opposition.  

So, when we talk of this referendum, what are the issues and have we really understood sufficiently what these issues are, and if we have done so, are we going to count on those people out there; to resolve the differences? And if we are going to count on them, then we have got to allow for proper explanation.  You level the playing field - one Brig. Moses Ali has to go and explain to all of us, and then after a period of proper explanation, you can say now I think these people have been properly exposed and you can then think of this kind of referendum.  Because, even in Europe, mistakes can be made. The Danes are feeling a bit guilty, for instance, for having conducted the referendum on Mastrich, when the people did not really understand the whole issue very well.  They have now organised a different referendum - they organised another referendum hopefully to nullify the previous one.  Here in Uganda, my own area here in Buganda, if we had had a referendum like that held in 1960, it would have been a very interesting referendum.  Within two years after that referendum, people in Buganda, right from the top downwards, fully regretted certain things that were pushed, although they were easily supported wherever I went, ‘Kabaka Yekka, Kabaka Yekka!.  I think we would not have said anything else and you know some of us had it rough. Our lives were in danger and some other people were killed, houses were burnt and so on. And again, those of us who say that it is party business, it is not so; it was a denial; a denial of the fundamental human rights.  There had been a denial of my rights as Ssemogerere to be of DP because I believe in it, and to associate with Latim, Obonyo, Byanyima, and so on. That is why I was considered unpatriotic, disloyal, and against the Kabaka, and Buganda. 

These are the hard facts, and within two years, many of the Baganda representatives who came to this Chamber on the mandate of Kabaka Yekka, no sooner had they arrived here than they crossed over to UPC and started condemning the whole institution of Buganda.  So, these are the historical realities that we have to think about when we are debating the Constitution, and we must have a Constitution that allows all of us -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of order.  I realise, Mr. Chairman, that all hon. Members in this House have got equal rights to debate and when we were sitting here yesterday, they cautioned us that there are 240 Members supposed to contribute.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Rt. Second Prime Minister who is holding the Floor, to continue talking in arrears when hon. Members have been stopped, while they were contributing crucial issues on this debate?  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  It is quite in order. He is a regional representative. Continue please.

MR. SSEMOGERERE:  I am much obliged, Mr. Chairman, and this reminds me of my own ruling in Addis Ababa. We were debating a proposed motion on Togo and a Minister from Togo, who arrived late, asked me for special discretion to talk. I allowed him five minutes first and then ten minutes as a maximum to make a special statement.  When we came to the relevant motion on Togo, the distinguished Foreign Minister of Ghana, and the Foreign Minister Benin, contributed and the Minister of Togo also spoke and he spoke within five minutes as had been the rule, and then the Minister from Benin spoke and I exercised some discretion and I allowed him to address the Council longer and there the same kind of point of order raised and I gave the same kind of ruling as I have given -(laughter)- and the same kind of -(Applause)- from the distinguished foreign ministers, and they were proved.  But I really assure you that I am closing now.  I think I have said enough about the referendum; if it is going to come, it has to come as a last resort and the pros and cons of that referendum have got to be debated by the Constituent Assembly to determine whether it will serve a useful purpose, and when it has been admitted or accepted, the referendum rules have got to be set in place.  You have got to agree on details and on how you will conduct that referendum.  You may have to engage social scientists to assist you in this, because there are many questions which form the basis of a wrong information because they are badly administered, and because those questioning are not scientifically trained, because they will lead their respondents in particular directions, and I do not want to now open a book on methodology, whereby some of the questions they put there were scientifically formulated.
MR. ONGOM (Moro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I can see my part is extremely difficult, speaking soon after such an eloquent and eminent contribution to the House.  However, I have a few things to contribute to this Bill.  I would like to inform you, Mr. Chairman, and the House that I went around the county I represent here, soon after the very successful visit of the Holy Father, the Pope, to Gulu.  Allow me, Mr. Chairman, to convey the appreciation of the people of Omoro County, on this very successful visit.  The people of Omoro were still being told at that time and it was true, that the Holy Father was invited to this country by His Excellency the President of this Country.  The success of his visit here shows how close the relationship between the church and politics can be.  Man is as religious as he is political.  It surprises me, however, that many politicians and even some in the House here, and some papers, voice concern about some politicians having dialogue with religious leaders in this country.  I believe, and that was the belief of the people that I consulted, that indeed, a very fruitful relationship could develop between politics and religion by this kind of dialogue.  Political leaders have as much rights as anybody else, to go to churches and mosques and discuss matters with leaders, religious leaders, as any other person.  It is in fact, I think, the non-believers who cause us problems in this kind of area.  So, I think we should encourage rather than discourage dialogue between politicians and religious leaders. (Applause) 

The political history of Uganda has been a very sad one and no rightful thinking Ugandan would like to see this kind of history repeating itself in this country, and that is why I think this debate on the Constituent Assembly Bill is very important.  The problem to me and to the majority of the people I consulted seems to be rather the interpretation of the causes of these problems that we have had.  For instance, on the problem of the Constitution many people have said in recent years that most of our problems have come because, either did not have the correct Constitution in place or that these Constitutions were decided on by the wrong people.  I do not myself subscribe to this kind of thinking because history itself shows that this is a wrong position.  Hon. Ssemogerere alluded to the history of the Constitution, of the 1962 Constitution, and how it was debated and passed.  Many people we remember -(Interjection)- protect me, Mr. Chairman.  Many people will remember, at least those who were here like me, that the problem of 1966 in fact came from a rejection of a Provision in the 1962 Constitution by the ‘Luganda Lukiiko’. In that Constitution, there was a provision for the people in the so-called ‘lost counties’, to hold a referendum and decide for themselves whether to remain in Buganda or to go back to Bunyoro, and nobody told me that the Lukiiko was not properly represented in Lancaster House.  It was very well represented, but these were the very people who came and rejected that provision, and so what did we see in 1966?  When the Prime Minister then abrogated the 1962 Constitution, the same person was also actually presented in the Lancaster House.  So, he could not have used the argument that the Constitution was bad because I was not there, or I was not represented.  Something else must be wrong not the Constitution itself or the people who decide on it.  When Idi Amin took over power in 1971, they gave 18 reasons for overthrowing the political Government and non of the -(Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, by November 1964, the referendum being referred to, had been held and accepted.  So, when you came in 1966 to wipe out the Constitution of 1962, it cannot be said that it was based on the rejection of the people of Buganda of the referendum.  It cannot be whitewashing the wrong actions of Dr. Obote.

MR. KINTU MUSOKE:  Additional information.  Mr. Chairman, when the Prime Minister of Uganda in 1966 abrogated the Constitution, he gave it on Television when he said, ‘At midnight on my own accord -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Information, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to give my Colleague the correct information.  I was a Minister then responsible for making the referendum and I have the know; I know almost by heart that in November 1964, when the referendum was held, it was designed in such a way that those people who were on the register of voters in the 1962 elections, had to take a decision on whether to go to Bunyoro or to remain in Buganda.  That was done beautifully, except that the then Kabaka refused to sign the document authorising the whole issue and effecting that law.  I was in the government and the Cabinet made a decision that the Prime Minister at the time, by virtue of Section 26 of the Constitution then of the Marlborough House, that the Prime Minister had to execute this by authority of the Constitution.  So, it was done and it never brought any conflicts between the Uganda Government, the Central Government then and Mengo Lukiiko.  What caused all the difficulties in Uganda was not the Constitution, it was the Amin gold which brought clashes, the Aru gold in Zaire brought by Amin as a Commander of the Army then.  That was the real cause.  Up to now as we debate here, that was the cause of our difficulties; it was as simple as that, and not the Constitution.

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, this is a matter of history and I am not going to dwell on it, but I would like to inform you that I am a student of history and I know what I am talking about.  The point I was emphasising is about all this talk on the Constitution being wrong or because the people who promulgated it were not the correct people or because they did not have the right mandate.  

The majority of the people of Omoro County that I consulted as I told you before, are of the view that this whole exercise is going to cost us a lot of money and, therefore, they have a suggestion which I have tried to put in an amendment which has not come out; I understand because of the problems of stationery in your office, and I must say, I made these proposals before I knew about the proposals by hon. Butagira that I saw in the House here.  The gist of these proposals are that my people think, the majority I am talking of, those who cared to attend our meetings, think that this House properly and suitably modified, can constitute itself into a Constituent Assembly and competently debate and pass the Constitution.  And what are the proposals? One, that the elected Members of this House remain intact, but that one of them should be added a few more people and, according to their formula, it worked out about twenty five more elected delegates to join, and that is to represent those counties which happen to have 150,000 people or more, so that they can qualify for one or more representation of members provided.

The people of Omoro also think that no county should be represented by more than three delegates.  That is why the number we arrived at is less than that suggested by the Committee.  They are not against representation by NRA or the historicals, but they say that the number should be drastically reduced and in their view the two, NRA and NRM are one and the same and they should be represented by a total of twenty delegates.  How they apportion between the NRA and the historicals is their affair.  My people also think that political parties -(Interruption)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, on what logic there would be in separating this House between the historicals, the nominated and the elected so that the elected remain part of the Constituent Assembly, and the others are out and yet the elected were an expansion of those that were there and, therefore, NRC is one unit and part of NRM.  I would want to know only a little bit more on how this can be done and you have that dictum to be able to have all these groups and then have one unit in the Movement.

MR. ONGOM:  Mr. Chairman, I am reserving that kind of detail to when we come to the Committee Stage because obviously we have many more points to talk about.  It is not that I do not have an answer for the hon. Member’s query but the hon. Member should realise that we are talking about a Constituent Assembly and not the NRC.  Those are really two different things; the only common centre here is that my people, the majority of those I consulted thought that the present NRC, those who were elected, can convert themselves into a Constituent Assembly plus these others.  They also think that political parties should be represented and another twenty seats allocated to them, but this time the manner of proportional representation counting and that, first of all, they are talking of those parties that were there and contested the 1980 elections so that the twenty seats can be apportioned between them proportionally according to the number of votes they got during the 1980 elections.  This record, I believe is available somewhere -(Interjection)- I was coming to the point of rigging afterwards if the hon. Members could allow me to finish my point.  The youth and workers’ representation, according to the suggestion I am proposing, should remain four each.  They do not favour the idea of nominations because in any case, you will have already taken care of special interests and they believe that the President should not be given or the Government as such should not be given more power to nominate more people because after all, we are all going to represent mostly the various interests within the country and they argue that if, the President and the Government do not yet have their interests represented, then their interests must be extremely strange.

I have in fact in my presentation already although I was about to ignore this question of rigging that I was reminded about, but I do not want to raise unnecessary controversy here because some of us do not believe in this rigging. In any case, for the simple reason that the party that won in 1980 was not the party in power, and they could not have rigged an election that they did not organise.

I would also like to talk about the reason why I say that this manner of representation should be adopted; it is basically on the problem of cost and perhaps the time element.  We were informed here, for instance, that this election will cost about Shs. 14 billion.  If you apportion Shs. 14 billion amongst the delegates in the manner I have suggested, each candidate would be worth about Shs. 58 million.  That is the calculation, and the people of Omoro say, if there is such kind of money, it is better you give it to us so that they can build a school or two with it.

In winding up, let me refer to this matter of referendum which I think was covered very ably by the previous speaker.  I do not also support the idea of a referendum simply because I think that those who advocate for it immediately, particularly those who want it immediately, I think it is because they see an advantage.  It is already an element of rigging.  For the last seven years, the operators of NRM have been going around the country talking nothing, but if they mentioned anything about political parties, it is always in the negative abuses, they have done this, they have done that, but nothing good.  For instance, in Gulu District you have the freedom to talk about political parties only when you are talking negatively about them and if you are to be unfortunate as to mention anything good about them, you fear to be followed -(Interruption)- I am telling you what happens.  And the freedom is that of the Minister of State Resident there, the D.A and the cadres so that we other people are not allowed, even those who perhaps would have experienced little respect, cannot dare do it. As a result, even in our meetings, when we go around like I told you, we dare not raise the matter of political parties and I think it would be grossly unfair if you ask the people of Uganda to vote now when they have not been given a chance to hear the other side.  I think it is wrong, it would be extremely wrong for us to hold a referendum particularly now, before the political parties are given time to tell the people about the virtues of the multiparty system. If at the end of it they do not agree with it, they will surely vote against political parties, but under the restriction at the moment, it would be undemocratic as it has been, and I will not personally support it and even if a referendum was held under such circumstances I will not go to the bush, but I will not support it.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MUKWAYA (Historical Member):  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this very important and historical Bill.  Allow me first of all, to comment briefly about the issue of the historicals.  It is very interesting at this very point of our history for some people to speak as if the historicals’ role in bringing democracy is negative, or was negative.  There are some people who are very important and big in their own way, and who stand up and speak as if historicals, or as Ugandans, who have no right to express their views or their feelings about certain issues.  I think this is a very dangerous attitude being developed and must be rigorously fought. (Laughter)  

I am not saying that some historicals may not have made mistakes or that they are angels, but the circumstances under which they started this National Resistance Council, they are the people who were there at that material time and I think they had no alternative; they had no option but to decide what they did, which actually qualified them to be historicals, now tomorrow and forever.  Because when you read, history may be ten years from now; there is no way you are going to separate the NRC and those historicals; there is no way.  I am tempted even to believe that the current NRC Members, five or ten years from now, are going to be historicals because it is their role which will qualify them to be historicals at the time they will be referred to.  

So, sometimes it defeats our imagination to here people calling historicals all sorts of things.  The biggest role they have played, and I am proud to be one of them  -(Applause)- the biggest role we have played in this country is to try and establish democracy.  I have taken trouble to analyse this animal called ‘democracy’ and I think democracy is not just a mere word of politicking, it is a fundamental issue when you are talking about society; it is development and it is management.  One great scholar - allow me to quote the laws and concepts of democracy - that democracy is a political system which encourages and makes possible the free and voluntary involvement of the people in the political life of a nation, ‘free and voluntary’.  An important aspect of this involvement must include the right to make such critical decisions at the determination of the type and nature of the Government to be established, and the right to comment freely on important public issues that may confront the nation from time to time.  In other words, the importation of national decisions must emanate from the synthesis of the people, including those of the minority.  

The historicals now, even in this House, may be in the minority, but they have views. If you are going to talk about democracy, their views and ideas should form part of the synthesis so that by the end of the day, you arrive at one common objective democratically But if you are going to suffocate some of the Historical Members by not airing their views freely, then the synthesis is going to be incorrect and ultimately it will not be democratic in my views.  Having said that, Mr. Chairman, allow me to turn to the Bill.

I strongly support the Bill as presented by the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs, but I want to make some observations on this Bill.  On page 11, where it talks about the proceedings of the Assembly, I would have been more comfortable if the Minister mentioned something about the proper recording and publication of the proceedings on a daily basis for information to the public.  May be it will come administrative but I think a Clause should be inserted somewhere either after (2) or (3) to cater for this recording and daily publication of the proceedings of the Assembly.

I further turn to page 23, the Third Schedule, where the Minister talks about - where it provides for the population in the constituencies.  My view does not differ much from the majority of Members who have contributed here, but I think for a constituency, between 60,000 and 70,000 inhabitants is reasonable.  That will cater for the counties which are too big and the municipalities and other areas where we think there is an imbalance in the population.

I turn further to page 31, Section 17, at the bottom of it.  I would suggest that the Minister should put a provision there to show the distance to be observed by the voters from the centre of the activity, because the Minister does not mention the distance to be observed or respected.  Because if you think the polling will be secret - and he talks about the distances between the desks or tables and but does not talk about the distances between the tables or desks and the observers - then one can stand; a tall man like me can stand in any distance and will be able to see what the voter is doing.  So, I suggest that at least 15 metres be included to keep the crowd away from the voting activity, so that nobody sees the actual activity as it goes on, but he can see from a distance that actually nobody is manipulating.

I further turn to page 33, under Section 21; I would wish the Minister to put a Clause to deal with individuals disrupting the voting.  In the NRC and RC election procedures, if you go and disturb the voting, the Presiding Officer has the powers to decide what to do with that character, the one disturbing the elections.  I think the Minister should allay my fears here by putting there a Clause to deal with individuals who will disturb that particular election, and to give powers to the Presiding Officer, either to ask the security officer there or to caution such a character who will be disturbing the elections, to keep a distance or to have control, because the Presiding Officer here is not actually in a position to manage and control the activity of the day, and if he does not have enough power to deal with these characters, some of whom may come when they are drunk or insane or whatever, I think the exercise may be disrupted.

On the same page, the Minister did not talk about time under 22(4). The Minister should include another area to cater for time and for counting the votes, because he has not guided, for instance, if they finish the voting and the counting is not finished, what do they do?  Because a dispute may crop up during the time for counting the votes.  Some people may even say, let us count and finish, while others may say it is too late, let us stop and count tomorrow. So, I think the Minister misguided the presiding officers and other polling officials as to the time of counting votes, when the exercise should stop, and for how long the exercise can proceed.

I am suggesting in the same breadth that the ballot papers which are rejected or stained must be filed and forwarded to the Returning Officer for future reference, because some of our people, unless they are properly guided, may think that these spoiled ballot papers are of no use, after all, they have been seen to have been damaged so they can be discarded of immediately.  I think these papers are very important for future reference and I think they should be properly filed and presented to the Returning Officer of that particular area.

The safety of keeping the boxes should also be mentioned.  Who is going to guard the boxes in case the voting has not been completed on that particular day?  Who, in particular, is going to guard those boxes?  I think the Minister should specify the characters involved in this exercise and give them power and mandate to be in charge and in control of those boxes. Otherwise, they can be manipulated and by the end of the day, we may get negative results.

On page 34, Section 23, I suggest that the Declaration Form, Form DR, at each station, must be signed by one of the agents of the candidate.  One of the agents must as a matter of policy, sign after they have counted the votes and fill in this Form.  There must be a provision for the agents, or the representatives of the candidates to sign on the Form so that the information given therein is not tampered with afterwards.

Having said that, perhaps the Minister will make those provisions to improve on his Bill. I agree entirely with many Members who have said that the women should be represented at district level, so that each district gets one lady representative, and I think it is very important for the ladies to be encouraged and to be assisted to come in this way.  

For the other representatives in the Constituent Assembly, I really do not have very strong views against the majority of the people who have supported them.  The only controversial area which I think you can critically look at is the area of the President appointing a Chairman.  I myself do not see any harm in the President appointing a Chairman. But most of the Members have said here that the President should not appoint a Chairman. I think the intention of the Minister was to make the President to have some control over the Assembly -(Interruption)- I mean I have manageable -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. MUKWAYA:  No, this is my opinion.  I am saying that, I think the intention of the Minister was to have the President appoint the Chairman for better management of the Assembly, not control, but if the Members have very strong views from their constituencies that actually the Chairman should be elected by the House, I do not see anything wrong with that because there are some people who are saying that if you advance that argument, then it means that you do not respect the President or that the President will be unfair. I think the Minister had good reasons to suggest that, and I think the area of management is very important. But if the politics of the day dictate that actually the Chairman should be elected by the Assembly, as long as the people are informed.  Because there are also some people on the other hand who have advanced the argument that the Chairman should actually be appointed by the President, also have their reasons.  So, we should actually look at these two areas and find out which should be the best in the interest of the nation.  Having said that, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much and I support the Bill.

MR. ONGARIA (Tororo Municipality, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this important Bill which will go a long way to set the destiny of this country.  When the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs was presenting this Bill to the House, he said that the NRC should not be allowed to debate the Constituent Bill because if they did, the final text of the Constitution will be called by our detractors the NRM Constitution or Museveni’s Constitution.  I believe, what the Minister was actually emphasising was neutrality and transparency on the part of the NRM Government and on the contribution of the Constituent Assembly.  

The Minister was also implying that the executive arm of the government, that is the President and the Cabinet Ministers, should not over influence this Constituent Assembly.  Further, the Minister was implying that the executive arm of the government should as much as possible be detached from the composition and functioning of the Constituent Assembly.  If this line of argument were to be followed, I propose the following:  (I)  That the President should have nothing to do with the appointment of the Chairman, rather the Assembly should appoint a judge because we believe a judge will be as transparent and neutral as we would want it.  Secondly, except for the specified bodies which would not normally or traditionally participate directly in political activities, like the Armed Forces, and by the Armed Forces I mean, the NRA, the Police and the Prisons and I will go forward to recommend in this category, ten delegates, six for NRA, two for the Police and two for the Prisons.  The rest of the specified bodies as per the First Schedule of this Statute should be elected through the universal suffrage.  

As for the women, since 1986, the women of this country have been exposed to all types of seminars and, therefore, I believe at this stage or at this point in time, they should be able to compete with men, and they should be able to take the men by arm.  I do not see how a Think Tank like hon. Njuba here, should be assisted to come to this House.  I do not also see a Think Tank like hon. Ssekitoleko should be assisted to come to this House, and indeed, there are many of our hon. Members here.  They should be capable to compete with the men in order to come to this House.  It is wrong for us to continue relegating our women to sub-standard level when actually most of them, even outside this House, can compete favourably and come to this House.  I will give you an example. Recently, in the elections of Kenya, it was a universal suffrage type of election, but six women managed to come to Parliament -(Interruption)- and I believe because of the political exposition that we have given our women, this time even more than ten will come to this House.  So, we should not continue assisting our women deliberately from time to time -(Interjection)

MRS. MPANGA:  Information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that he is forgetting that there are more women in this country than there are men.  In the last elections, we were talking about democracy, and in the last Census there were 51 percent women. But what percentage of women are here?  It is those who are not able, or who are prevented by culture that we are talking about.  We would like also to attain a quality and you lose a lot of talent if you do not do it.

MR. ONGARIA: Mr. Chairman, that is the more reason why, if there are more women than men in this country, more women should be able to be elected here because there are more women, and they are already organised, I do not see why they should be assisted, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order.  Information from the hon. lady.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the women he is talking about, the wives, they have got to get permission from their husbands, and further information is that the experience that we have seen is that even hon. Members in this House do not allow their women to attend meetings -(Interruption and Laughter)

DR. S. KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that in actual fact if he thinks there is equality, it should start in the home where he is undemocratically holding more than four women to himself.  Thank you. (Laughter)     

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, in the first place, I would like to refute that argument.  I have one wife and the wedded wife and I am going to remain with one wife, I do not have four wives as she alleges I have had.  Thank you very much.  Supposing I had four women I do not intend, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, if I may continue, as for the political parties, I still believe that through universal suffrage they have room to compete for the elections, without necessarily bringing them here on special arrangement.  They can go and compete in any constituency with anybody.  

Again on the youth, the National Youth Council, I am an ardent supporter of competition and so I would still encourage the youth if indeed they form a majority in the population of this country, and they are already organised, even this House has gone as far as to form an Act for the Youth Constitution. They should be able to compete and elect their members to this House.  So, I still feel that they should not support the basis of a country as an electoral area.  We should not tamper with the current boundaries of counties because they are already legal entities.  For me, it is easier to form more than one electoral area in one big county than combine the counties politically.  For example, in some of our districts like Tororo, representation is made on county level because the counties are also occupied on nationality level, and so, we have never had any problem with anybody in as far as that set up is concerned.  

Again on Tororo, we have several nationalities, each nationality speaking its own dialect, having its own tradition, and having its own culture. But we have co-existed peacefully for a long time. If you made a mistake to transfer part of one nationality to the other nationality, then you have created a problem, and that is why I am suggesting that we should continue with the county level of representation.

AN. HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, could the hon. speaker, tell us or develop his point with regard to the substantial Bagisu minority in his Constituency in Tororo.  I am asking if the hon. Member could clarify what he would like the Government to do with regard to the substantial Bagisu minority in his part of the Constituency in Tororo.

MR. ONGARIA:  We do not have Bagisu in Tororo, Mr. Chairman.  That is the truth, because again, on the basis of counties, we have the Japadhola, the Samias, the Banyole and the Bateso, that is all.  We do not have the Bagisu.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, I now come to the contentious matters.  One of the most contentious and controversial issues raised during the debate on Uganda’s future Constitution, was whether monarchies should be revived or not.  This is an issue that I expected the Constituent Assembly to discuss, but to the surprise and amazement of this country, the government already seems to have decided on it.  

As far as the Bill is concerned, it talks about localising some of the contentious issues in this country.  I am entirely against it because, some of these localised issues are indeed national issues.  I want us to take this country as one country and, therefore, as one people.  If you would like to treat the country as a human body - if you had a sore in your smallest toe, you would feel the same as if you had pain in your eye, and you will feel the pain down.  

So, I believe that the contentious problems that are facing this country should be discussed nationally and, therefore, the Constituent Assembly should also discuss and decide on the monarchies.  I want to give an example.  If you are going to treat this issue as local, supposing tomorrow or in ten years we go back to the history that we were facing in this country, where, for example, the Baganda will say we are descending, would not that alone affect the whole country?  So, we have got to look at these things from a national perspective.

AN. HON. MEMBER:  I would like clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor because when he was defending the county issue, he told us in Tororo that if we tried to tamper with the counties we shall be looking for trouble. But when he comes to local issues, they become national.  I just want a clarification. (Laughter)  

MR. ONGARIA:  You see, here, Mr. Chairman, I am talking of the debate that was carried out when the Constitutional Commission was sampling information throughout the country, and I am sure they did not touch on the counties. They were talking about the monarchies in the country, and people throughout the country contributed their ideas on the monarchies.  Now, since the Constituent Assembly is going to discuss all these other issues, I believe that it should be within the competence of the Constituent Assembly, to discuss or at least give their views about the monarchies.  That is what I thought about.  So, Mr. Chairman, looking back to the time when Obote summarily dismissed the kingdoms in this country, at that time we had four and a half kingdoms in this country. (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Four and a half?

MR. ONGARIA:  Yes, four and a half, and I will give you my explanation. Why I am calling it four and a half.  We had the Kingdom of Buganda, the Kingdom of Bunyoro, the Kingdom of Toro, and the Kingdom of Ankole and we also had a semi-Kingdom of Busoga. That is why I call it four and a half. (Laughter)  So, I feel that all these kingdoms had properties in this country and, therefore, there is absolutely no reason why the government should dispense favour to Buganda alone.  I would have liked to see a situation where there is a uniformed policy regarding all other kingdoms.  If other Kingdoms are not going to favour the return to Kingdoms, then for goodness’ sake, let them be consulted, and let us know their views, but as of now, what we have heard and what we have seen is that indeed, one Member of this House has been appointed as Chairman, with others to negotiate on behalf of the Government.  Now, the question is, what happened to the rest of the Kingdoms?  There is nothing being said about them.  The fact that I come from Tororo, for instance, does not mean that I cannot discuss or I cannot take interest in what is happening in Bunyoro.  No, we are national leaders and, therefore, in this House we should discuss anything that is in the Bill.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the fact that the Government is negotiating with Buganda, does not mean that others are not negotiating.  I think we are all aware or at least I am aware that the Bunyoro Kingdom is actually itself negotiating certain aspects of their kingdom and certain favours are also being passed to them, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, I am not aware of that -(Interjection)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Now, be aware.

MR. ONGARIA:  Okay, I am now aware.  Now, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. MULONDO:  Information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Probably the hon. Member holding the floor would be kind enough to tell this House, through you, what grudges he has over the Baganda and the Buganda institutions because I would not see it coming here as a reference as to why the Government should negotiate with the Baganda for the return of these properties.  I do not see the relevance of this argument in this House.  I think, in my opinion, that we are in a transitional period which we should appreciate that each and everyone of the Ugandans should need the other for amicable settlement and solutions for the business we are carrying, and some of us who have been suffering here would hate to see talks of this nature in this House, which could make other people to think that probably we are not all Ugandans, who have come here to see that we have to solve our problems amicably and need to come to a better understanding and a better Uganda, where everyone of us would happily live.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to make it absolutely clear that I have no grudge at all with Buganda.  I am discussing this purely because this is included in the Constituent Bill.  I am entitled to express my views as a representative in this country, on what is involving the entire country and this section is here, Section 18, and I pick it because it is here. I thought I would comment or I would say something about it, but I want to assure you hon. Deputy Minister that I have no grudge whatsoever and I am only expressing the views - my views as a representative of this House -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. ONGARIA:  Mr. Chairman, it looks as if the hon. Minister is directing his attacks on me directly.  I would wish that he comes to the time when he will be replying to these views then we will be able to know what he thinks about them.  Mr. chairman, I hope I will sum up my views by -(Interjection)- Mr. Chairman, I am finishing.  Thank you very much for giving me the Floor.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I think it will be unfair on the part of the Government side not to clarify or not to inform this House on this very important issue where the Member holding the Floor seems to have given the impression that there is now a negotiation between Buganda and the Government, over the monarchy of Buganda.  I think, it should be clarified that the negotiations are covering the return of the properties and not the reinstatement of the Kingdom or the monarchies.  I think this is very important.  The negotiations going on refer to the return of the properties to the institution, to the cultural institution, which is part and parcel of us all in our respective cultural areas.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO (Women Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for availing me this time to give my views and the views of the people I represent in this House.  I stand to support the Bill and I request and encourage hon. Members of this House to do the same.  We should not act like past leaders who were reluctant to relinquish responsibility given to them by the public.  These people acted in an uncivilised way and probably defeated their era of political maturity and this, therefore, plunged the country into untold suffering.  Today, we must demonstrate to the world that we are politically mature and we should not emulate the past leaders.  

According to the Constitution Commission Report and from what we have read in the newspapers, it is abundantly clear that the very people who voted us into this august House have changed their minds and, therefore, we must go and seek fresh mandate from them.  I know it is a natural fear, that one, all of us, whether we like it or not, whether we believe it or not, there is that natural fear.  It is a natural fear because when you say that the NRC Members should go and seek fresh mandate there is a fear.  It is a natural fear because when you say -(Interjection)- can I finish my point please?  When you say that we have agreed to go and seek fresh mandate, but let all of us go and give the powers of the NRC to the Constituent Assembly to finish off the business of NRC, there is a fear.  There is a fear when people say as Members have said it that okay, let us take, what system we are going to use as a contentious matter and we go for a referendum right now, there is a fear. (Laughter)  

So, nobody can stand and deceive us that he has no fear.  All of us have that fear. (Laughter)  But what to do?  Let us face it because the people are saying, I am quoting the report.  They say they have lost confidence in us.  If they say you go and seek fresh mandate, what does that mean?  I know, it will be difficult, and hon. Members, if we say that let us go and seek this fresh mandate as we are now, we shall be unfair to some people.  You will go as a Member of Parliament already, and you can use that position to call a meeting which is outside the candidates’ meeting, and indeed people will come, and you will address them.  Leave alone the Members of NRC, but what about the Cabinet; the Cabinet Ministers, they will use that status and they will use Government and go and conduct those meetings outside the candidates’ meetings.  What are we going to do?  So, the best is all of us to go when we are at the same level.

AN HON. MEMBER:  How?

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  I am sure, within this very Bill, we can give powers to the President to appoint the Cabinet, and indeed Government will be in it, and I am sure in the Constitution which we are using now, those powers are there.  So, my personal suggestion, and the suggestion of the people I represent, and those are the Bakedi Women, because I had a chance of addressing them at two occasions.  On one occasion I just addressed those from Tororo District.  And that one drew three women from each sub-county, and there are 30 sub-counties. So, the total number was 30 women.  Another one was a forum taking the whole Bukedi Region; that was the whole Bukedi Diocese (over 300 hundred women), and we went through this Bill, and these are their views and also my views.  I wanted to give the information to the Second Deputy Prime Minister when he was quoting somebody that he should say that he is - but how are we going to express the views of the people we are representing if we do not say it in this House?  So, that is the request from the Bukedi Women; that we all face it womanly and manly -(Laughter)- and go and refresh our mandates.  

Having given those views, I go to the Bill itself.  When it comes to page 5, about the President appointing the 15 delegates to this House, they do not have the argument on that, and they endorse it, except that they reduce the number from 15 to 12.  And they are reducing it to 12 having it in mind that let it be done on a regional basis.  And they are taking the old regions of this country.  That is the North, the East, Buganda Region and the West.  And let the President appoint three representatives from each of those regions.  And among those 12, let there be women, and only four women; they are requesting among those appointed by the President.  Let the President also look at the women and get his eye so that among the 12, four are women. (Applause)  Still on page 6, about pardoning, they have a view that pardoning of - they have reasons why they are against pardoning those people who have committed an offence, to be given -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  On which page?

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Page 6.  They say that such a person should not be allowed to be elected a delegate for the following reasons;

i) The Constitution is the supreme law of the nation and, therefore, it should be established by people of impeccable character. 

ii)	Being pardoned from a thought is not enough to clean the character of a person.  Such are the people who would like the Constitution to be bent towards their character if they are given a chance like this one.

iii)	Experience has shown that such people who had been pardoned before have repeated the same faults, even on a worse scale. So, pardon is not, therefore, necessarily related to reformation.

iv)	In the last ten years of our history, you find quite a number of such people in our midst, who are likely to gain access to the Constituent Assembly, and their participation 	in Constitution making, is likely to make the general public lose credibility in the Constitution.  So, they are against pardoning.

On page 8, in the case of the Constituent Assembly failing to finish its work within the four months, I say, and they also say, that the extension of three months, should not be allowed by aggregate of periods.  This one it may tend to delay even the general elections.  Because when you read the Bill, and as we see our resources, the Minister of Finance may say there are no funds.  Or the foreign funders may say, things have been embezzled now we are no longer assisting you.  Then instead of - because they may say after the four months, we may come to the situation where they come here for two weeks, and they say, no funds; go back.  They go back for a month, and they come back for just a week because it is by aggregate.  So, they are suggesting the extension should not be by aggregate.  That is their suggestion, and it is my suggestion.  When we come to the Chairman and Deputy Chairman, we think that the qualifications as we see here that those officials would like - the Bakedi Women would like to add a fifth on that.  We think that religious leaders should also not take those offices of the Chairman and of the Deputy, as it is said in the Bill that political leaders should not be appointed to those offices.  They are saying even religious leaders -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Partly leaders not religious leaders.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Partly leaders, I am sorry, partly leaders.  They say even religious leaders should not take those offices for the same reasons as we are saying that the party leaders should be appointed to those offices.  We have already heard and we have already read where politicians are consulting Bishops and Priests in the Church, not in their personal capacity but as Church Leaders.  When we come to the issue of the language, the official language should be used in the Constituent Assembly just as it is being used in the NRC.  Reason being that we are sure that the Draft Constitution is in the official language.  It is not written in these languages.  I stand to be informed by the Minister whether the Draft Constitution, and even the previous Constitutions, are written in the Ugandan languages.  If it is so, then maybe, we can tolerate it.  But if it is not, these people who are coming here, will have to read this document thoroughly to understand it.  Then after reading it, even reading those previous Constitutions for proper comparison.  Now, even with the report we are given, they will be given maybe a better report, because this is interim and it is revised, and we do not know where the first one is; we did not get it.  So, they will have to read all these documents, in which languages are they going to read them?  

So, with that, we say, the official language must be used in that Constituent Assembly which is coming in place of the NRC.  Even the interpretation will take time, and it is time consuming, and it will not be exact.  It is impossible for somebody to interpret exactly as you are talking.  So, it will be a waste of time, and waste of resources.

Well, I have already talked about matters that are contentious, and they were saying that already in Tororo, and I am sure for those who have read the Newspaper, you read where the DA was being perturbed by these movements of party politics.  It is in place already.  So, if it is there, why are we postponing something which we should do now? (Applause)  Why have a fear?  And I am sure from what I have seen that those people who are coming here, most of them, in the Constituent Assembly, they are affiliated in one way or another, to one party or the other.

MR. MULWANIRA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to give this information to the hon. Member holding the Floor, with a fear which is apparent.  This House has got the good intention of putting in place a Constituent Assembly.  And as she says, the DA is disturbed or perturbed, and there are people who heard of the good intentions of this House, and are already manipulating the good intentions of this House.  And as a Member of this House, I am sure you should be having the fear, if somebody is going to abuse something you have put in place for a good purpose.  So, when you talk of - why should we fear?  I do not think we fear the politicians, but we fear people who are going to jeopardise the good intentions of this House; to put forth a Bill to discuss the future of this country. Thank you. (Applause)

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the Deputy Minister for his information, and that is why I am saying, why don’t we have a referendum now and solve the matter once and for all. (Applause)  Because, what is on the ground, is different from what we are saying.
 
AN HON. MEMBER:  But Uganda has not changed.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  But at least, people have come to realise that Ugandans, we think that the main thrust of the Constitution is the system, and yet it is not the case.  And indeed, as you are saying, the politicians are manipulators -(Laughter)- they confuse the masses. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  No, no.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Well, you do not want to believe it, but that is what it is.  Why don’t we be - where is the transparency we are talking about?

HON. MEMBERS:  The politicians.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Well, yes.  So, I have all the qualities of the politicians. (Laughter)  Some time back, the Government said, politicians were referring to a referendum.  Time came when we had groups like mobilisers saying that let us go for a referendum, and now again, they have changed.  Are not those politicians? They are now saying no; not a referendum, now we should wait.  What is this? (Laughter).  As a woman and the women I represent, we are the most affected whenever there are violent changes.  Because, some of you hon. Members, the male Members, at many times you freed the country, leaving your wives and children behind suffering.  I have never heard of a man being raped in such situations. (Laughter)  It is the women who are suffering.  Let us call a spade a spade.  We must do it.  If it is a referendum, let us go for that referendum because it is causing a lot of problems, which you Members I am sure are shying away to tell the truth. (Applause)  When it comes, that one I know definitely, and all of you have to know I am a woman, I represent women, and, therefore, they are saying they must have a district representative to the Constituent Assembly. Applause) They have a feeling that each one of you, as you come from your district, knows the problems the women there are facing.  There is dowry in Tororo, and somebody in Luwero or in Masaka may not know the implications of dowry.  There is circumcision in Kapchorwa, and you might have heard about it, but you do not know exactly what is taking place.  So, they feel that if they have their representative right from the district, they will be properly represented. (Applause)  And they have a fear still that this body saying, it should be that body to elect only 8 women, they have a fear that those women might turn up to be coming from just one area, and mainly Kampala.  Because when they come here, they are not known by most of the members of that organisation and those who are known are these ones who come from Kampala and -(Interjection)  

MR. BAMBALIRA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to get clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor. Some time back, we debated here a Bill to establish a National Women’s Council, whose purpose as it is reflected in this Constituent Assembly Bill, was to elect or nominate eight ladies.  Now, the same lady is criticising that one.  One of the objectives of the National Women’s Council as stipulated in the Bill was to elect or nominate eight ladies. But now we are changing to say that every district should have one lady, when we had passed that Bill here.  So, I am seeking clarification on that, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, please.

DR. S. KAZIBWE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the informer who is informing the Member on the floor, that the purpose of the establishment of the Women Councils in this country was not specifically to elect them to come to the Constituent Assembly.  I thought I laboured to explain why. The purpose was to sensitise them, mobilise them, and train them, so that they could participate effectively in the affairs of his nation.  Not only to come here.  I just wish that when the affairs of women are being discussed, the hon. Member will pay more attention and not consider it to be a women’s issue.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the Minister for clarifying that issue to the hon. Member who was informing me.  And I am requesting him that he still has that Bill, let him go and read it again. (Laughter)  When we come to the nomination papers, when I showed these ladies the pictures on the nomination on the ballot papers, they would wish to know whether those papers will have photographs of the candidates or just their names with any - as they are here, they wanted a clarification on that.  And we thought that even if a picture is put there, an ordinary person might not be able to distinguish them.  So, they suggest that why don’t we have symbols for those members who are going to stand, of either a hoe or any symbol. (Laughter)  I know, when I talk of fears, people do not want to accept it.  But just by accident, I mentioned how at one time, where there was a symbol of a party, and people started saying, ‘woo, woo, ya’, even this -(Laughter).  So they are saying at least, let us use symbols for the majority who are illiterate and who may not even know that this is Kiryapawo’s photograph.  And we saw another problem; the time for accepting registration; they talk of the evening, to end at 4.00 p.m.  But in the morning, it is not properly known at what time.  Because somebody may go there and start registering at 8.00 a.m. because it is not properly indicated in the Bill.  At least they emphasise 4.00 p.m. for evening time.  So, we want even the morning time, the beginning time also to be properly specified.  And we also have a fear on the counting; if it is not finished on that particular day.  Where are these ballot papers going to be kept? Under which security, and where we shall be sure that there is no rigging?  Because it is possible that in one constituency or in one centre, it may so happen that time catches them up without finishing the counting.  So, what do they do?  They know we have gone through all these, so they want the Minister to clarify on that.  And also, when a member pays the fee, he should be given a receipt to confirm that he has really paid, because we have seen people being manipulated, and somebody will be bribed, and when you go to register, and to stand, your paper is not there.  And you do not have any evidence because it was that gentleman or lady and you who were there.  So, they want at least on payment of the fee, a receipt to be issued.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up please.

MRS. KIRYAPAWO:  And lastly, still on that registration, they want these people, at least the Commissioner, to be there, and the candidate to also have a witness, to leave out any loophole where somebody will be denied that he did not register, whereas he registered.  With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BAMBALIRA (Bwamba County, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me this chance also to contribute on this Bill, having listened very carefully to the various contributions.  I have looked at this Bill as a challenging Bill to this country.  And this Bill, the way I look at it, can either be a Bill to help the Movement to continue, or a Bill that can mark the beginning of the end of the Movement.  I am saying this because it has been mentioned by some hon. Members that when we are going to establish a Constituent Assembly, the NRC will not be regarded as such to be a House.  But when we go to the field what is likely to happen in every Constituency that we shall create, you might find that every political affiliation might feed in a candidate secretly.  This is likely to happen.  And what will happen is that the political parties may be struggling to capture more seats in the Constituent Assembly, so as to struggle with a provision in the draft of the Movement, and so as to continue for the next five years.  I am seeing a possibility of that problem.  And some Ugandans want to have a Movement system; some Ugandans want the political pluralism.  Now, when such a situation happens, some people were asking, where they will go.  For example, when I was consulting my people in my County, I consulted widely in Bwamba County. A good number of them did not like parties at the moment. But there is a question which one elder asked me, that you people you do not want parties, and he told me that the NRM Government is like UNLF which was an umbrella kind of Government.  And he was saying that you use the umbrella when it is raining, but when it stops raining, you fold the umbrella.  That is what one elder was telling me. (Laughter)  And that when you fold the umbrella, everybody goes to his house.  Now, I tried to challenge him, that can’t you use the umbrella even when it has stopped raining?  He said, if you use the umbrella when it has stopped raining, you would melt under it because it would be hot.  So, with that challenge which the elder gave me during my consultation, I feel we must solve the problem of the political system to be in place in future, first because as the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister mentioned, we must be sincere to ourselves, and we want to have a Constitution in which we have a state of time.  Not a Constitution for a particular period.  This is my belief.  Our people have got various schedules of opinion, even belonging to NRM. By the way, it is also a schedule of opinion.  It is an affiliation.  Another one belonging to a political party is also an affiliation.  So, the various forms - we need to have an agreeable system to stand the taste of time for the whole of this country.  And if we do not get a proper way of solving this problem, it might be a problem in future.

The Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs in his introduction, one of the reasons he mentioned was that there is need to have a Constituent Assembly, which should be impartial and neutral.  Because some people were saying if it is the NRC to promulgate the Constitution, they might call it an NRM Constitution, and, therefore, some sectors may not respect it.  In view of that, I would like also to say that the NRC would like also to participate alongside with the elected members.  Because, while we are here as Members of the NRC, we are also part and parcel of this country.  This country belongs to all of us, and we need only to have more people to join us.  One thing which disturbs my head, are statements which were made in public.  Some statements discredit us.  For example, if some on says that we have no mandate, he has already told the public that we have no mandate, and, therefore, it is implying we are not necessary.  So, I am appealing to such leaders, Mr. Chairman, in future they should be considerate when they are making statements to the public.  They should also respect the House and members of this House.  Having visited many places in Bwamba County in Bundibugyo, at first many of my people were puzzled when I explained this Bill to them.  They were puzzled in a way that this Bill - in fact they were asking me whether the Government has lost confidence in the National Resistance Council, and why the NRC cannot debate it.  They even looked at this Bill and at this exercise as money consuming, and time-consuming.  They also considered that in a space of one year, between now and a general election in 1994, you have two elections, the Constituent Assembly Bill elections and general elections, and they thought that it is going to disturb their peace, and then the referendum. So, they looked at all these aspects, and they said that their peace which they were enjoying now, was going to be affected.  People will come in, others might come with money, and others might use all possible ways, and they will be confused. So, they looked worried about this one.  And when I explained to them, they came up with the view that okay, if it is the wish of the House, let us have it.  And when they turned to that side, they had some observations they made on the Bill.  Like many Members have mentioned, they accept the counties as a basis of the constituencies.  But then when it came to the Presidential Nominees, they expressed some worry, and they said that if we are to have an impartial House, we should have people who have come in impartiality.  But if we have the Presidential Nominees, there might be a tendency of the 15 members to influence the House, so that the House or the Constituent Assembly can be based on issues of a particular inclination.  They are also of the view that the Chairman and his Deputy should be elected by the elected Members.  And they even made a further proposal that after electing the Chairman and the Deputy of the House, those people should be replaced in the constituencies.  Because they will also be doing the work of the Speaker, and they may not have time to contribute to the Draft.  So, they were suggesting that those people should also be replaced by electing more people from those counties, or from those electorates where they have come from.

On completion of the Constituent Assembly, among the specialised groups, like many other counties have expressed, they also rejected the idea of only 8 women from the National Women’s Council, but wanted every district to send in one lady. (Applause)  At the same time, they also rejected the idea of the National Resistance Council electing 10 people.  They were wondering how we could constitute ourselves into constituencies here, when we are representing constituencies from our places.  That one was not accepted.  Actually, Mr. Chairman, they proposed that the NRC by having one extra person from every county with a particular interest was not necessary.  

On party representation, they asked me some questions.  There are some people in my county who are sympathizers of UPM.  They asked me a question as to whether I had mentioned the Bill, and that the four parties that contested in 1980 should be represented. But they are asking that since, DP, UPC, and CP are making noise, when will UPM start?  That is what they are asking me.  And they were asking when UPM will organise itself, and where the headquarters of UPM are?  So, that is a question to the leadership of UPM whose sympathizers asked me.  As I mentioned earlier, they were asking me actually another question - I have some people in my county who want to remain in NRM.  They asked me a question as to whether we should go for political pluralism, and for those who want to remain in the NRM system alone, where they would go?  So the NRM headquarters should think about that particularly, and we have the DAs, these are cadres of NRM and administrator political leaders, and we also have political leaders and even wanainchi who are stuck in NRM.  So, the Secretariat should start thinking of where to put these people if it goes to political pluralism.  

When I go to the Third Schedule of this Bill, the methods stipulated there on the style of election campaigns that elections should be non-partisan.  I want to tell you, that this might not be possible.  Well, people may not say it openly, but quietly there will be consultation. It is likely to be there, if it is not there now.  So even if some people do not show themselves in their true colours, they are likely to come here with various political affiliations.  And for that matter, the arrangement that candidates will be given centres, while they will all campaign at  one go in one station, to me is unworkable.  It is unworkable to bring four - say if in a county there are about six contestants - to bring all of them in one centre, on the same day; to me it is not workable.  Because it might create hatred amongst themselves or amongst their supporters.  Some might be having those shades of opinion within.  I suggest that the campaign be made open but controlled.  But not all of them being put in one centre at the same time.  Yes, if you put them at the centre at the same time, it may create some problems.  It can create tension and hatred among others.  

Finally, this was an issue that the members of Bundibugyo raised; the issue to do with the boundaries.  Because they are saying Uganda as a country, in its Constitution, at the end of the Constitution, the one which we are using now.  The boundaries of this country are clearly defined.  They are very clearly defined.  However, there is a small problem in Bundibugyo. It might be small but important to the people of Bundibugyo and Kabalore.  When Idi Amin gave us the districts in 1970/72, there was no clear gazette defining boundaries of some districts.  Recently, there was a meeting between leaders from Kabalore and Bundibugyo with an official from Local Government to mandate on that confusion which is there.  It is not a dispute, but there is confusion.  There is a part that is not very clear on the boundary between Kabalore and Bundibugyo.  We would like the Government to address this problem and I believed it does not affect Bundibugyo alone, but it might be affecting other districts.  So, I would like the Government to address this issue so that that confusion which might exist is solved.  So, with those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to take my seat, thank you.

ADJOURNMENT
THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session, and we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

((The Council rose at 6.10 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 25th, February, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).               
                                                                                                                   

