Tuesday, 21 February 2012

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.
                  
   COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all to today’s sitting. I want to thank you for the work you have been doing in the last one week. I want to make a correction. Last week I referred the supplementary budget estimates to the Committee on Finance, but it should have gone to the Committee on Budget. So, I have written to the Committee on Budget to take it over and they are required to sit tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock in the morning so that they can consider it and report back to this House.

Secondly, I wish to inform Members that last week I hosted the High Commissioners and Ambassadors resident in Uganda to a breakfast meeting to brief them about the Inter-Parliamentary Union, and one of the things they were interested in is to further cooperation between our Parliament and a number of other Parliaments. In particular, I received a request from the Parliament of the Philippines and that of Turkey, that they would wish to form Parliamentary friendship associations in addition to the one I discussed with you last week. So, as soon as the official communication comes, I will be informing you such that you know how to proceed.

2.38
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Rt Hon. Speaker, I stand here, and I am in a difficult situation, when the frontbench and entire backbench is missing from this side. I do hope that they are still held up. I propose that it would be opportune if we could have a 20-minutes break so that we can look around to find where this side of the House is. In view of that, it is prudent that this House is not well constituted; one side is missing. When we fully constitute ourselves, I have a matter I would want to raise from your communication to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members last week when we adjourned, there were matters which both sides of the House were interested in, and I can see that one side of the House is empty. So, let me suspend the House for 30 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 2.39 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.06 p.m. The Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.06
CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISE (Mr Patrick Amurait): I want to lay on Table the financial statements of the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) for the year ended, 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is committed to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Namayanja Florence): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Kampala Integrated Environment Planning and Management Programme. I beg to lay.  

I also beg to lay on Table the Northern Uganda Development of Enhanced Local Government Infrastructure and Livelihood financial statements for the 22-month period ending 30th June 2011. I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are both committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. Today, I am not allowing matters of national importance. I want to deal with my business which overflowed from last week. We will give you an opportunity tomorrow or the day after. In the meantime, join me in welcoming pupils of St Mary’s College, Lugazi seated up here. They are from Ngora, but they are under a bursary scheme sponsorship organised by hon. Dr Epetait. They have come to see how we work. Thank you for supporting the children.

We also have students from the Islamic University in Uganda. As you know, it was enacted by an Act of this Parliament and it has grown over time. They have also come to witness our proceedings. We want to welcome you.
  
CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT COMPENSATION TO HABA GROUP OF COMPANIES LTD AND RHINO INVESTMENTS LTD IN THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2009/2010

THE SPEAKER: Last week we completed debate on the report and we agreed to adjourn so that those who had amendments to the recommendations could give them to the Clerk, and they are reproduced and distributed. I think there are only three proposals for amendment. What the clerk has received are three, so we shall take them one by one.

3.10
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE (Mr Tress Buchanayandi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of Government, I beg to request that we postpone this item pending some consultations.

MR EPETAIT: I am actually surprised that my honourable colleague, the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, could come up with such a proposal when Parliament has a lot of business to accomplish and this particular one has already been debated at length. All that we are going to do here is to consider the proposed amendments to the resolutions. I beg that we proceed to finish up with the PAC report rather than leaving when we are just about to reach the doorway. I think we should proceed and finalise this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think that if there are areas that you are uncomfortable with, you let us know; but really, I do not think we should stop this exercise. We agreed last week that we are going to do the recommendations. So, we shall handle them one by one; where you have a problem, you will say so. And please, come and sit here if you are leading Government business.

Recommendation 1, Page 55

MR WADRI: Right Honourable Speaker and honourable colleagues, if you have copies of the report with you, I invite you to go to page 55 where the recommendations start. “In the course of these compensations, the act of hon. Khiddu Makubuya, former Attorney General, tantamount to mismanagement and abuse of office, which Act is unjustifiable, suspicious and unacceptable. Therefore,

    1. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya should take political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in his work.

    2. The appointing authority relieves hon. Khiddu Makubuya of his duties for causing financial loss.

    3. The IGG and CID should further investigate hon. Khiddu Makubuya’s actions and take appropriate action.

THE SPEAKER: You have listened to recommendation No.1.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You are saying that the appointing authority relieves hon. Khiddu Makubuya of his duties for causing financial loss. The moment you cause financial loss, you must make good. So, what I am trying to put here is that hon. Khiddu Makubuya should be personally held liable for the loss. In this instance, he should make good on the loss.
 
THE SPEAKER: Are you not now doing the work of bullet No.4?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, when our committee made the first proposal - and actually it has taken roots the fact that the former Attorney-General has taken political responsibility,  and he made that very clear when he tendered in his resignation from the ministerial position. 

The moment a person takes personal responsibility, that goes a little further. One, if the investigative organ to which we have referred this matter finds them further culpable, won’t they be prosecuted? Two, if such a person also takes personal responsibility, there could be the other aspect of asking them to make good the wrong that has been done and you know that is about refunding the funds. That is the spirit of personal responsibility which we are asking the honourable member to take.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a little bit confused about the legality of that particular recommendation of personal responsibility. Maybe my learned friend across there, the Attorney-General, can assist us on this. 

You know that we are not a court of law. So, for us to order somebody to take personal responsibility may be a little problematic. How is that going to be enforced? Will Government attach property using this resolution? Is that possible in law? 

So, we shall need a little bit of guidance or we have to think through this particular resolution before we decide on it that way. I am really talking as the Attorney-General for the Opposition. I don’t know what my colleague on the Government side thinks.

Otherwise, my view is that we should not have a resolution which might have problems with the law and somebody uses it to quash the report arguing that we went beyond our own powers as Parliament. That is the confusion in my mind.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I would be happier if we left this resolution as it is. We cannot complete the investigations ourselves. And that is why we have a proposal that the IGG and the CID should further investigate before taking appropriate action. If we got to the conclusion, we shall have done the work of the IGG and CID. I think we have done our work and we should stop at that.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have been looking at bullet No.3, on page 56, where the report says that the IGG and CID should further investigate hon. Khiddu’s actions and take appropriate action. But I would like to say that I am aware that just the other week, there was a case in the Constitutional Court involving some of our colleagues who are being prosecuted by the IGG. During the session, the Attorney-General informed court that the IGG’s office is not properly constituted –(Interjections)– of course I find that also difficult to comprehend because the Attorney-General is supposed to be the principal legal advisor to Government, including the appointing authority. In this case, he should have actually advised Government before that the Office of the IGG is not properly constituted. But for him to later on go to court and say that that institution is masquerading, is very unfortunate on the part of the Attorney-General.

So, Madam Speaker, my clarification is, are we referring this matter to an institution that is not properly constituted, according to the Attorney-General’s Chamber? 

But Also, Madam Speaker, you can imagine a situation where two institutions go to court and one denies the other – that is quite shabby. And the people who were claiming that the IGG’s Office is not properly constituted are actually members of Cabinet. So, you can imagine a Cabinet that is supposed to advise the President, going to court and arguing that the IGG office is masquerading; it has no powers. The Attorney-General denied the IGG in court. How can we refer this particular case to an institution that the Attorney-General has rendered useless? I need a clarification from the Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, if you engage in this debate, it means that even the work that has been coming here from the Office of the IGG, who reports to this House, is not valid. Why don’t you leave this matter to be determined by the court? That means that if the IGG writes to me, I should say, “Don’t bring your documents here.” But the IGG reports to this Parliament. Why don’t you wait for the determination of this matter by the court?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, but that is the very concern that we are dealing with now – the IGG knowing it is a legitimate institution, but the Attorney-General has gone to court to say the opposite. The confusion –(Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Shadow Attorney-General. I recall this matter appeared in one of the meetings of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs where you sit. If you visit your records, you will realise that the Attorney-General told your committee that the IGG is fully constituted. So, why can’t we rely on that record other than speculating what court will decide?

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Attorney-General to tell us his position? Okay, Prime Minster first.

3.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESSS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise to make the point that to the best of my knowledge, in a case that was determined by the Supreme Court, on whether the Deputy IGG, in an acting capacity, can perform the duties and roles of the IGG, the answer was in the affirmative; that he could. That is why, up to this moment, Mr Raphael Baku is working as Ag. IGG; it is because that challenge was resolved by court.

So, instead of engaging in speculations, my suggestion would be that this House acts on the assumption that the other institutions of the state are performing their duties properly until we have heard – just a second I will give way – some official and clear position on this matter from court. For instance, a court pronouncing itself on this that the Attorney-General may have appeared - even if it was true - in court and had made a submission, it cannot be a basis for this House to take a position not to deal with this institution until we have a clear pronouncement. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon. Prime Minister. The clarification I am seeking from the Prime Minister is, Why can’t the President be advised to appoint a substantive Inspector General of Government. Why can’t you tell the President that the Deputy, Mr Raphael Baku, is acting in the position of the Inspector General of Government? You sit in Cabinet every day; I guess even yesterday you had a Cabinet meeting. This is the time the country needs a fully constituted IGG because the list of people to appear there seems to be expanding as day follows night. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose as follows. If you really feel that the office is not well constituted, let us also amend this report at the end and say that whereas we have committed this work to the IGG, we urge the Government to constitute the IGG fully. (Applause)  Otherwise, what am I going to do with the IGG’s work; he reports to this office? 

3.26
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): The essence of Government is the question of consistency and predictability. It is so disturbing that while in Parliament we say one thing and in court we say another. I don’t know whether it is for legal or political expediency, but as Parliament we must stay on alert. We cannot just sweep it under the carpet knowing very well Article 119(3), where it says that the Attorney-General shall be the principle legal advisor of Government. With due respect to the Leader of Government Business in the House, ultimately it is the Attorney-General who has the final word and final say. He can be a good lawyer, but certainly, for us we go with the person holding the portfolio of the Attorney-General.

In that respect and regard, this matter needs to be put to rest by seeking and demanding a clear position on this. We are behaving as if we are acting. While inside the House we pretend, but outside there when matters come before court, different statements are issued. I don’t think that is the way a very civilized country like Uganda should behave. Someone must not be telling the truth. 

In view of that, Madam Speaker, before we proceed on this matter, can we have a clear position as regards the IGG. Is his tenure properly constituted or is it lacking? Short of that we cannot sit here to pass a resolution that will lie in futility, and there may be implications on the way we shall proceed with the resolutions. As you see resolutions No.1, 2 and 3 to the concerned persons, the bearing is on the IGG and once we don’t have such a person, a fully constituted office of the IGG, then certainly we are in trouble as a country. The Chair should give guidance and Parliament proceeds with its business. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are inviting this House to take a decision on a matter which is before the Supreme Court. That is what you are asking us to do. It hasn’t been pronounced upon. Attorney-General, can you tell us what you have been doing in the court so that we know what to do. 

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker and colleagues, my view is that you have properly guided the House. This matter is before the Constitutional Court. I am very reluctant to discuss or debate matters which are before court. Beyond what the Prime Minister said in this regard, I have nothing useful to add.  

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to get clarification from the Attorney-General on the point which he has conceded to in the Constitutional Court, and which is not a subject of adjudication by the Constitutional Court; that actually the office of the IGG is not constituted. We did not get a ruling on that point from the Constitutional Court since the Attorney-General has conceded on that point to save the petitioners. 

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the office of the IGG is a very important office that we must not play around with. I am surprised that we have been having an acting IGG for two years and more. What is the problem with the Government? (Laughter)

Secondly, during those difficult times of mine, when I read the Constitution, it talks of an IGG and two deputies, but we have one individual in acting position with all the other positions vacant. Is this office of any importance in future? What is happening?

Madam Speaker, I would like to go with your proposition for the resolution that when we refer the case to the IGG, we should urge Government to advise the President to expeditiously appoint the Inspector General of Government and two deputies. We are 38 million people and there are many retired judges, among others. I don’t think it is a big problem to pick one from that lot. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, at the end we shall move a recommendation to that effect. I put the question that recommendation No.1 be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 2

MR WADRI: On recommendation No.2, the committee recommends that in considering hon. Syda Bbumba’s role in the compensation saga, which involved abuse of office, mismanagement and causing financial loss, hon. Syda Bbumba should take political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in her work; the appointing authority relieves hon. Syda Bbumba of her duties for causing financial loss; the IGG and CID should further investigate hon. Syda Bbumba’s role and take appropriate action. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that recommendation -

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the point I made last time was about personal responsibility and I thought we can’t do that here. 

THE SPEAKER: Then propose a deletion. 

MR KATUNTU: I propose that we delete “personal” because money was lost and money should be recovered, but it can only be recovered in the correct way. If you resolve now for these two colleagues of ours to take personal responsibility, that actually means that you are telling them to refund the money. How enforceable is that? The only institution that can enforce personal responsibility is a court of law and you need to be warned of the dangers of overloading this report or else you give somebody chance to impeach it. I am speaking as a lawyer and I would like anybody learned in this to come and dispute what I am saying. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I am at a loss, because the wording of the first recommendation that affected hon. Makubuya is more less the same as that affecting hon. Syda Bbumba, unless we delete the other first one. If we don’t, then it becomes very difficult. 

THE SPEAKER: We delete both. Let us go back to recommendation one and – but we had discussed the issue of “personal” under hon. Makubuya. Just move that we delete the word “personal” here and we move. 

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a matter of legal interpretation and I think we cannot go beyond that. I absolutely concur with my learned brother, hon. Katuntu, that when you talk about personal responsibility, what you have done is actually to pass judgement and once you pass judgement, you will be questioned in this Parliament, and this Parliament will be questioned as to whether we have the capacity to say that we have exhausted all the avenues for investigation and we have addressed our minds legally to the matter and, therefore, we have come up with a final judgement on the matter. Therefore, I strongly concur with my brother Katuntu that the word “personal” should be deleted if only for the reason that we do not want to get into conflict with legal interpretation. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR WADRI: When we make a recommendation, in no way are we saying that our recommendation is the alpha and omega. Just like the other time, what would have happened if these two ministers had refused to take political responsibility? So, what I am saying is that we have recommended that these two ministers take personal and political responsibility and if in due course they so feel that they cannot take personal responsibility, that is a different factor. But it does not mean that we should have our brains clogged to the extent that we cannot make recommendations, because the other party will fail to take it up. I still strongly feel that the committee –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was an Auditor-General’s report and the report came up with figures. Mr Chairman, I am just seeking clarification from you. Did the Auditor-General’s report say there is no loss? If he said there is a loss, who occasioned the loss? Therefore, if the Auditor -General said there is a loss, these people should be personally liable for the loss. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, if you read the Auditor-General’s report, it is clearly indicated that Uganda as a country lost money and when the Public Accounts Committee swung into action to investigate, it did find that the persons who were mentioned here were responsible for the loss. So, I really find it very difficult at this point to come and say we should leave them go scot-free, because that will mean that we have not helped the Auditor-General in further digging into these investigations, because the evidence there is that money went missing. We lost money and we have further found out that the people who caused this financial loss are known. 

THE SPEAKER: But are you suggesting that the IGG and the CID are now redundant? That we have completed the work and they are redundant?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, in no way are the offices of the IGG and the directorate of CID redundant. We as Parliament and as a committee of Parliament are not competent in carrying out investigations which may lead to actions like prosecution. That is why we are inviting the IGG to come in tougher with the CID. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I just want to inform my learned colleagues that responsibility is either personal - it can be joint or several, or it can be vicarious. So, if by the Public Accounts Committee we let these people out of the bag and we don’t hold them personally liable, then we have to look for other forms of liability. Maybe they are jointly liable, maybe they are vicariously liable, because they were ordered by the powers that be. So, by saying that someone is personally liable would actually depend on the evidence this committee adduced and the circumstances under which they say these individuals caused financial loss to this country. So, if we say that we should not hold them personally liable, then who else can we hold liable? Should we hold them jointly with the President? So, we are saying that they are personally liable for causing financial loss and that one does not amount to pronouncing judgement. A judgement may come to the effect that refund the money or attach his property. So, I really feel the committee should not let this recommendation out of the bag. In any case, it is those who are around who should be pushed hard to the wall. No compromise. 

3.43
MR KISOS CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do concur with hon. Katuntu and also the chairman for what they are suggesting in accordance with the recommendation. Deleting the word “personal” does not deny us the objective of the recommendation because we still maintain the names of these individuals in the same recommendation. By mentioning hon. Syda Bbumba, the name is for an individual and it is also personal. So, you cannot de-link hon. Syda Bbumba from being a person. By deleting ‘personal’, this does not affect anything in any way. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.45
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Madam Speaker and the august House, I think we need to define the extent to which we are supposed to make our recommendations. I believe these recommendations are going to be implemented through other bodies; IGG inclusive. Therefore, excluding the part of handling them personally would be better, because after the work of the IGG and after their investigation, we shall get reports and recommendations, which will be the implementation aspect of our recommendation of the report that we are handling today. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Now honourable members, I just want to draw your attention to the text of the two recommendations. It talks about taking political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in his or her work. It is not relating to financial loss.

3.46
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for having given me this opportunity. Time and again, this Parliament has been reminded by those that sit within it and those that sit outside it that the recommendations of Parliament are only advisory in nature. We must take a decision and make recommendations that this august House feels appropriate.

When you read the report and you synchronise and put into context the recommendations like you have rightly pointed out, there is nowhere the report passes the judgement as hon. Abdu Katuntu says. We are saying that these ministers should be held responsible and we are requesting the relevant authorities to start investigating. Now, to what extent they shall be held liable shall be on those investigative bodies, basing on the evidence that this report shall have passed on to them. So, if we put the recommendation in context of the report, I personally see no objection with the recommendation.

3.48
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, page 2, paragraph two of the report, sentence No.2  says, “The committee was deeply concerned when it received a report from the Auditor General indicating that whereas Government compensated Haba Group with Shs 142.6 billion, an independent assessment of the claim by KPMG had shown that the company owed Government a net of Shs 999 million.” That means a loss. Article 164(2) of the Constitution, which deals with accountability says, “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the existing instruction shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” We are saying that these people concurred and directed the use of public resources contrary to the laid down instructions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you are now amending the recommendations. It says, “Take political and personal responsibility for failing to take due diligence in their work.” That is what the committee wants. Now you are adding something, which is not there. I am reading from the report. No, I think let us leave it as it is and then the other loss will be identified by the IGG and the CID because we have also asked them to do the remaining part of the work. I put the question that recommendation No.2 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Recommendation 3.

MR WADRI: The committee recommends that: One, the President takes note of the violations of the laid down guidelines and procedures by his subordinates and moves to rectify them. Two, the President institutes performance management contract systems for ministers and public officials.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

3.51
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Madam Speaker, we had an amendment moved from the Floor to add a third bullet to recommendation No.3 and I would like to make a slight adjustment to the language where it should read, “The President refrains from making communication that would otherwise be misconstrued as directing public officials who by law enjoy autonomy in their official capacity.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Jimmy Akena is making an amendment to the recommendation. Instead of the Leader of Government Business saying, “I put the question”, I think it is only fair that we, as a Parliament, pronounce ourselves on the amendment he is moving.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, he gave notice of his intention to move this amendment last time when he contributed.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, can we at this point ask hon. Akena to expound on his recommendation so that he can bring the whole Parliament - Did he? Okay, I am sorry.

THE SPEAKER: He made that proposal to amend and stated it and left it with us. But this amendment is harmless because it is saying, “...refrains from making communication that would otherwise be construed as directing.”

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a problem with the whole proposal because when you look at it, it is as if we are tying the hands of the President. We cannot say that “any communication which otherwise may be interpreted…” Who interprets in this case? When you look at the Constitution, Article 99(1), it says: “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President….” So, how is he going to exercise this authority, if he cannot direct? And in this case, who is interpreting? So, I would request that we reject the proposed amendment as presented by hon. Akena.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, if you were here during the reading of the report, His Excellency took issue with the actions of those subordinates, saying they should have rejected his directives. Can you then relate that to this amendment? That is what he told the committee when he met them.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, when I look at it in that way, the President communicates his directives; so the ones he directs are supposed to advise him according to the law. However, we should not stop him from communicating directives. He communicates, but the directed officials of Government should –(Interrupted)

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The President has made it clear that much as he gives directives, the public officer must follow the law. If his directive does not fall within the ambit of the law, it is within the concerned officer’s responsibility to advise the President by saying, “Mr President, your directive would contravene such and such a law.” Or he could say, “It would be better that we handle this situation in such and such a manner.” What the President has said is that public officers should not use his directives as a cover to carry out illegal activities or those that will cause loss to the country. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that he has to read Article 99(1) together with Article 99(4). Article 99(1) says that: “The executive authority of Uganda is vested in the President and shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution and the laws of Uganda.” And clause (4) states that: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the functions conferred on the President by clause (1) of this article may be exercised by the President either directly or through officers sub-ordinate to the President.” And in this case, when the President directed, he was performing his function directly; he is not delegating it to another person. It means he is performing his function.

THE SPEAKER: So, what? (Laughter)

MR OKOT OGONG: We are saying that passing a resolution of Parliament of this nature will undermine the provisions of the Constitution. That is my take on it.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I propose an amendment to this proposal and it should be the reverse. It should read: “Public officials who enjoy autonomy in their official capacity should desist following instructions and directives which are not in accordance with the law.” 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think if we are to go by the Attorney General’s amendment, we shall be running away from the truth; we are hiding our heads in the sand like the proverbial ostrich. We should be very clear. This recommendation touches the operations of the Presidency and if we talk about public officers without making reference to the Presidency, we shall be doing ourselves a disservice. That is the reason we are specifically saying that a lot of things have gone in the name of the President and so, we want to be succinct. We are not talking about the general public, but about the letters coming from the President – whether from the President or his staff. When a letter comes from the President it wields a lot of power – unlike when it comes from the Minister of Agriculture or Local Government. I am not demeaning those ministers, but in the constitutional provision, the Presidency holds a higher status. So, let us be clear on that.

4.01
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way I see this amendment, it touches on the core of the Presidency. I have also listened to the amendment by the Attorney-General. To me, it appears like the Presidency can originate directives which are futile – if you listened very well. Going by his amendment, it means that some directives or indeed all of them, must be weighed to see those which are effective and those which are in vain. 

I cannot envisage the President’s directives being in vain; why should he issue them in the first place. For that matter, I think, right from the Standing Orders, the Constitution and all other laws related to the Public Service and public officials, it is a cardinal rule that they should not do irregular or unlawful undertakings. So, that is well known. I do not understand for what purpose that amendment has been made; it is a redundant amendment which the Attorney General must withdraw. 

In the circumstances, therefore, we either allow ourselves to put this – because the President was even at pains; he conceded on this. It is true that – unless Members do not want to face it, but this should be - by the way we would have made even drastic resolutions on the President but we did not. Now we are saying let us put emphasis on what is known and I am sure the President himself would concede to this. I do not find any problem with the recommendation because it is meant to realign the entire Government – the Presidency within its docket and the public officials within their docket. Moreover, it captures the spirit of this report. Thank you.

4.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am not sure that what is in this formulation was intended by the mover. Because I do not think his intention was to gag the President. When you say: “The President should desist from making communication that would otherwise be interpreted.” First of all, the President makes communication by word of mouth or in writing. So, you are saying, “Do not make written communication or oral communication that would otherwise be interpreted as directing public officials who enjoy autonomy in their official capacity.” 

You are saying, “Do not write or do not speak anything that a public official who enjoys autonomy may interpret as a directive.” Now, what do you mean? The President, by virtue of his office, is the chief executive of the country. All authority lies with the President. Any executive authority that is exercised is by delegation from the President and either this is by way of writing or speaking - giving directives. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us get clarification from the mover. Hon. Akena, please explain your point.

MR AKENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that the Prime Minister was not with us when were debating the actual report. And it is clear from his question that he has not read the Hansard and to know what transpired.  When I brought this amendment, I read a paragraph from one of the letters, and there were several letters from the President, where there were directives to the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance. Now in this particular letter it can easily, without any stretch of the imagination, appear as if the President was directing the Bank of Uganda Governor to pay this money. 

The intention of this amendment is to put the Presidency above some of these goings on, because it is clear, when you look at even the letters by Basajjabalaba, he used the directives of the President to push his agenda. It is clear in all those letters. I do not want to see a situation where the Presidency looks like, or it appears that the Presidency is actually the person directing monies to be paid which are causing financial loss. I will take the information. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you hon. Akena for giving way. Madam Speaker -(Interjections)- first son. Actually, to make matters clear, when we interfaced with hon. Syda Bbumba, the honourable minister, she told us she could not resist the directives. And in our communication with her, and in all our notes we have as PAC, she said she was working under a directive. So, what does the word directive mean? If we know that then we can get the answer. That is the information I want to give. (Hon. Akena rose_)

MR MBABAZI: No, please. I gave way to you not to give way to others. (Laughter)

MR AKENA: Unfortunately, I do not have the exact letter -(Interjections)- this is not the one I quoted. The one for 13th November is the one I quoted and in that one it really looks like the President was acting in a way which could be misconstrued that he is undermining the Constitution and specifically Article 162(2). So, that aspect requesting the Presidency to refrain from issuing communications which can be misconstrued is not trying to undermine the Presidency -(Interjections)- in fact this is the one. 

The letter of 13 November 2010, written to the Attorney-General by His Excellency the President - Let me read the fourth paragraph of that letter verbatim. “By copy of this letter, I am directing the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to liaise with the Governor, Bank of Uganda, with the view of settling all the outstanding claims in respect to the above matter.” And the above matter is, “Compensation for sub-lease and management contract for HABA Group and Government contribution toward the construction of KIU Teaching Hospital, Ishaka.”

So, if the Prime Minister – there is a continuation here, “The above arrangement will expedite the surrender and handover of HABA Group properties to respective stakeholders.” If the Prime Minister would prefer that somebody reading that letter comes out with the impression that it is the President who directed the loss of Shs 142 billion - you may have it your way. But I really feel we should try to insulate the Presidency from some of these scandals as we have taken the decision as Parliament that the ministers concerned take direct responsibility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I recall in response to that argument is that the first Deputy Prime Minister was here and he said that the President is the President. The President does not beg. The President does not request. He directs. So, I think that is what you have to balance; otherwise, he will say, “Please, Attorney-General do this for me?” That is what we have to balance. 

MR AYENA-ODONG: Madam Speaker, I think we are in a dichotomy of a situation here. We must have two positions juxtaposed in order to understand where we want to go. In fact, the more hon. Akena tries to explain the more confused I become. I think it is hereby agreed that the President does nothing, but directs and then it is upon the actors to interpret the directive. So, the issue is, in what context must the President put his letters so that the anonymous actor may actually know that the President meant this and that and that?

It is my view that the actors of the directives of the President sufficiently warn themselves of the dangers inherent in the directive of the President. Otherwise, it is not for the President to desist in the manner he actually issues his directives. I think the burden is cast more on the people who act upon the directives of the President. (Applause)  

So, in my humble view, I think this kind of amendment is redundant -(Applause)- because it is up to the person who is implementing the directive of the President to interpret it. The President will give a directive to all the ministers who are now in their thousands or to the so many Ugandans that he directs. The way I may interpret the same letter that is written by the President to me could be interpreted differently by hon. Amama Mbabazi and especially Gen. Moses Ali. In that case, I think -(Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, first of all, I am glad that the Speaker had mentioned to give me opportunity to come and say what I am thinking. I want to agree with him that this amendment is redundant totally and it is with bad intention, because how do you implement this?

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I think we are wasting time. I want to propose a way forward to go with a proposal of the Deputy Attorney-General because that is really the crux of the matter. That would cure. No, it is not redundant. The civil servants need to be cautious. I think that is crux of this matter. The subordinates must be on notice and to proceed with caution. That is what the Deputy Attorney-General is saying.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I think in that case, what you want to say is precisely what you are saying, urging public servants whenever they receive communication from the President to interpret it properly and act always within the law. 

That is okay, but this one is not saying that. This one is saying something completely - I agree completely with hon. Chris Ayena’s interpretation. Therefore, this - I do not intend to amend. My intention is to oppose this amendment completely. That is why I am standing to oppose this amendment because not only is it redundant, but actually, it causes problems. [Mr Wamanga-Wamai: “Information”] Wait, just a second. I will take information, but just one second. 

Let me make my point; that not only is it redundant, it would actually cause problems in communication between the Head of State and those that he must direct by way of function of performing of his duties. 

So, let me also comment on this. That letter - how could anyone possibly, interpret a directive say to the Attorney-General saying, “Study this case of a claim of compensation by so and so”. The directive is that you do your job as Attorney-General to study the case in accordance with the law. 

Obviously, it is not possible that anyone could possibly interpret that to mean the President is directing you, even to determine that there is a case for compensation. Absolutely, not.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you Rt Hon. Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. Actually, I am in agreement with you and in agreement with the Deputy Attorney-General’s amendment, therefore, opposing hon. Akena’s amendment with the following information.

Actually, we should leave the President to direct the way he wants because the person he is directing has the liberty to act in a way that he or she deems fit.

I would like to quote a letter written to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, on the 4 September 2011, where the President was talking about resource allocation and this is a letter that was circulated to all of us, Members of Parliament.
In this letter, the President was saying that resources of this country must be allocated in the context of population distribution and he went ahead and - I just want to read the last paragraph. He said, “This formula should start next financial year. Remember, I had given this directive many years ago yet it has not been implemented...”  I think let the President continue directing because after all, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister could also have ignored it like he did to the President’s own directive.(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have come to the agreement that the only way the President works is through directives. So, we cannot interfere with his method of issuing directives, but what we need is to address the conduct of those - yes. So, I put the question that the amendment by hon. Akena be approved by the House.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, I put the question that the amendment by the Deputy Attorney-General be approved by this House. I now put the question that recommendation No.3 be approved by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 4

4.22
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker and colleagues, recommendation No.4 runs as follows:

1.	That the Governor, Bank of Uganda, should be held personally responsible for the loss the government incurred.

2.	That the Governor, Bank of Uganda, should be relieved of his duties.

3.	That the Governor, Bank of Uganda, should be further investigated by the IGG and CID for abuse of office and appropriate action be taken. I beg to move.

4.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS(Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise to move a motion that this particular item as the Leader of Government Business indicated last Thursday in the debate, that the committee Cabinet thatsat and looked at all these cases and advised Government, and Government took positions, which we have been clearly shown, for instance in what we have passed, had not been able to interact with the Governor, Bank of Uganda, and -(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to find out which rule the frontbench is using to ask this House to stay debate on the resolutions of a committee of this House because there is another sub-committee. I belong to PAC and I believe that we had all the opportunity - we talked, we interfaced - so, I just wanted to know which rule is being used in this situation. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I moved a motion without notice under rule 46. Madam Speaker, I can see hon. Besisira had anticipated what I wanted to say because I had not said it. 

This is what was said in this House last Thursday by the Leader of Government Business and by hon. Dr Kiyonga when he made his presentation, in fact, in his capacity as Leader of Government Business then. These two officials, the acting Solicitor-General and the Governor Bank of Uganda, were not present; they were out of the country. So, our committee was not able to interact with them. Of course, it is true that PAC received their presentation; that is alright. However, we as an Executive, having received it we wanted, as we have done with the ministers, to interact with them and take a position. I am moving a motion – (Interruption). 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has quoted rule 46. According to what he is saying, I feel it is out of context. Is he, therefore, in order to continue misleading this House, insinuating that this House must make decisions depending on the committees set up by Cabinet? Are we debating Cabinet committees’ resolutions? Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we make resolutions but we direct them to another body to take action. When we received a report of the Public Accounts Committee, at the end of the presentation I asked the Executive to study the recommendations and give us their views. That is how the Third Deputy Prime Minister came in and said, “We have studied your recommendations; we have taken action on Dr Makubuya and we have taken action on hon. Syda Bbumba.” Yes, that is what transpired here. However, they said, “We have not completed receiving from two”. (Applause) That hastened our work because they said, “We have already taken action already on the recommendations you have given us.” 

When we were concluding the report, hon. Dr Kiyonga came to this Floor and said, “We have dealt with two of the people. We still have two and we are coming back to report to this House.” He said this on the Floor of this House. (Applause) Some of you were not here but we were here.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, you have given a very good recollection of what transpired when the Third Deputy Prime Minister gave an explanation on behalf of Government, which was further augmented by the presentation of the chairperson of the select Cabinet committee which studied the Public Accounts Committee report. However, of concern to me is the pace at which we are working. That time the explanation given to us was that the Governor Bank of Uganda was out of the country. I am reliably informed that the Governor Bank of Uganda flew from Nairobi on Thursday night last week. He is in the country. 

They had Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday and today, Tuesday. So really, the public is very anxious. It does not mean that during the weekend the state goes to sleep. The state never sleeps; the state is always awake. The state never blinks an eye even for a moment. 

The point I am trying to make is that when we came out with these recommendations and this report, we acknowledged that three people acted in unison, in collaboration with one another. Now the two have seen themselves take political responsibility. Really, in the eyes of the public, people may begin to think that Parliament is selectively picking people. We need to improve our image because that is a general feeling. These three did their thing together, they wrote letters to one another and they received what they call directives from the same source. If the other two have been found to have erred and indeed quit the scene, how about the third person? So really, my advice and observation is that we need to be ourselves; otherwise, we shall lose face when we get out of here. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I can see anticipation and debate of the motion, but I just wanted to conclude my motion then we can debate it. My motion was to seek leave of Parliament to give the Executive a few more days so that we can do for the Governor, the acting Solicitor-General and for Justice Kainamura, the former acting Solicitor-General, what we did for the ministers. So that even on our part as an Executive when we take a position, we take it having given them the right to be heard. It is only a few days. 

Nobody should assume that by giving them the right to be heard, this Government will exonerate them or do anything like that. We are simply asking for a simple thing - only a few days if we can meet. The chairman of our committee, Dr Kiyonga, left for London for an international summit on Somalia. The President is going to London to attend this summit. This summit will occur for only one day and they will come back. So, we simply ask this august House, please give the Executive a few days. When they come back, this committee will interact with them and we will give you our response as we did in the case of the ministers.
I beg to move.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I have very attentively listened to hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi, the Prime Minister. [Hon. Member: “John Patrick.”] Yes, I recall the others but we shall use them when we are outside - career sausages, whatever – (Laughter) - we shall call from outside, not here now. 

Apparently, the Prime Minister is trying to hitch himself onto the principle of the right to be heard. We, as a committee, heard these people and since there is a select committee of Cabinet that also wants to interest itself in making sure that they give these people an opportunity to be heard, we will have no objection. However, we want to be very succinct; how many days do you need? I do not want to leave it vague. I propose, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, through the Speaker, that we give this Cabinet sub-committee three days, that is, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. 

Madam Speaker, I am being very generous because if I had gone back to my committee and asked them, they would say that I am too generous to give three days. So really, three days are enough – (Interjections) – They are more than enough. So, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, we expect the Cabinet subcommittee to come up with the report so that next week we receive their feedback as a matter of urgency. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my good friend, John Patrick Kassiano Wadri, for that generosity. I am sure that we will use the time he has mentioned to interact with those officials and we will be back next week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we stand over this matter until Tuesday and no further extension on that one. 

Recommendation No.5

MR WADRI: The committee recommends that:
1. Government recovers from Haba Group all monies paid including applicable taxes in excess of what was determined by the Auditor-General.

2. Haba Group should be investigated for uttering forged documents.
 
I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that recommendation No.5 be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No.6

MR WADRI: The committee recommends that the then Town Clerk, Mr Ssegane, who entered in and extended the various contracts without following the laid down procedures, should be held liable for abuse of office and causing financial loss. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are talking about people; why should the Cabinet subcommittee meet with some people and leave out others? They are going to meet some staff, why don’t they meet the former Town Clerk as well? If you have decided to meet the officers who are concerned, then meet all of them. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, this is a problem of interpretation. Madam Speaker, I made reference to the former acting Solicitor-General and the current one who are in recommendation No.7. We had not seen No.6. Mr Ssegane clearly fits in that category and I, therefore, request that we handle all of them during this period. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, on that same recommendation No.6, we have our report of the Local Government Accounts Committee which clearly indicates that Engineer Byandala was also involved in this transaction – (Interruptions)

MR BYANDALA: Allow me to inform this man, hon. Nandala-Mafabi – (Interjections) – Is he a woman? I said honourable. Okay, let me inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the selling – (Interjections) – no, I am also on a point of order. Let me inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the selling of these markets occurred when I had left Kampala City Council. By the time I was there, Hajji Basajjabalaba was just renting these markets. This report is totally on selling of these markets. So, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to include me in this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not have that report so I cannot rule on that situation.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your wise ruling. I am very certain that hon. Bbumba and hon. Makubuya have fallen prey because of hon. Byandala’s mistakes. I can testify to this because the report was put forward and it was adopted by this House that hon. Byandala be held responsible and refund – (Interjections) – listen.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, if you want us to take action then you must bring it back formerly not by smuggling. 

Recommendation No.7

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, allow me to read recommendation No.7 for the purpose of the record because I believe it goes under the principle that the Cabinet subcommittee will have an opportunity to meet the officials concerned. 

The committee recommends that the former acting Solicitor-General, Justice Kainamura, and the current acting Solicitor-General, Madam Harriet Lwabi, be investigated by the IGG and the CID for the role they played in handling the compensation claim”. As I said, this was just for record purposes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want to say that at the close of the debate, there was a proposal to delete recommendation No.7 and the chair actually had accepted that the part concerning these civil servants be deleted. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, your recollection is quite right. The last time we were here on Thursday, a legal opinion was given on the matter and I did concede – (Interjections) – You may ask why, and when I am given an opportunity I will be able to explain. 

MR MBABAZI: As the government side did last week, I want to confirm that the Executive concedes. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation No.7 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No.8

MR WADRI: Recommendation No. 8: “The appointing authority should expeditiously appoint a substantive Solicitor-General.”

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation No. 8 be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 9

MR WADRI: The committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Chambers be restructured and streamlined.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I think the way we are proceeding is also questionable. The statement we have just deleted talks about the technical people and among the technical people is the Governor of Bank of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: No, no please. Hon. Kasule Sebunya –

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: In principle, if you are deleting technical people –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasule Sebunya, do you have the report? (Laughter)

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I rest my case. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, unfortunately I was not here when the committee had reached that position which reads, “The committee recommends that the former Ag Solicitor-General, Mr Kainamura, and the current Ag Solicitor-General, Ms Lwabi Harriet, be investigated by the IGG and CID for the role they played in handling the compensation claim.” This was deleted. What is wrong with CID and the IGG investigating someone and then they come and say, “You have no case to answer”? I do not see anything wrong with that. The chairman of the Public Accounts Committee should explain to us why he conceded that that one should be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you were not here to make your case last week, we are not re-opening the issue. We had a debate on this matter and took a decision.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Much obliged.

Recommendation No. 10

MR WADRI: The committee recommends that a Government Compensations Act, a law that shall stipulate priority schedule of government compensations and emergency cases inter alia, be enacted. I beg to move.

MR EKANYA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg the chairperson to accept this. I would like to move an amendment to the committee recommendation that Government suspends all compensation until this Act is in place. This is because as we speak now, there are people who are getting irregular compensation, and it is in the interim report of the Auditor-General. It does not help for us to pass a recommendation while some people are going behind the back acting contrary – 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just information. We, the Acholi war debt claimants, have been waiting for 26 years for our compensation and so any delay for even one day would attract a very unnecessary response from down there. So, what is due to us should be given to us other than suspending all compensation just because one dirty frog fell into the water. It is not going to work that way.    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that would really be an illegal recommendation. Supposing people have their court judgements ready and you are saying that everybody should not receive their compensation. I think it is blanket.

MR NIWAGABA: I wanted to clarify that that was my proposed amendment and it is targeting only those compensations that are handled exclusively in the Office of the Attorney-General, State House and Ministry of Finance but not court awards. We can be very clear and exclude court awards. We can only deal with these ones handled privately and clandestinely and we only come to learn about them when the Auditor-General has made a report – it is only post-mortem and they are the ones we are targeting. 

Let us first have a law because most of those compensations cannot be justified in law. You will find that they are either timed barred or fictitious and they will be abused. So, that is why if Government is interested in ensuring that people are compensated outside the Government Proceedings Act, - outside the normal court awards - let them bring a law so that we know how these compensations come up and how they are made and paid. 

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to say that as a committee, we have requested the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to avail us the list of compensations that they have made and those that they intend to make so that we make an opinion on those compensations. 

I would like to agree with hon. Odonga-Otto that this would be unfair for some people who have outstanding money, for example people from the North and the Banyankole Kweterana Society and other unions that lost their properties. They should not be denied being paid because Government has not come up with a law. We would rather ask Government to expedite bringing this law but in the meantime, those that are dully entitled should be paid. At the same time, as a committee we are going ahead to examine these compensations and we shall also come to Parliament on the matter.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Given what the chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has submitted, and further that Government accepts this recommendation, may we have some timeframe within which they could be able to bring this particular Bill for debate.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I think from the debate of last week, my learned brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu, has really been spot-on and I think he is making a good point. However, the passage of laws is known; it does not take a very short time nor can you give a precise time. So, I think that if we are given about six months – (Interjections) - Yes, it is not easy! It is quite involving and we should be able to be ready with the Bill for presentation to Parliament.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Prime Minister’s clarification should come on the backdrop that there is a standing amendment that they want to stop all compensations pending the Bill that is coming before Parliament. Now, if you get up to say in six months, I am worried because these sharks in State House – I repeat it for emphasis - these sharks in State House will almost complete all the deals that require such kinds of compensation that by the time the law comes before Parliament, they would have finished everything. (Laughter)

What I would suggest is that if the Prime Minister is insisting that within six months they can bring a Bill, then this Parliament should stand firm and stop all such compensations, and I do not mean court awards like to the Acholi war debt claimants. We should stop these deals in State House where people keep loitering around there and pay themselves for this period of six months as we wait for the law. If we give them six months, after that period the law will never catch anyone. I beg to move.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to bring to the attention of this House the fact that there are some few people in Lango who are moving around, purportedly on behalf of the people from Lango Sub Region, claiming for compensation for animals that were raided by the Karimojong. I want to inform my brother that the people of Lango would want to claim what they lost formerly. 

We have already been advised by the President that Government is willing to compensate the people of Lango. However, like I said, we have been informed that there are few people who are already in the office of the Attorney-General to get that money. Actually, we have also been told that they have even opened up accounts in banks, and those people are in State House. We have been told that Shs 10 billion was given. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support the amendments as moved by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba. If for six months we are not going to have anything solid that governs the manner in which these ex-gracia compensations are handled – We have already seen an example as was brought out by the PAC report. I happen to be a member of COSASE and I can report that within the next couple of weeks, we will be tabling three or four reports with similar weaknesses regarding the Office of the Attorney-General. A fake court case is put in place, someone goes behind to have the matter settled out of court with the Attorney-General’s Chambers and billions of shillings are doled out in claims. This is a loss to Ugandans. 

As members have said, we can only make a post-mortem and cry for spoilt milk after they have completed their transactions. If we can quantify the billions that we have lost within the last six months, and that is just a fraction of what we have managed to expose, imagine what is going to happen within the next six months especially after you have told them that there is a law coming into place. I want to think that the speed at which some of these people are going to move is going to be extremely surprising to human nature.

In that regard, I would like to beg this august House that we move to support the amendments as moved by hon. Geoffrey Ekanya and later amended by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, except for court orders. These settlements that are made out of court – hon. Okot-Ogong talked about Lango people who lost property during the insurgency. In Tororo, we were victims of the Lakwena insurgency and for the last 15 years, people have been signing documents and receiving this money without the real victims knowing. Lakwena passed via Tororo and overran Rubongi Army Barracks. Everybody knows that we lost a lot of assets - animals and farmland. For how long are we going to continue settling the same issue again and again?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we cannot include a caveat in which we can say that we stop all those except if verified by the Auditor-General. There should be something like that because this thing is too much of a blanket rule.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is that we need to qualify our issues on compensation. Some of the compensations that our people are asking for are so dear to their lives. Let me give you two examples. One, we have people who have been maimed because of the insurgency. There are people without limbs as a result of landmines and they are just within the community without being attended to. For how long shall we make such people wait when they actually now lack a livelihood? (Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for giving me way to inform the discussion. When we talk about people like those from the Acholi Sub Region, we are not only talking about people who got hurt by rebels from either the Lakwena and other groups; the compensation sometimes comes about as a result of what Government agents did to the people in that sub region. For example, all the animals were stolen by Government agencies and not by Lakwena. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, please give us some advice. Let us hear from the one who pays, first.

MR FREDDIE RUHINDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to follow on what hon. Todwong has said. There are peculiar cases that need urgent attention, like the type he has mentioned. By the way, these other matters that have disappointed us notwithstanding, it does not mean that we do not have basic guidelines. 

In the case of ex-gracia, for example, which hon. Sanjay Tanna is talking about, let me give you just a brief about some of the guidelines we follow: The discretion is limited to a situation where the claimant has a good cause against the State but is barred by technical, legal impediments to enforce the cause through the courts. Typically, the most common examples are such as those where a claimant is barred by statutes of limitation because of passage of time or is barred by legislation after abrupt changes in Government disclaiming liability related to such changes.

There are other situations where an otherwise would be successful claimant against the State is not able to do so because of legal or technical reasons and may appeal to the State to give him some relief. In such deserving cases and purely for moral reasons, the State, not so much that it is obliged to pay but because it feels that it is morally just to do so, does make ex-gracia payments. However, in such situations, usually four conditions must exist before the Attorney-General, on behalf of the State, exercises such discretion in favour of claimant against the State. These conditions include:

1. 	The claimant must have a good cause against the State;
2. 	There must be a technical legal impediment, which bars them from enforcing that cause through the courts of law;
3. 	The circumstances that led on the legal bar are such that the claimant cannot be blamed for it; and 
4. 	The Attorney-General exercising his discretion properly feels that it would otherwise be grossly unfair and morally unjust to deny the claimant the relief sought only because the State would in any case, for technical legal reasons, be victorious before the courts. 

We have even gone further, and this was at the insistence of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. They insisted that how do you compensate a person who has just come in and leave a person who had a claim four or five years ago- first in first serve, except on exceptional grounds, say of sickness and otherwise. 

Our office apologises for those very disappointing cases. The guidelines are in place and we shall put them together and bring legislation. Let us not prejudice those very deserving cases that we have at hand to compensate. So, Madam Speaker, I pray for the six months, as prayed by the Prime Minister, and I am sure we shall be here in the House with the Bill. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Committee on Government Assurances to take that assurance? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we have had a problem with government taking long with the laws. You remember that it took us over six years before we could see a Bill on anti-money laundering despite the Executive committing itself about having an anti-money laundering law. 

Even with this one, because the Office of the Attorney-General is the biggest beneficiary, it will take more than six months. I would propose that if we are to give them time – these laws do exist; there used to be one in the early 60s and 80s - we should give them two months. The monies we are talking about are in big amounts, and we have even not touched the awards. We are touching the compensations, which are going through the Attorney-General’s Chambers, State House and Ministry of Finance. Surely, in two months he should be able to produce the law. 

MR EKANYA: I just want to remind the Leader of the Opposition, who was the chairperson PAC, that every financial year even before we pass the budget, during the vote on account, if you scrutinise it, the Ministry of Finance and the Attorney-General’s Chambers’ first line of payment is always compensations, which are queried by the Auditor-General. For the last 13 years I have been in Parliament, during the vote on account, they bring those items. That is why we are saying today that such compensations that cannot be verified by the Auditor-General and are not by a directive of court be suspended until we have a law in place. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in fact, compensations are supposed to be budgeted for. If they are not yet in the budget, there is no reason for us to hurry with them. The best thing for us to do is to have a law in place. It is only the approved court awards, which are supposed to be paid and in the budget. If we allow Government six months, they are going to now bring wrong compensations and they will clear them in six months. They are waiting for the budget to be approved in June and they will start paying people. We would rather do it now so that by the time we go to the budget process, the budget is read when we have the law in place. Otherwise, we are going to lose a lot of money.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you also punishing this old man from Amudat whom the President was talking about whose compensation has never seen the light of day? Are you also telling him to wait another six months? 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, if we are to go on that path, there are very many deserving cases. When we were examining these matters that we are now concluding on, there was even a very sad case from western Uganda where a lady lost all her four limbs and she was to be compensated some amount of money. This lady is lying helplessly somewhere in one of the districts in western Uganda unattended to and yet those who later came with their fictitious amounts for compensation were compensated. 

There was also the former minister, Okumu Ringa, who supplied government with Peugeots when he was the sole agent in Afro Motors. He moved to courts of law and was awarded compensation by courts of law but nothing has happened. The man is now reduced to a pauper. He sold every property of his, including the one in Kololo – (Interjection) - Yes, Kabojja was sold. Everything of his went and yet here is a situation where he was duly awarded compensation by courts of law but he does not have somebody to keep pushing the papers. If it were first come first served, how come his compensation, which was awarded by courts, has not been effected? 

Somehow we see that there are cases where people have got their godfathers - for them to be paid there must be somebody who moves with the papers. I think that is not good for us as a country. We must have a system where once a claim is lodged, it follows a normal course. It should just be effected whether there is somebody following it from day to day or not. There must be a system. As of now, there are very many people without godfathers who are suffering out there. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the government in view of these tragic situations that we have. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Colleagues, I think members are making good points. I would urge you not to take a decision, well meant, which may in itself cause further suffering to other people. Most people that are entitled to compensation are people who have suffered and are in need of this compensation. Therefore, to suggest that we suspend compensations because we fear that there are some criminal actions going on, may be trying to solve a problem but creating another. 

Instead of suspending, I want to undertake that instead of six months, although we are going into a budgeting period now, we could reduce this period to three - (Interjection) - I was getting advice from the Attorney-General. The shadow Attorney-General says three months; I do not know the experience he has in drafting. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt. hon. Prime Minister for yielding the Floor. My first job when I left law school was in the Attorney-General’s Chambers and I was in the department of First Parliamentary Counsel, where I worked for two years. During that time I was in charge of drafting bylaws and statutory instruments. So, this thing about drafting is – but that is not most important. 

I will just seek clarification from the learned Prime Minister. Is this law going to apply retrospectively to older claims, which are pending, or it will be applied from the date it comes into effect to cover new claims? If it is not going to apply retrospectively, then mixing the two does not make any sense. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would be so much obliged to follow this up. Actually, we have a team that extracts such commitments made by ministers. For avoidance of doubt, we have four in every plenary sitting, and this would form part of a publication. So, whether you say two or three months, we shall catch up with you; it is just a matter of time. 

That is not why I got up. I am imploring the Prime Minister that if we are to wait for the Bill to come before Parliament in two or three months, and to buy from what the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs said earlier, could it be possible within a month to have a list of all pending claims presented to all Members of Parliament so that we can formally debate it in Parliament? I say this so that we do not go and sleep and wait for the law while these people sort themselves out. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As my colleague definitely knows, in the committee we asked the Minister of Justice to submit to us the list of all pending compensations and court awards and human rights tribunal awards. The concern of Parliament now was expressed in our committee. In the report that we made, we made an undertaking to make a report on our findings in that regard. So, we are doing it and we even reported in our committee. For purposes of information, this can be given to members. So, I want to confirm that the concerns of members were expressed in the committee and work is being done in the committee to have this matter addressed by Parliament. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The information from my learned brother, Abdu Katuntu, is good but as you know, drafting statutory instruments and drafting substantive laws are a bit different. (Laughter) But since he has had that experience, limited as it is, I would like to undertake that we accept the proposal by the shadow Attorney-General that this could be done in three months. So, we will do everything possible to present a Bill within that period. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: So, that becomes a government assurance.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The list, I think you heard from the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us finish with the report. We are on recommendation No. 10. Are you withdrawing?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the fact that Government has committed itself that within three months the law will be in place, and that they are going to table the list of all pending claims within the next two weeks, I wish to withdraw the amendment to the committee report that compensation be suspended until the law is in place.

MS RUSOKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is on the recently discovered cases agreed upon and sanctioned by the minister in charge of Luwero-Rwenzori. Specifically, there is a special worrying case of the families of the victims of Kichwamba who were burnt. Some were maimed and are on the streets yelling and others went mad because of that shock. This problem rolls over because these students were not from only Kabarole District; some are from here in Buganda and others are from Gulu, name it. So, I see the two weeks as too short a time for us to inform other districts to send the lists so that we scrutinise and evaluate and forward the right list. To add on to that, each new day, new people get to know of this. It wasn’t published, you go to a rally and people start showing you the orphans of the people who suffered in the same case. So, I wish you give us a grace period of maybe three months to submit. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I cannot give you the grace period because it is not my docket. You have heard the outstanding claims. What do you say about the new claims?

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want it on record that in Kanungu, Kibimbiri Parish, we have people who were disorganised by elephants. A family was eaten by elephants and when this compensation comes, those people should also be helped. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House approves recommendation No 10. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 11

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this august House urges Government to constitute the Office of the IGG owing to the importance that it holds. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you probably add the word “expeditiously”? 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this august House urges Government to constitute the Office of the IGG owing to the important role that it plays and that this should be expeditiously handled within one month. I beg to move.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose an amendment to the proposed recommendation so that it should read, “Government should fully constitute…” This is because the Office of the IGG is constituted and is running. So, we should say, “fully constitute”. Thank you. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I submit that we probably talk about imploring Government to fill the vacant positions in having the inspectorate fully constituted. By talking of filling the vacant positions, we avoid the danger of getting into the area of giving someone an automatic defence that the inspectorate was not constituted at the time of that recommendation. It is just a matter of wording anyway - Parliament implores Government to fill the vacant positions under Article 223 within one month - (Interjections) - The Prime Minister is asking what I am saying. I am saying that I move an amendment that Government fills the vacant positions in the Inspectorate of Government under Article 223 and for avoidance of doubt, within a period of one month. I beg to move.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I fully understand the concern of members about the importance of this Office of Inspectorate of Government and the need to have it fully instituted and I support that idea. However, what I would like to urge colleagues not to do is to keep giving directives on matters like this - you must do it by this time and so on. First of all, it is not a good idea. 

When we were talking about the Bill, you asked, “How long do you think it could take you to produce a Bill?” We consulted and agreed on some time. But for you to say, “let us pass a resolution that you must do this”, please, you are going a little too far. I think we are better off leaving the recommendation open. I do believe that the appointing authority, the government, the Executive, is really fully conscious of the need for having a fully constituted office of the Inspectorate of Government. Government will try their best, expeditiously, to do the needful to make this office fully constituted.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, hon. Amama Mbabazi, for accepting to give me clarification. A government that is conscious of the need of the office of the IGG would, in the first place, have fully constituted it long time ago because there was no barrier. Here we are, after three years, the hon. Prime Minister is not giving an explanation as to why this office has not been fully constituted and he is giving a promise, I do not know based on what foundation, that Government is conscious and they will fully constitute this office.

Well, not to prolong the argument, how do you look at it, hon. Prime Minister, if as Parliament we desisted from making recommendations that touch on the office of the IGG until you organise yourselves as Government and constitute the office? How do you look at that? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, you see that is why I am saying that Government is fully aware of the need to fully constitute the office because the office is operational even now. There is an IGG and the office has many staff, and it has been doing a lot of great work, there is no doubt about it. However, what we are saying is that we know as much as you do that we need an IGG and two deputy IGGs and so on. So, we are saying this should be done. 

I am not the appointing authority but I think it is not always easy for the appointing authority to find the right people to hold the right positions especially in light of what this Parliament has been doing about appointments. Therefore, I think the President with the appointing authority has been scanning the entire- I hope that you will find the right people to appoint to these positions soonest, and I am sure that the President is as conscious as you and I are of the need to have this expeditiously done. Thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Amama Mbabazi. Much as there is sense in what you are saying, that you are aware of the fact that the Office of the IGG is not well constituted, the fear on our part is the fact that if through legal processes the chief government legal advisor is already undermining the existence of that office and therefore rendering it impotent, then it means that all this work that we are doing will actually be rendered useless. So, that is the more reason why we are trying to insist that we need to have a timeframe.

Not only that, if that office had been a civil service institution, certainly we would have more questions to ask as to why you leave a person in an acting position for three years and you cannot even come back to say whether he is suitable for this post or not, or that you relieve him of his duties. So, really there is something wrong. 

I think Government needs to be a little more serious. If we are just going to leave this recommendation open, and for three years we have not had a substantive IGG, Government could as well go home and sleep and we will be here up to next time. All these recommendations that we are making imploring the Office of the IGG and CID to investigate officials will then be rendered null and void.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we need to debate this too long. This was the compromised position to allow us to pass our recommendation. We are asking the IGG to do some of this work and then we said, at the end, we want the government to expeditiously handle the issue of the appointment. That was the compromise.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we always say if something is not being done, there is someone who wants to benefit from it. The office of the IGG deals with corruption related matters and it looks like the Executive is not interested because they know they will be investigated very fast. I think that is not right. If you really feel that you are not supposed to, why have you failed to appoint a substantive Inspector General of Government for three years?

You see, the law is very clear that there will be an Inspector General of Government and deputies. If somebody does not honour this Constitution, it looks as if he has thrown it down. We are saying the Executive do not want to honour the Constitution; if you do not honour the Constitution, you have now abused the authority entrusted to you. We are saying maybe we give you time as you may not have thought about the fact that it is dangerous. In fact, the people who took IGG to court are members of the Executive, saying that this is not fully constituted and yet they are the ones who should have advised the President or who would have appointed the Inspector General of Government.

I want to ask you, hon. Amama Mbabazi, my brother from the mountains of the sun, if you are not among them why don’t you agree even for one month and say we appoint the IGG? But if you are also among those who want to extend, then you will put it in our minds that you want to benefit in the lacuna. So, we are requesting you, whom we believe is very active- (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the achievements of the NRM to which the Leader of the Government Business ought to be proud of is the institution of the IGG. It is one of the cornerstones of the achievements of the NRM. Therefore, it should be taken with a lot of enthusiasm because once we run it down, we risk the very reasons we set it up. 

I was looking at the Office of the IGG; it is very broad, although emphasis now is about investigation and prosecution. If we were to make use of it, it is very broad and wonderful. Article 225(1) spells out the functions, and i will read some: 
(a) 	To promote and foster strict adherence 	to the rule of law and principles of 	natural justice in administration; 

(b) 	to eliminate and foster the elimination of corruption, abuse of authority and of public office; 

(c) to promote fair, efficient and good governance in public offices...” These are some of the functions, among others. Really, do we need to be told that this office is critical in governance at this point in time? 

It is only by consensus that we agree as Parliament. It is true there could have been oversight here and there, but we need this office. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, between you and I, I would urge you to tell this House when you envisage this important office to be fully constituted so that it even gives you clout and a way to govern this country in a free and fair manner. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think it is in issue that the IGG’s office should be fully constituted. What we are arguing about is the time. I think there is no one saying it should not be fully constituted; what we have not agreed on is the timeframe. That is all. Please, let us conclude; we have other work to do.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I agree with all the reasons you have given. As for my dear brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I will have time outside Parliament to teach him one or two things - [Hon. Nandala-Mafabi: “I am circumcised.”] - (Laughter) - but we are in agreement. All I was saying is that this Parliament will have adequately expressed its concern if we say, in the resolution, that the appointments should be done expeditiously rather than giving specific time. We will concede to that, Madam Speaker.


THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the resolution. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I invite my colleagues to turn to page 65, which provides for the loan recommendation. The committee recommends that the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya, be liable for causing financial loss by unilaterally approving additional compensation of Shs 8.1 billion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I propose two additional recommendations. The report has identified people but in the process of the investigation, more people can be identified. If we have asked the IGG and CID to do this, we would be limiting ourselves by saying that these are the only people to be brought to book. From what hon. Kiyonga put across, he said, “There are people mentioned and those not mentioned.” I propose that we add a recommendation from that saying, “The IGG and the CID carry out investigation and bring to book any person mentioned or not mentioned in the report.” 

THE SPEAKER: But that is what hon. Kiyonga said regarding those mentioned and those not mentioned. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think we should be serious with some of the recommendations I am going to propose. The PAC report is very clear in paragraph 151, page 53. It says, “In view of the above findings, the committee observed that the President played an evident role in the compensation process.” 

We are killing flies while leaving the big animal. It would be wrong for us not to bring the President into this matter where he played a role in the compensation process. (Interjections) I agree, you can say, “Aye” and I repeat, you can say it 150 times, but unless we clean it up, we shall not have it done well. The amendment I wish to include is, “The President should also take political responsibility in this compensation process.”

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The President played a role in responding to two things. Kampala City Council, under the leadership of the Opposition, sold markets in Kampala to individuals at the expense of the many Ugandans that were using these markets. The President played an evident role in reversing this action. The President subsequently, because of actions of Government, directed the relevant offices to take action. Now, the President was performing his duty as he must do as the leader of this country; he acted responsibly and this House should commend him for his actions. (Applause) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I was chairperson of the Local Government Accounts Committee and I wrote 50 reports regarding all local governments and especially KCC. I want to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business because errors that are committed by technical people in Government departments, like in this case the Office of the Prime Minister - the Permanent Secretary and the directors - are committed by the Prime Minister. In this case, if you read the reports that were adopted by this House, whereas Mr Ssebana was the mayor, the errors were committed by the town clerk who was appointed by the Executive and the engineer, my good friend, hon. Byandala. 

The markets were not even sold; they were just given a lease. It is the same President Museveni who said, “let the markets be given to the vendors” without having had the first contract which was given to Haba cancelled. This created a big contradiction. So, I want to clarify from you, in that case who acted in omission, was it the mayor or the technical people, one of whom you have now appointed the Minister of Works?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The clarification I would like to get from the Prime Minister is that when we met the President on 21st December, he was equally embarrassed by some of the letters which had been written by his assistants. He actually handed over to us two people, a one Charles Muhoozi and a one Joyce Kabatsi. The President was touched and he said, “Go and appear before the Public Accounts Committee. You did not advise me. Look at these letters.” One of the letters which he had signed was to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. So, you can see that some of these people in his office caused him an embarrassment. The clarification I wanted to seek was whether you got that information.

THE SPEAKER: So, what is the point now?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: From all this, obviously, this House must clearly come out to commend the President- (interjections) - He is the first President in the history of this country that has subjected himself to appearing before a public accounts committee. This is the strength of the commitment of this Government to accountability, accountability for work and for public resources- (interjections)- I had given someone some benefit of doubt because I had heard a rumour that he was training as a lawyer but - (Hon. Katuntu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude this matter. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, we totally oppose that amendment. In fact, if there is to be an amendment, it should be the opposite, that is, for this House to pronounce itself on the good efforts the President has made in doing his work and in trying his best to bring to book those who may have acted in- (Interjections) - So, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the amendment as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, for purposes of the record, I want to register my appreciation and that of my committee to the entire Parliament for the manner in which it received and debated the report of the Public Accounts Committee. It is my sincere hope that the recommendations which have been made thereto will be implemented by the relevant agencies that are deemed responsible for effecting the recommendations that we have made. I thank you very much, honourable colleagues. (Applause)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE  COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENT OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

5.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, this matter is coming up for consideration and adoption. We move that you call for debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented and when we called for debate, you said you wanted more time. So, the Floor is open.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rules are nearly the backbone of the House in the way we conduct business. By the look of things, it is like we have used a lot of energy on the business that has just been concluded. I beg for your indulgence that we postpone the treatment of this report to tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. This item was supposed to be the first item on the agenda on 7th February but I received a request that I postpone it to last week, which I did. I received a request that I postpone it to today. Honourable members, we want these rules. Debate is open. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I had stood to support hon. Kyanjo. (Laughter) With the enthusiasm we have, to really do due diligence to this report, I would think that we do it as the first thing tomorrow. I ask to move.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, the Floor is open.

5.53
MR SAM AMOOTI OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Madam Speaker, I said this last week and maybe I want to repeat it; you allowed general statements to be made by members about the report of the committee and that the details of the proposed amendments of the rules, which would really be the crux of the matter, is the thing that we can handle going forward but when we shall have allowed a general debate. I remember very well that hon. Alaso kicked off that debate and I would have wished to follow the same line, Madam Speaker, with your permission.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I have said the Floor is open for general debate. 

MR OTADA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank you and I want to thank the committee for a report, which I believe is a good report. I also want to say that I am one of those who appeared before that committee and proposed certain amendments which are part and parcel of that report.

As we proceed to discuss this report, I would like to invite the House to be cognisant of two scenarios. Scenario No. 1 is the provisions in this Constitution. I would like to say that we have Article 1 of the Constitution, which you are all familiar with. We have Article 21 of the Constitution, which basically talks about equality before the law - equality for every citizen of Uganda and freedom from discrimination. In fact, let me cite 21(1); it says, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life...” 

I also want members as they debate to be cognisant of Article 29, which talks about protection of freedom of conscience, expression, movement, religion, assembly and association. I want Members of Parliament also to be cognisant of Article 72(4) of the Constitution as we debate this report and I would like to read it: “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party.”

Now, for avoidance of doubt, there have been people who have been making wrong assertions almost to propose that there are only two sides of the House - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MR OTADA: Thank you and most obliged, Madam Speaker. I am making a very pertinent point and I want Members of Parliament to at least do the simplest, that is, listening in. 

There are also court precedents that are out there. I want to remind you that our Deputy Speaker, Jacob Oulanyah, went to the Constitutional Court in the case Jacob Oulanyah v. the Attorney-General whom I believe is my good friend here, hon. Freddie Ruhindi listening and looking at me. There is also the case of George Owori v. William Oketcho & Attorney-General, which is a source of law and caused a court precedent. There is also the case of Prof Anyang Nyong v. 10 others in the Republic of Kenya. There are many others. There is the Indian Court ruling, the Malawian and Zambian court rulings, and these are all members who practice Commonwealth Parliamentary practices. 

In these rulings they have stated it clearly that at all times, there is a shade of opinion called the independent Members of Parliament who exist in real life as long as they are elected. The only way you can do away with them is to fight them in their constituencies so that they do not emerge. The minute they have emerged and arrived in this Parliament, they must enjoy all these provisions of the Constitution that I have quoted. 

You must be cognisant of the court precedents that I have sighted. Therefore, as we debate, know it at all times, honourable members, that the shades of opinion who are independent Members of Parliament under Article 72(4) are a people who should be treated in the spirit of Article 21 of the Constitution.

6.00
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I have three issues that I want to bring to the attention of members before we consider the Bill. One, I want to start from where hon. Otada Owor ended. Your predecessor, hon. Edward Ssekandi, in the last Parliament gave a ruling on the status of Independents in this Parliament to the effect that each Independent Member of Parliament is independent of the other. 

If we are allocating positions and privileges in this institution of Parliament - this is my own interpretation - in FDC, we are 37, it would be very unfair for a party of 37 people to get one position and one Independent also to get one position. This is my interpretation. We are 37 people gathered together, then one person who is independent of the other also gets one position; this is a total abuse of those who are gathered as groups.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, if you did not want that position, you should have appealed the judgement of the High Court and also the one of the East African Court. The judgement is there. It says the Independents must be reflected in the constitution of all the bodies. You have not appealed, so you are bound by it. Do not confuse the House.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you and most obliged. I am equally bound by the judgements of those courts. I was talking to my colleague, hon. Betty Amongi, and she raised a point from a jurisprudence point of view that we should help them to answer - how come we in UPC are seven and we have nothing? In this case, they are now the aggrieved but I want to rest that case there. 

I would recommend that once we are allocating these positions, we should not ignore Independents. That is fiat accompli, and that is why we were very happy to second hon. otada to the Pan African Parliament and he is doing very well representing us there. We are not saying we should disregard any group because they are Independents, but we are saying, in the process of recognising their rights, we should not make it look more lucrative to be an individual than to work as a group. 

Having said that, I saw the committee recommendation on page 23 - now it is reaching our docket – and the committee recommends that no single committee must be chaired by the leading Opposition party, both the chair and vice chair. The FDC is the main Opposition party and we exercise discretion as a leading opposition party, we form the shadow Cabinet and we incorporate members of other parties. Now the recommendation is saying, even if you are the leading Opposition party, you are not allowed to exercise discretion and say, “For PAC, the chairman will be hon. Kassiano Wadri, FDC and the vice will hon. Okot Ogong, FDC.” 

I think the committee should not be used. Let me make this statement because there is a kind of alliance between members of the ruling party, NRM, and the minority Opposition parties-(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, it becomes funny that the minority Opposition to whom FDC is a big brother - I would use that word - are now going to the Committee on Rules and saying, “Wait a second, all these positions, we must share them.” So, who takes responsibility of leading the Opposition? We are not going to be here permanently. Tomorrow if NRM is on this side of the House, I think that whoever is the main Opposition party must be given the responsibility of reorganising the Opposition. 

I appeal to members of this House that we totally ignore that recommendation where people on our side want to legislate how we should lead and provide leadership in the alternative government. This is very dangerous for the Opposition. It is bringing internal rebellion, which may not be very healthy.

On the recommendations of the committee on government assurances, members, at the committee stage we shall appeal to you – I am glad the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges accepted all our recommendations where we shall have expressions that amount to assurances. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I need to explain this. (Member timed out.)    

6.06
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by supporting the recommendations made by the committee on gender issues for the women slots to be reserved at 40 per cent. I want to thank the committee for that. When it comes to committee stage, we shall liaise with the chairperson, especially on the issue of a certificate of gender equity, which we duly presented to the committee but I see is missing from the report. The committee did not object to that. 

On the issue being raised by hon. Odonga Otto on the minority political parties, I am the one who took that to the committee. I took that after studying how 62 countries operate. I did not take it out of nonsense. I will bring on the Floor each, if you want, of the 62 jurisprudences and how the Opposition handles business on the opposition side. 

Let me give you an example of UK. In the United Kingdom, the only positions reserved for the official opposition is the Leader of Opposition, the shadow Cabinet and the Public Accounts Committee. At the moment in Britain, Labour has 270 Members of Parliament; Conservative has 300 Members of Parliament; Lib Dems have 57 Members of Parliament. The Lib Dems and Conservatives are in a coalition government. The Lib Dems with 57 have a chairperson of government assurances. Labour, which is the official opposition with 207 are the ones providing the Leader of Opposition and the shadow Cabinet. 

When it comes to the position of chairpersons, in the 62 countries I have studied, those positions that are reserved for the Opposition – In Canada, for example, they will say, “The following committees are reserved for the Opposition.” It will then be the whole House to elect but that position will be only filled by any of the political parties in opposition. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Two minutes. I want you to clarify on the issue of the shadow Cabinet; is it exclusively official -

MS AMONGI: No. On the issue of the shadow Cabinet, actually in some jurisprudences it is shared. In the case of Singapore, for example, they say the shadow opposition is constituted by the opposition party with the highest numerical strength with other opposition members. So, they sit internally and determine. The parties see how they share but the person who leads is the Leader of the Opposition, in the case of the shadow, but it is constituted by various opposition parties. 

On the position of chairpersons, I have studied Israel, India, Canada, Tanzania, Kenya - it is good the committee went to Kenya – and I have also studied Britain, USA; I have studied 62 countries. They reserve chairpersons and other positions for the Opposition. In other cases, they are elected by the whole house. In other situations, the whip sits in the opposition and says, “These are for this party; these are for this party” and it will be the internal mechanism of that political party in the opposition to give chairpersons, for example, for government assurances and so on. In all jurisprudences, what is reserved for the official opposition party is the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow, full stop. That is where it goes. 

I want you to study and challenge me where in the world chairpersons are reserved solely for the leading opposition party. I want you to challenge me -[Hon. Members: “Uganda”] -because by the time I went to the - apart from Uganda and that is why-(Member timed out.) 

6.11
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I start by thanking the committee for the good report. I will start by addressing myself to page 4 regarding the Speaker’s Panel. 

When you look at Article 82 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it says, “There shall be a Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Parliament.” By us introducing in the rules that there is need for the House to have the Speaker’s Panel whereby they can stand in for you or the Deputy Speaker in absentia, I feel this is unconstitutional. Unless the Constitution is amended, this particular clause is not tenable. I want to propose that the recommendations forwarded on the Speaker’s Panel be dropped. 

There are also costs involved in managing and running these offices. If we are to create four assistants for your office, there are costs involved in facilitating and running these offices. I want to propose that we drop these because we have been enjoying your speakership and that of the deputy. You are competent enough and we have a lot of confidence in you. You can steer this House very well. So, there is no need to get assistants or a Speaker’s Panel.

Still in the Constitution, Article 82(a) talks about the Leader of the Opposition. There is no provision that we shall have a deputy Leader of the Opposition. Therefore, we shall be acting either ultra vires or against the Constitution if we make provisions that are creating a slot for Deputy Leader of the Opposition. I want to propose that we also drop this because hon. Nandala-Mafabi as the Leader of the Opposition has been handling their issues very well. In his absence, hon. Winifred Kiiza has been acting as a whip and she has been fitting in his shoes very well. I feel this office is not necessary. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. We are also giving an example, my brother. We have hon. Amama Mbabazi and hon. Moses Ali. So, are you saying that – in fact, even the other one is asleep - (Laughter) - Are you saying that hon. Moses Ali is also not sitting there constitutionally as Deputy Leader of Government Business? 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. One thing I should put across clearly is that administratively, you can handle these issues. These are administrative issues. You have not seen a budget for the second Deputy Prime Minister or the Third Deputy Prime Minister. This is being managed by Government administratively and we advise you to respect the Constitution.

MR RUHINDI: I want to give some information. The deputy premiers are principally ministers. When they were sworn in, they were sworn in as ministers. This idea of assigning them extra responsibilities is an internal arrangement. This is why we are actually urging the Opposition – (Interruption)

MR AKENA: Thank you for giving way. You said the deputy prime ministers are ministers. I want to know, which ministry does the Third Deputy Premier, Gen. Moses Ali, hold? Which ministry is he in?

MR RUHINDI: The principle designation is “minister”. The deployment is after; we all know that. The Minister of Public Service is here. When you are sworn in, you are sworn in as ministers except for two positions, the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General. Those are specific although they are ministers. For the others, you are sworn in as ministers and deployment is thereafter – (interjections) – Please, listen to me. The President, who is the appointing authority, assigns you responsibilities after you have been designated either as minister or minister of state. The Minister of Public Service can clarify that further.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was still holding the Floor – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Appointments Committee. While in that committee, these ministers came with their portfolios and Gen. Ali came without a portfolio apart from that of Deputy Leader of Government Business. Hon. Kajura came for public service and hon. Eriya Kategaya came for East Africa, and I want to stress that Gen. Ali came as Deputy Leader of Government Business. 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I should put it clearly that I also sit on the Appointments Committee with hon. Nandala-Mafabi and remember we have a post for minister without portfolio. So, I want to reiterate that he is the Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business. That is on record. 

As far as the Committee on Appointments is concerned, the committee recommends that the chairperson of the committee shall report to the House any appointments approved by the committee and the report shall not be subject to debate. I appeal to the members that when this report has been presented, there is need for us to debate it and we at least consider the rejects because this committee has been lambasted several times. After withholding approval of some appointees, the committee has been accused of witch-hunting and so on. We should be given reasons as a House as to why the given members have not been approved instead of accusing the committee of failing people because of our selfish interests. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I support what the honourable member is saying. I have been a victim of those accusations and yet if the report had come here, the House and the country would understand why certain people were rejected. 

6.20
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise mainly to speak on the issue of the Speaker’s Panel and the other provisions in the Rules of Procedure which might not be in consonance with the Constitution. In that respect, it is better for the Constitution to be amended first if the amendments are desirable. If it is decided by the House, for example, that there is need to have a Speaker’s Panel, then we have to amend the Constitution. This is because we cannot have Rules of Procedure in Parliament which are not in consonance with the Constitution of Uganda. The other issues – (interruption)

MR KYANJO: Madam Speaker, I stand in support of the proposal by the honourable member on the issue of the Speaker’s Panel. When we were looking into the mischief we wanted to cure, it was discovered that there was a fear that sometimes the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker may not be present and yet the House needs to sit. However, at the same time, we discovered that when you compare the two columns - the times the House has not been able to sit because the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are away and the times when the House has not been able to sit because the members themselves are not present - we discovered that the members were more absent than the Speakers. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you, honourable members, for the information. In the proposals from the committee, there is also a proposal that the Appointments Committee holds its proceedings in public and not in private. For that, I personally have no problem changing from the current practice. However, I think there is a good reason it was decided in the first place that the Appointments Committee sits in private when considering appointments. (Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: The information I would like to give to the member is that usually, interviews are done in camera and the results given later to protect the integrity of the individuals and much more, protect the integrity of the Members of Parliament. 

Secondly, these people who have been nominated and appear before the Appointments Committee do not have a chance to come before the Floor of Parliament to defend themselves. So, to require that they be interviewed in the open, then you are being unfair to them.

Also, the Speaker is the one who chairs the Appointments Committee and she chairs Parliament as well. So, really, there is nothing you are curing by requiring that the people be interviewed on the Floor of Parliament. 

MR KABAJO: I thank you, honourable member. My time is almost finished. The third item I wanted to comment on is about allowing the press with all their equipment into the gallery. I think this would be a problem because first of all, we already have a problem whereby some of us play to the gallery. Now, if the cameras were allowed from NTV, WBS TV and every media house, I think it would become a very big problem. Right now, it is only on one channel where I am being seen and I am not being seen on the others. I think to keep the integrity of this honourable House, it is better to leave the situation as it is and not allow in the cameras. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabajo, what do you say about those national assemblies which have their own dedicated parliamentary broadcasting service?

MR KABAJO: Having a dedicated broadcasting service belonging to Parliament is okay by me. What I have a problem with is allowing all broadcasting houses to bring cameras into the House. I thank you. 

6.26
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you, Madam Speaker. For me, as far as the press is concerned, people sent us here and so let them see what we are saying and doing in this Parliament. We were sent by the people so let us not hide what we are doing from the people.

On the issue of HIV/AIDS and related matters, they wanted to delete the word, “related matters”. I think it is very wrong because HIV has got other things that come with it like carcinomas that cause cancers and other opportunistic infections that can come in. I was of the view, and I propose, that it should remain as HIV/AIDS and related matters. The word, “related matters” should not be removed.

On the health committee being separated from the education committee, I can assure you that when it comes to health, things are a bit different just like in education. Health is so wide and there are some terminologies where when you are debating, you see people getting lost. That is where people are hiding sometimes to put some slots which people do not understand to confuse this House. I was of the view that health should be a committee of its own and education and sports should also be a committee on its own.  

The UPDF in Parliament - this is the only Parliament where soldiers can debate with us and to us. I think that is a very wonderful privilege. However, I have seen that sometimes they also want to chair committees and I was wondering how a Lieutenant General heads a committee. They are already soldiers. These are fighters and they are sent here to watch what we are debating. I totally disagree with UPDF members heading, for example, the Committee on Social Services - (Applause) - Committee on HIV/AIDS, or the Committee on Defence again in Parliament. A soldier chairing a committee on ICT! Honestly, they should leave it to us who have been sent by the people and then they should take what we have debated back to UPDF as observers.

Last but not least, on the Speaker’s Panel; sincerely speaking, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are enough to chair this House. I do not understand why you should now put Dr Bitekyerezo to be on the Speaker’s Panel. To do what, when I choose my own Speaker and Deputy Speaker? You should chair us. If you fall sick or you have malaria, the deputy should chair but not to start bringing in some other people to chair because it is very wrong. We want you to be honest and to lead us properly because you are ours. I thank you very much. (Laughter)

6.29
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I thank you very much. I will start with the point Dr Bitekyerezo ended with, on the Speakers. I support the fact that the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker suffice to lead this House. If you are going to create more small positions, then we are going to have chaos in the House and so, I support that.

Secondly, proposition 3.12, on the Appointments Committee; believe me, when you are being interviewed, you are taken through so many private questions and if you are going to put this under public scrutiny, we are then violating the human rights of an individual. An individual has a private life which is private to that particular individual. You are not supposed to violate it because it puts that individual in the public. When we are being elected here, we are being elected to debate in the House and not to put out our private lives in the public. I do support the fact that this proposal on the Appointments Committee be deleted.  

The next one is about UPDF. I support the fact that we maintain the status quo on UPDF and Independent Members of Parliament. The members here represent UPDF but if you select them to chair or become vice chairpersons of committees, we are going to have a problem because their electorate is really not so much represented here in the House. So, I support the fact that we maintain the status quo as it is in the old rules.

The committee is also recommending that the chairpersons are elected by the members of the committee. I suggest that we maintain the status quo; let the chairpersons be elected by the various whips in their respective parties instead of being elected by the committee members. I thank you.

6.31
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to emphasise the point of the Speakers Panel. Up to now, I am not yet convinced that we really need a panel of Speakers. I want to support what other members have already said, that it is not even provided for in the Constitution. I want to be convinced; what is the rationale for a panel of Speakers? What problem are we solving? For me, that has not even come out clearly so that we can now propose to have a panel of Speakers. Like other members have said, you have done it well. 

We have an alternative here to have the commissioners chair the sessions and yet they have their own function as commissioners. Why are we trying to mingle roles of people? I would like to say that I do not want mistrust because from what I see, it is like we are mistrusting our own committees. 

It is the same with the Appointments Committee. My question is: where has the Appointments Committee failed in performing its duties? The recent work that the Appointments Committee did of vetting ministers was done so well and I think many people or all of us appreciated it. So, where have they failed that now it has to go public? 

I can compare this to the Permanent Secretary, for example, being interviewed by the Public Service Commission or the CAO being interviewed by the District Service Commission; why should a minister be exposed for the whole world to know? Why don’t we have that private life as well? Why don’t we as politicians be professional for once and try to do things in a way that we can appreciate and be comfortable with?

My second area is on the chief whips. There have been proposals for deputy chief whip, deputy opposition chief whip and assistant chief whip. What problem are we solving once again? Why don’t we trust ourselves? So far, from the NRM side, where we have a large number, I see that our chief whip has done well. He has whipped us well. Even with the Opposition, in their small numbers, their chief whip has done well. I would rather say that we strengthen the offices instead and not really create positions like chief whips. Sometimes I think we are only after creating positions or titles. Thank you very much.

6.34
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the time they put in to produce this report. On page 7 of the report, paragraph 3.5, on the relationship between national parliaments and EALA, there was a proposal to establish a reporting mechanism but the committee says that the current system is adequate.  

However, I have had time off to visit EALA at Arusha twice and noticed there is an inadequate reporting mechanism. We have colleagues who represent us at EALA. Sometimes there are certain issues that we may need to get clarification on here in the House but because they are regarded as strangers while here, they are unable to present such reports. So such reports are usually only presented by either the Cabinet Minister or the Committee on Foreign Affairs.

Let me cite an example; the laws that are made by EALA are binding on all the member states but if I asked for a compendium of those laws, you will notice that they are not here because we do not have them. We also have never had any opportunity, as Parliament, to debate any of those laws yet we are supposed to be doing that in order to present our position.

In view of that, I would like to propose that an amendment be put in place to allow all EALA members an opportunity, on a quarterly basis, to access our Chamber to present reports for us to debate them before they can defend them – (Interjections) – Let me first conclude then you can seek that clarification. (Interruption)

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable member holding the Floor for giving way. We are looking at this with a lot of sympathy, but there are a lot of questions we are unable to answer. One of the questions is: what do you qualify these members to be when they come to present reports on the Floor of this House? Do they become Members of Parliament of Uganda?

Two, don’t you think this would require us to amend the Constitution in order to craft the way they should come to report to us? Probably, what you are proposing is tantamount to a position that exists in the Pan African Parliament where representatives come from amongst us. If that is the proposal, it should be welcome. Otherwise, it will be difficult to turn EALA Members into Members of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, really, hon. Hussein Kyanjo has made my point. Thank you, hon. Rose Akol, for yielding the Floor. I would like to believe that we have two ministers in charge of the East African Affairs – the Cabinet Minister and the Minister of State.  So, would you want to tell this House that your proposal qualifies the statement that these two ministers are simply not performing? Otherwise, I fully associate myself with what hon. Hussein Kyanjo has just said. Thank you very much.

MR BIRAARO: Thank you very much. I should thank the honourable member holding the Floor not only for giving way but for also bringing up an idea that I personally agree with. What I am saying is that these are people we have assigned responsibilities, one of which is about taking charge of our interests at EALA. However, there is also the other element of Members of the Pan African Parliament. I would like to move that we review our rules in line with the Constitution to allow these members brief Parliament of what they might have done over there. 

I do not find any problem with members of foreign parliaments addressing us. We can allow that to be done just like the Head of State does. In that regard, I do not see any problem with us having a provision in the Rules of Procedure to have a day, say once or twice in a year, when these EALA and PAP members come to brief us on the issues pertaining to areas where they are delegated to represent us. I thank the mover and pray that we accommodate her motion.

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable members, for your contributions. Madam Speaker, I would like to point out that there is nothing impossible because these are our rules; we can still suspend them to allow these members in here to present their reports before we debate them. The basis for this is that for the last five years, I do not know whether there is any member who was in the Eighth Parliament who can adequately stand and say that this is what is going on at EALA. Even just to present the laws that have been passed by EALA, which are binding on us, I believe nobody can do that.

The other thing I would like to point out is the fact that there is only one Cabinet Minister. The Minister of State for East African Community Affairs is not yet appointed. Even with the Cabinet Minister being in place, he is supposed to report only to Cabinet and not Parliament. Why don’t we use our own members whom we elect to represent us there to come and brief us on these issues? My proposal is based on the lack of reporting mechanisms, which must be addressed.

On the proposed amendment on see page 36, on the budget process, I would like to say that the Bill that culminated into the Budget Act came to Parliament as a Private Member’s Bill. In that regard, I now do not know who takes the responsibility to set regulations. That is why we have this problem when we are having the budget process. 

Here, the proposal to have the sectoral committee report, if there are any inconsistencies, referred to the Budget Committee alone for reconciliation is a bit of a problem. I am saying this because it is the sectoral committee that interacts with the various departments of government for a period of over 45 days during the budgeting process. So, to refer that report alone to the Budget Committee, I think it is not for the Budget Committee to know what has happened there. 

I would like to propose that when this report is referred to the Budget Committee, the sectoral committee should be involved because they usually have details pertaining to all matters that appear in those reports. The Budget Committee looks at these reports for only one day, for example, and yet the sectoral committee looks at it for over 45 days. Both committees should look at these inconsistencies.

Madam Speaker, I intend to move an amendment when time for us to look at the proposed amendments comes. The Hansard is the official report of Parliament business. In that regard, I would like to believe that on a daily basis, the Hansard should record all happenings of Parliament. If a committee is out on duty, that should appear on the Hansard other than them being marked absent. If a committee has travelled, that should be recorded. If someone is away, like today if I am not here in Parliament and I have not asked for duty, I should be marked “absent”. If I have asked for permission from the Speaker, which ordinarily every member is supposed to do if you are not going to attend Parliament, then “out with apology” should also be recorded on the Hansard. 

I intend to move that all business of Parliament should be recorded on the Hansard. If I am away on duty as part of my committee responsibilities, it should also appear on the Hansard that members of this committee have gone to Tororo on such and such duty, or have travelled abroad for such and such duty. If I am absent with apology, it should appear on the Hansard. If I am absent without apology, it should also appear on the Hansard. The Speaker should be able to account for each and every member on a daily basis and we should also be accountable to the people who sent us here. 

Madam Speaker, I intend to move that amendment in view of the fact that the Hansard is the official record. We also have the African Leadership Institute, which does oversight on us, and on various occasions we have had problems with them. Even when you are on duty, you are marked absent, and there you lose marks. So, I think this is an important amendment that should be accepted. I have also seen in other Parliaments –

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up. I think you have taken more than three minutes. 

MS AKOL: Just one minute more or two. I have seen, for example, that in the Parliament of Ghana, the business of the previous day is given five minutes for review so that if there are any errors, it is an opportunity for the House itself to correct its own business so that it does not stay on record even when there is an error. It would be an opportunity for the House to also review its own business the following day before it commences on the next business. Madam Speaker, I propose that we also adopt a system, and let it be put in the Rules of Procedure, that we review our own business. 

6.47
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you. I would like to briefly comment on the issue of the appointments board requiring the appointees to appear before the committee of the whole House. First of all, all of us Members of Parliament would be interested parties, and so it would be difficult for us to be fair to those who have been appointed. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think they said that we should convene here to vet appointments. I think they were talking about bringing the report of our committee here for endorsement. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I think that would be okay. The Constitution says in many Articles that many issues are to be determined by Parliament. I think the issue of appointments is one of them. So, once the committee determines or decides on these appointments, then they have acted on powers that are vested in the committee by Parliament. So, we should not feel that we are left out. 

The committee recommends that the appointments board should asses the appointees. Clearly, this is not their role. You cannot assess someone whom you do not directly supervise. We should respect the principle of separation of powers. Assessing the performance of ministers or appointees is the duty of the Executive and not the role of Parliament. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The issue raised about the committee carrying out assessment was one of the proposals to the committee. The committee, in its wisdom, declined to pass it. So, it is not part of the recommendations.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you very much. I would also want to comment on the certificate of financial implications. The committee recommends that Private Members’ Bills should be exempted. This would contravene section 10 of the Budget Act. All the Bills that are brought to Parliament should be accompanied by a certificate of financial implication.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the issue of creating a committee on subsidiary legislation. Subsidiary legislation, as we all know, is passed by the local governments and ministers. They use powers that are delegated to them by Parliament. If we put a committee in place on subsidiary legislation and require that this committee vets all the subsidiary laws before they take effect, we are likely to have an impasse. (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for you to conclude.

MS KAMATEEKA: When these by-laws are passed, for example, by the local governments, they are supposed to take effect immediately. If we require that they come to Parliament, with all the busy schedules that these committees have, then we will create problems. They will also not have the confidence to put the laws in place using their delegated powers. In this regard, we should facilitate the First Parliamentary Counsel to make sure that they do a thorough job and that the subsidiary laws do not have provisions that contravene the Constitution. Thank you.

6.51
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some of the issues I wanted to raise have already been raised but I will contribute on two issues. 

On the issue of designating Members to Parliamentary committees and its leadership, there is an attempt, in the recommendations of this report, to import the practice of the Movement system in a multiparty dispensation. When we were under the Movement system, we used to express our interests through the Clerk, and what is being put here is what we used to practice. I would like to suggest and recommend that the parties should designate their members and through the system also designate the leadership of the committees other than falling back to the Movement system when we are actually under a multiparty dispensation. 

The issue of Independents; there have been rulings and of course, our Constitution, as read by hon. Otada, is very clear that Independents should be given the opportunity to participate in the elections or even stand. In my own understanding, this does not say that there should be slots allotted to Independents. So, there should be a way or a system in our rules for this Parliament to provide for the participation of Independents in the whole process through contesting or expressing their interest to contest, especially for the elective positions. 

On the issue of the creation of committees –(Interruption)

MR MULONGO: Thank you, honourable colleague, and thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want clarification from my colleague. We allow participation by Independents but against which slots? The parties will have shared out slots depending on their proportionality, so how will these Independents vie for which portion of that proportionality already shared by the party?

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much. For EALA, there are nine slots. If you want my opinion, all those who wish to contest can express their interest, maybe through nomination, to the Clerk and Parliament can vote on them. That is what the Constitution says; allow the Independents to contest and participate in elective positions. There is nowhere, not even in the rulings that we are referring to or even in the Treaty, where it says that a slot should be reserved for the Independents. 

My last contribution is on the issue of creation of committees. I do not know – (Interruption)

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, it was absolutely not my intention to interrupt the Member on the Floor, but I feel it would be unfair to this House really, if we don’t put the record right. I don’t know whether the Member is aware about the East African Court of Justice ruling, which among other things is very clear to the effect that the representation in EALA must reflect the composition in the House of the member states, and for as long as the honourable member recognises that an Independent Member does not belong to the ruling party or to the Opposition party, then I would want the Member to drive her point home straight other than going in circles. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you speak about this matter, I invite you to read the case of Jacob Oulanyah vs the Attorney-General. I think it is very clear that the Independents must be given space. I have said it many times and you have not appealed. You know you did not appeal and abandoned it in the courts. So, that is the law we are using now.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, with due respect and I request for your indulgence, I hope we are all working under our Constitution. I have read and internalised the ruling in the Oulanyah case and even the East African Court of Justice and when you say various shades and various parties - for example in Kenya, there are more than nine parties in Parliament. If you simply want to say - and that is why the Treaty clearly said, “according to the rules of the respective member countries.” It is up to us to make it work according to our own local conditions, and I believe that it is about participation and nobody should bar any Independents from contesting and participating, but not allocation of slots.

My last comment is on the creation of committees. Many committees have been suggested and I agree, but I don’t know how many more we will need to really have equity. My previous assignment of the Committee on Presidential Affairs was such a huge one. When you add on the Office of the Prime Minister, it is also huge, but there is no suggestion. So, I am thinking that at least if the East African Affairs is sort of small, we should find a way of a big mandate of sectoral committees to be separated so that the committees find it easy to deal with the issues that are raised. I really want to also agree with the committee that we do not need to create a committee on loans, agreements and etcetera, because the sessional committees are mandated to do this on their own. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.50
MS VICTORIA RUSOKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to assert that whatever we are resolving and amending, should strictly hinge on the source of power of information and the supreme power is the Constitution and our Rules of Procedure. So, when we bring in new things, I think we are giving false hope unless we are ready to revise the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. 

When it comes to the Independents being appointed to the EALA, I don’t see anywhere we can stand and quote – so, if we can stand and quote slots to the Independents, then how are we going to involve them? So, I suggest we maintain our slots to the ruling party and the Opposition. 

My second concern is on the chairpersons and deputies of the sessional committees. There has been a complaint that these people are unfairly chosen, but I wish to –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to bring the honourable member to order. Within this very session, hardly 20 minutes ago, you pronounced yourself and made a ruling on the matter. Is the honourable member in order to go ahead insinuating, despite your reference to a court ruling, to express ignorance on this Floor because she said she doesn’t know? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think for the record, I want to remind you in case you do not know that the Rules of Procedure of this House relating to elections of EALA and PAP were quashed by the High Court. This is the matter that I have been talking of, that the Attorney-General filed a notice of appeal and abandoned it there. So, the judgement of that court is the judgement which is alive and we are obliged to create space for all shades of opinion. It is not what you want; it is what the court has said. 

MS RUSOKE: On the selection of chairperson and deputy chairpersons of sessional committees –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I did not intend to speak on this issue of Independents, hoping that this debate would continue tomorrow and I will have consulted the relevant people. I thought I would consult before I speak about it, but this is my thinking and reading of the relevant judgement. I read Jacob Oulanyah’s case and I have a copy here and I can even lay it on Table. My understanding of this judgement is to the effect that Independents – and of course Article 72 of our Constitution which was sighted by hon. Otada allows it. They have a right to participate and be considered. That is not in dispute. I think what is in dispute is how they should actually participate and be considered. I don’t think it is anywhere, either in this judgement or in our Rules of Procedure or in the case of EALA, in the Treaty, that Independents should have a slot. Our challenge and what I am supposed to consult on is how they can participate effectively because I really agree that when we say participate, they should actually realise something out of it and that is the matter we should consult upon. 

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure interestingly - take the example of Rule 11 that is in respect of EALA. It does not mention Independents, but the rule on election to the Pan African Parliament mentions Independents. 

But my understanding even of that rule is that do not deny them an opportunity to participate. To me, the issue is participation and why of course we had a challenge of Jacob Oulanyah’s case is because when the nominations were done by the respective sides and they were brought here, there was no question put. So, the first challenge was, there was no election and the courts both in Nya Anyang Nyong’s case and Jacob Oulanyah’s case, emphasised that matter very clearly that there must be an election either by secret ballot, by acclamation or this business we use here of ayes or nayes for as long as there is voting.

Also, the relevant Articles - apparently Rule 11 is a replica of Article 50 of the Treaty to as much as possible take into consideration the interest groups, shades of opinion and so on as much as is practicable and feasible.

I am still internalising this matter and consulting. By tomorrow, I believe we should have a clearer position, but also, we did not abandon the appeal in the Supreme Court. We have had challenges in the Supreme Court and sometimes due to problems of quorum because sometimes we do not have full compliments and sometimes the Chief Justice has got to requisition from the Court of Appeal or from the High Court, for judges to sit in the Supreme Court. It has always been a question of resources, but we are trying to address those issues; but it was actually not the Attorney-General abandoning an appeal. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Tomorrow, can the Attorney-General, on top of those two cases quoted, also bring a clarification on the Mbidde case filed against the Secretary-General of the East African Community and the Attorney-General application number six of 2001? Would it also be prudent for you to wish us an injunction?

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, hon. Amongi. Actually, concerning the main references for hearing on 29th this month, all they did was to actually put an injunction that, do not go ahead with the election until you have amended your Rules of Procedure to suit the relevant provisions of the law. So, in other words, we are on the right track. We were actually not prohibited to do what we are doing now. I think what we were barred from doing was to have an election before we consider what we are doing now. Thank you.

MS RUSOKE: My next point, Madam Speaker, was on the Speakers’ Panel. To me, the Speaker’s Office cannot be treated casually. These people are not trained or elected and they do not know whether the Members of Parliament will be satisfied with them, and since we do not have it in our Constitution, I do not think we should accept it. Fine, one Member was whispering that it works in the UK, but then in the UK they have no written Constitution. So, we cannot keep on borrowing things that we have not learnt; things that we have not approved or those that do not appear in our Constitution, which is our supreme source of information and where we hinge on to make decisions and amendments.

Finally, on the deputy Opposition Whip, still, the Parliamentary Act amended in 2006 is very clear that in order to have any additions, we need to amend the Constitution itself. So, I do not think we should bother ourselves with this. I beg the Members that we just drop that suggestion.

On election of chairpersons and deputy chairpersons of sessional committees, I wish to request that we maintain the system, but these members be approved by the members of those sessional committees and not to just be automatically accepted.

7.10
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the report number 310, which is talking about providing for the procedure of removing the Vice President and the Prime Minister from office. Looking at the fact that the rules provide for the removal of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the Commission, Ministers and others, when you look at the Constitution, Article 108(a), for the Vice President and Prime Minister, the procedure under which their offices can fall vacant is provided and is clear. I would think if we are going by this recommendation, then that requires that we again have to amend this Article.

I would think that it is clear that once a public officer either abuses office or is charged for embezzlement or corruption, then the person can be charged and prosecuted and the office can fall vacant.

I would, therefore, think that this recommendation would need to be left out because how these people can leave office is normally if they abuse their offices or they are charged with embezzlement, and I would not think that this recommendation would be carried by Parliament.

To have a panel of the Speaker, I think would be overcrowding the Speaker’s Chamber. First of all, the Office of the Speaker according to protocol, is the third highest in this country. Now, when you bring all these other people, then we would be creating confusion around the Office of the Speaker and this would not look very good.

Much as other people are trying it, I think for Uganda as of now, we might need to preserve that office for the smooth-running of Parliament, and I would think that we should not take this idea. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.13
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from a point that has been greatly belaboured and that is the point on the Speakers’ Panel. The committee states that the purpose for this amendment is to achieve effectiveness and efficiency. I see that most Members are misunderstanding the concept of the Speakers’ panel. This is meant to achieve efficiency. Many times you have been constrained to travel because the Deputy Speaker is absent. I remember you had to cancel your trip to South Sudan to celebrate their independence there because hon. Oulanyah was not around.

I have also known of situations where the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah also had to cancel two trips because you were not here. Now, the purpose of this rule is to enable you to operate flexibly so much so that you could go and leave the office working and plenary going on. 

The idea here is also that the assistants Speaker would only handle non-controversial things which you would appoint them to handle. Things like general debate on the State of the Nation Address; the Budget – I sometimes sympathise with you, Madam Speaker when I see you sit there from 2.30 p.m. up to sometimes 11.00 p.m. without stepping out. To me, that itself is not healthy. I have seen in Ghana, for instance, where I lived for five years and took interest in the parliamentary debates, they have four assistants Speaker. Actually, they have two from the Opposition and the other two from the ruling party. They work very well and in agreement with the Office of the Speaker. 

Having said that, the same applies to the Office of the Leader of the Opposition; the idea of appointing a deputy leader of the Opposition is to make sure that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not overstretched because there are times that he needs to be away. There should be somebody substantively standing in for him. That to me would not make us go too much off-road. Moreover, we are here to do give-and-take. (Interruption)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform my brother here and the whole House that we are debating this matter in isolation. We are making the office of the Speaker very casual, as though the Speaker was any ordinary person; she is not. This is a constitutional office with responsibilities and it falls in the national hierarchy of the President, Vice-President and then Speaker. Where will these people of yours fall? (Laughter) If the Speaker is not there, what are you going to do with the decisions these assistants will make? Will they be binding as those of the Speaker? So, drop this idea. (Laughter)

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the menacing style of the General, but it will not intimidate me from my opinion which I am free to express. I made it very clear that the assistants Speaker would deal with issues which are not controversial and need not make a binding decision so that when the Speaker is away, the House can still run. Many times we have had to close because both the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are away. This innovation will not demean the office of the Speaker, in my opinion.

I was also elated by the proposed provision to remove restrictions in the use of electronic gadgets in the House. Things like tablets - we have moved a long way technologically and these gadgets are very useful; you can do anything at the tap of a button. For instance, the other day when Members wanted the House to adjourn just because they did not carry their copies of a report – these copies were sent by the clerk responsible some time back and I stealthily tapped onto it and I pulled it out. So, if everybody or at least many people had their iPad tablets in the House, debate would not have stopped. And I have seen that you can also carry - personally in my iPad tablet I have the entire copy of the Rules of Procedure, the Constitution and most of the reports, regardless of the volume. And I can access them at any time during the debate, but because of the current rules, I use it stealthily for fear of being put on a point of order. So, Madam Speaker, I really appreciate this amendment -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You may conclude your submission.

MR OBUA-OGWAL: I want to make a short submission on the provision to create a committee on human rights; this is critical and I welcome it. But I would like to request that this committee be considered an accountability committee and be headed by the Opposition like it is the case in many democratic countries that I know. As a matter of fact, the human rights commission should be headed by a non-ruling party functionary. Thank you.

7.21
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am an Independent Member of Parliament and so would like to make a contribution that affects Independents. I support a proposal that the Independents get their leader called “the Dean”. We are all aware that the number of Independents is growing bigger in this House; I bet you anything that in 2016, a majority of you who are party loyalists will see yourselves among the Independents. As long as you do not sort out the mess in your primary elections, you will see yourselves on our side next time. So, support whatever we are pushing for now because you can be a victim the following day. (Laughter) 

I support the idea of having deputy whips because the number of Members is growing and I think by 2021, we shall be having about 500 Members. Therefore, we need the deputy whips to assist the Chief Whips. 

Regarding the Speakers’ panel, the position of the Speaker is a very precious position in this country and I am delighted that we are headed by a lady this time. I am proud of it because the Parliament is performing. I proudly associate myself with this Parliament by the way. So, let us not create other assistants Speaker to dilute the position of the Speaker. (Applause) Sincerely, this is the third person in the country, then we get the likes of - I do not know. (Laughter)

I support the creation of the committee of health and education separate from the amorphous Social Services Committee. The reason is, if we get the education committee, we have a big number of teachers in this House - our fellow Members - who I am sure will flock to that committee and we shall have a professional way of handling this committee -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t you made your point? Okay, conclude.

MR OROMAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise indulgence. (Laughter) Likewise, with health, we shall also have professionals. We have doctors here and a majority of them will go to health and we shall have it right there. With those few remarks I beg to sit. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.26
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also commend the work done by the committee headed by a senior legal officer and a colleague, hon. Fox Odoi. For the short time I have been in this august House, I have realised that we use a lot of energy and time to find a solution. We are talking about the amendment of our Rules of Procedure and on that note, I will talk about three issues, the first one being representation in the august House. 

Article 71 of the Constitution says, “A political party in a multi-party political system shall conform to the following principles:

(f) No person shall be compelled to join a particular party by virtue of belonging to an organisation or interest group.” 

Article 78(c) is to the effect that Parliament shall consist of such numbers of representatives of the Army, Youth, Workers, Persons with Disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine. 

Article 83 says, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament:

(g) If that person leaves the political party for which he or she stood as a candidate for election to Parliament to join another party or to remain in Parliament as an Independent Member.”

In the case of Brig. Henry Tumukunde, the ruling of the Supreme Court is very clear. It says that all Members of Parliament, once elected and sworn in, have the same tasks, rights, obligations, immunities and privileges. 

In that regard, I would propose to have the following rules amended: Rule 13 should be amended to introduce a whip or a dean for Independents whose functions shall be similar to those of the Opposition Whip. Rule 134 talks about representation on the standing committees. I would still support that we have a dean included for the whip.

The second point concerns the camera process. which I would really okay because this is a correct principle of open justice. Here we are talking about public office and public interest. Our society out there is only eager to demand for a greater measure of openness and accountability.

The other point is the report made by the Appointments Committee for the persons appointed by the President. HHH yere my point is that when such a report is brought to the House, it is not easy to have consensus in the House. You will find some people talking in the positive and others in the negative. That is why we have so many points of order and points of procedure. In that regard, such a scenario may not work.

Lastly, I would say that the report made by the committee in that regard should be adopted. 

7.30
MR KENNETH BBOSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also applaud the committee for the work well done. I would like to shed light on just a few areas. First and foremost, in respect to allowing media houses to come into the Gallery. This would be very nice. I am just adding on to what my honourable colleague has suggested, that as we look into that it will be prudent if we have some guidelines before we have camera flashes disrupting the sessions of Parliament. But maybe -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that in the last Parliament, when we allowed these sessions to be screened, we made provisions that they focus on the Member holding the Floor like I am doing now. We were careful, if I have not forgotten, to protect Members who may be doing other things or probably having a nap or thinking while closing the eyes. (Laughter) So, I do not know how we shall cater for that the moment we allow cameras in the Gallery. I had not addressed my mind to that. 

So, the information I want to give is that in the last Parliament, we provided for focussing on the person presenting at that time, but now, even if on your own you tried to focus on the House generally, you can have very interesting scenarios of people doing different things. Thank you.

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Thank you very much honourable colleague for that information. Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, maybe you would have those other media houses tap the system that is being used currently. I think that will be very good because the signal is very good. We could allow them to tap the same system so that they do not only rely on the TV. When the picture comes from the TV, it may not be very clear. This will help our people who always ask us, “Where were you during this burial?” “Where were you during this function?” No, I am at Parliament. It will help us to explain to them that they did send us to legislate. 

Secondly, on the matter of having separate health and education committees from the Social Services Committee, I do concur with this. Having had some experience before I settled into the Local Government and Public Service committees, I noticed there was a heavy workload and for a moment, I was sceptical about the committee finalising the work, but they were able to finish successfully. So, I do concur with that recommendation of having the separate committees.

Lastly, in respect to the Speakers’ Panel, I have not heard the Speaker complaining, so, I do not really see why we should anticipate because Parliamentary business is planned. Let us not pick ideas from Great Britain thinking they will just work. No, let us look at Uganda as Uganda and maybe for a better Parliament. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.35
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three issues to talk about. To start with, I would pray that this House desists completely from making laws that place a strong padlock on different shades of opinion. I have read through the report and the recommendations that have been made and I found that there was nothing that was made to cater for the representation of the Independents on the Parliamentary Commission and I believe this is really not fair. 

The Constitution talks about discrimination and says nobody shall be discriminated against because of his political thinking and talks about discrimination giving different treatment to somebody because of the different reasons including their political opinion. So, to leave out Independents completely from the Parliamentary Commission is in itself, I believe, discrimination against the Independents.

I know that to include the Independents on the Commission would involve changing other laws, including the Administration of Parliament Act, but that is something we can do for the sake of fairness, transparency and ensuring that this right, which is guaranteed in the Constitution is not tampered with. I will move an amendment on that matter when it comes on the Floor tomorrow.

On the issue of removal of Prime Minister or Vice President, I do not think it should have been the intention of the people who framed this Constitution to give powers to Parliament to impeach the President, give powers to Parliament to censure the ministers and then leave the two positions of Vice President and Prime Minister in between there as the untouchable zones. I do not think that is right. From my legal knowledge, I think something is unconstitutional if it contravenes the provision in the Constitution which says something different. If the Constitution is silent about the removal of these people from office and we make a law, yet it is already provided for in the Constitution that Parliament shall have the power to make laws, then I do not believe that we are doing something unconstitutional.

The Constitution has not talked about it so we are creating a law which caters for that. So, I fully support that there should be a law to that effect. (Mr Ruhindi rose_) 

I will take the information later, Mr Attorney-General.

Finally, on the issue of the committees, it was stated here that we are in a multiparty dispensation and we should not go back to the Movement form in the committees. One thing I know is that once we are here, we are here to legislate for this country and I think it is prudent enough to make the members of the different committees to choose or to elect their own leadership.However, I still realise that the leadership in committees as far as Independents are concerned is completely silent, and I think that that is something which we must address to ensure that there is equity in this House. I thank you, Madam Speaker for the chance - no, I will take the information before I can sit.

MR RUHINDI: Thank you for giving me this opportunity to give you this information because to me it is very critical. You know there are matters which are very substantive. This is why we have got - you see the Constitution is the foundation like a foundation of a house where the house is built then you have rooms. You can actually adjust those panels, you can do what, but how many times do you normally go to change the Constitution. This is why they say that the Constitution should stand the test of time. 

Let me give you an example and it was cited; the impeachment of the President is in the Constitution; the censure of ministers is in the Constitution; and censure of Parliamentary Commissioners is in the Constitution. That means that there is a lacuna in the Constitution, for instance, as to the censure of the Vice President and the Prime Minister. For you to really put the censure of the Prime Minister and Vice President in the Rules of Procedure and not in the Constitution, to me, would be a fundamental error. So, it is not a question of if there is a lacuna here - it can be anywhere - no. You have got to consider the subject matter. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I wanted to understand from the learned Attorney-General if you juxtapose your argument against this one that, what is not prohibited is allowed. So, where do you put the position of removal of Prime Minister and Vice President?

MR RUHINDI: You see your maxim is so generalised. For instance, if I were to ask you, what is your authority? What is your source of law?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I just wonder about the necessity of the amendment -[MR ODONGA OTTO: “Removing you.”]- you can remove me even without this amendment because people have been removed. Aren’t they? Are we short of that law? The Vice President has been replaced, which law did we use? Are we short of that? The Prime Minister has been replaced; I think we should be serious. We seem not to know. The vice presidents have been appointed since this country started and been removed, the prime ministers have been appointed and they are going, what is this additional - are we short of that?

7.43
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the Speakers’ Panel, I would like to commend the Office of the Speaker and I totally disagree with the issue of a panel because your office has made us proud the way you do your work. I would not see any reason of having a panel because you have not complained that that chair is failing you. I totally disagree with the idea of the Speakers’ Panel. 

However, on creation of the committee on subsidiary legislation, I support this and I want to observe that many regulations have been made and these regulations continue to exist for a long time. Parliament is charged with the responsibility of overseeing the implementation of different laws, but when by-laws and regulations are put in place, there is no way some of these regulations are known to Parliament. Therefore, I feel the committee will be doing us a great job of bringing these regulations. Some are stale and some are contradictory to other laws and the Constitution.

I will give an example of the Kampala Capital City Act, where people are deliberating on some issues not knowing the regulations that were put in place to operationalise this law. If it had been brought to the committee of Parliament, probably many of the contradictions within the Kampala Capital City Act would be worked on by Parliament.

The other – the creation of the Human Rights Committee; I think it is high time that committee is put in place. We have cited a number of human rights violations and if this committee is headed by the Opposition as an accountability committee, we would go a long way in addressing many of the violations.
 
Electronic gadgets within the chambers not taking into account the cameras – but as Members of Parliament; I think modern technology will assist in the way we transact our business. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.46
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and dear colleagues. I would like to join my colleagues to congratulate the committee for the wonderful work done. Congratulations. 

I also want to concur with some colleagues that some of these rules – for the time being, I will confine myself to 3.1, 3.2, 3.6 and 3.2.1.; these are rules that are well-provided for in our rules that we are currently using. The proposals that are being proposed are actually contradicting our Constitution as most Members have expressed. Any rule that we make must be consistent with the provisions of the Constitution. Therefore, I do not support the proposals of creating the Panel of Speakers, the Deputy Leaders of the Opposition, the Deputy Whips, because I do not see any value-addition these proposals are bringing. In addition to providing for these offices, we’ll create more confusion and conflicts. We should borrow or make laws that add value and save our time. 

In addition, I would like to support hon. Akol. I was in Ghana and I visited their Parliament; the Order Paper, the Hansards, all records of Members in attendance and Members deployed on various operations, are recorded so that you can account for the time you are in Parliament. Even when you go on missions abroad and within the country, it is very important that that information is recorded for the sake of accountability even to our electorates. Sometimes, our voters ask, “Where are you?” and sometimes, people tell lies that, “I am abroad, I am here” when actually you are constrained in the constituency by some problems and are unable to go to the constituents. Therefore, I support hon. Akol and I propose that we support that.

On 3.2.1, I want to say that responsibility goes with authority. These chief whips of parties should at least be given that authority to qualify trips by nominating and proposing names as we currently do our thing. But if we try to remove that, then they will be left toothless. They will have no authority. I propose that we leave that as it has been done. 

I would like to see some definitions included in our rules for better understanding. There are certain things, for example, which are causing a bit of confusion; like oversight. I would like to see that word defined in our rules so that we know – some of us who are new in Parliament and who are not lawyers – to know what oversight means and how far it goes. This is because, for me, with my background, I sometimes see that Members of Parliament go beyond oversight by trying to do some responsibilities of the Executive. They go overboard. We must be sincere with ourselves.  This has caused a bit of discomfort between the Executive and Parliament and I do not want that relationship to be spoilt. 

For example, what does contempt of Parliament mean? I would like to know what contempt of Parliament means and many other things we meet so that we know how to operate and how far we can go for the smooth-running of this Parliament, and for a smooth relationship between Parliament, the Executive and the Judiciary. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.52
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak on something I am very passionate about. That is on issues of gender. 

Article 33(5) of the Constitution, “Without the prejudice to Article 32 of this Constitution, women shall have a right to affirmative action for the purpose of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition or custom.” 

In the principles or the objectives of the Constitution, again, we see another important tenet in the Constitution that says that the State shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of marginalised groups on all constitutional and other bodies. 

Finally, I come to Article 90 which creates committees of Parliament in 90(1) and (2). 
1. “Parliament shall appoint necessary committees for the efficient discharge of its functions.” 

2. “Parliament shall, by its rules of procedure, prescribe the powers, composition and functions of its committees.” 

I want to thank the committee for the recommendations they have made in this regard. But I want to disagree a little on their position when they talked about the issues of gender parity and said the 50 percent may not be tenable. They are giving a reason and an argument that it is because of the numerical strength that the men have in this House. The numerical strength that the men have in this House is because of the continuous imbalances that we are seeing which have become a history of this country and also of course, it is because of the continuous traditions that we continue to see; the culture - the men doing everything yet the women being a good percentage of this country continue to be marginalised even in Parliament.

Current representation of Parliament in the committees is not very good. We have only one chairperson in the standing committee and two chairpersons in sessional committees, with very few deputy chairpersons. 

I am of the view that this is possible especially if we put a provision in the current rules that we are trying to amend and provide a rule that can be obeyed by all the parties in this House. We can provide that if a man is chairing a committee, as a matter of principle, the deputy should be a woman or the other way round. That will ensure that we move towards equality as stated in the Constitution. How long are we going to stay with mere principles that are never put in place –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS AMODING: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have already made that point of gender balance. The other quick point I want to submit is on sitting arrangement. I think the committee has recommended very rightly that UPDF is non-partisan and I would like to really see UPDF playing that non-partisan role. They are a listening force. They are supposed to just come and hear what Parliament is saying and their contributions are not very important at this point; they are supposed to provide us with security. 

So, I support the provision that the UPDF be allocated a separate seat somewhere together with the Independents; why don’t we, for example, have the Police represented here, yet we have UPDF? This is a security organ that should continue to serve all parties regardless of who is in power –(Interjections)- Let me take that information from a retired Army man. 

COL. MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and colleague. UPDF is in this Parliament in its capacity as a vanguard of these institutions. That is why you do not see the Police and Prisons here. Note my word, “vanguard”; that is the role UPDF is playing here. 

7.57
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the job they have done so far and to produce this report on time. But I want to comment on one thing. I believe most of the committee members had legal minds and I know they are aware that the Constitution is the supreme law of the land and that the rules can never be above the Constitution; that can never be accepted. 

I thank this committee for the work well done, but there are some issues that I would like to raise. Appointments of the Vice President and the Prime Minister are provided for in the Constitution. The Constitution even provides for the removal of the Vice President or the Prime Minister. So, if the head of State is given a constitutional mandate to appoint or remove those people, I think we should leave him with such responsibilities as the fountain of honour. We have our role as Parliament which we are performing very well. I have seen so many ministers leave, we have threatened to censure ministers and ministers are resigning; we are doing oversight functions very well. So, why don’t we leave the part of removing the Vice President and the Prime Minister to the President? 

Furthermore, I would like to talk about creation of new committees. I appreciate the intentions of the committee on that. But I would like to differ a bit from them. Instead of creating more committees, why don’t we urge Parliament to have more resources and strengthen the departments of Parliament: Research Department, we have the legal department – I remember recently, our legal personnel in Parliament were struggling to defend our resolutions which the Attorney-General did not defend. So, why don’t we strengthen these departments by expanding them. By doing that, we shall have supported Parliament to do its work more effectively.

The Ninth Parliament has been praised all over the world for its good performance. I am told that one of the intentions for creating a panel to assist the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker is to give them more competence – this has been the most competent Speaker we have ever had in Uganda; what are you talking about?

MR ODONGA OTTO: You see, the argument of creating a panel of Speakers cannot stand if you keep comparing it with the seating Speakers because they are doing well. It is like going to Ituri Forest and declaring that I am the tallest. 

I have been here for eleven years and there are situations that I saw in the previous Parliament where both Speakers have international commitments. At one time, the Clerk informed us that we are not going to have plenary today yet we were already here in our suits. So, the mischief we are trying to cure – in fact for me I would even say that we need a second Deputy Speaker not from the ruling party side only; so that we do not have any situation where the international commitments of these two gallant Ugandans should stop Parliament business. The information I am giving is that maybe, other than rejecting the whole idea of a panel of Speakers because someone from Opposition will be there, the worst minimum negotiation we could have is to have the Second Deputy Speaker from the ruling party side. They cannot all be out of the country at the same time. 

MR EKUMA: Thank you, colleague. Anything that does not agree with the Constitution, I will not be able to support. I cannot take that because the Constitution provides for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. If we are thinking of amending the Constitution, maybe with time we shall do it. But so long as our Speaker continues to perform to our expectations and those of Ugandans, I believe we will not tamper with this; we shall never. We shall campaign and go to the people and ask them to stay with the current system because it is very efficient. 

I would like to thank my colleagues who have good intentions on certain amendments; amendments which are going to benefit Ugandans; I will support those ones. But for those with wrong intentions, I urge this Ninth Parliament to drop them. Thank you very much. 

8.04
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and colleagues. I want to thank hon. Fox Odoi and the rest of the committee members for the good work. I just want to reflect on what the point of this amendment was. Why did we first of all ask for this amendment? Some of the things that we wanted to get clarification on were issues to do with contempt of Parliament. There were a number of things at the beginning of this Ninth Parliament and some lacunas we wanted to cure. I thought in bringing these amendments, some of those clarifications should have really come out and definitions come out about all of these things. 

We seem to have veered into many objects of this amendment including those that came from outside this Parliament. Every Parliament has its own culture and innovations and that is why many people come to our country and Parliament to learn things like the Budget Act and so many other things like the Parliamentary Commission. Some of the things in causing these amendments - we should not be excited to go beyond what we have. I think we should focus on why we need these amendments and what we are curing this time before we go on to whether we want a second Deputy Speaker or a Panel of Speakers – all these are very innovative ideas. 

Hon. Odonga Otto, I know you stood for Speaker and I am sure there will come a chance and time when we shall vote you as the Speaker of this Parliament –(Laughter)- but I think we do not really need this panel at the moment. [HON. MEMBER: “It comes with the job.”]  

On the issue of open interviews, have we started to mistrust our appointments committee members? Have we started to mistrust them? I thought they did a very good job at the beginning of this Parliament and I think that is where we picked the momentum of how good the kind of person we have in this Parliament is, this time. They did due diligence on everybody and I think those that were not allowed to be members of the Executive, had difficulties in making the committee understand them - whether by qualifications – what mischief are we trying to cure playing to the gallery in terms of these open things?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my brother for giving way. I think we must thank the Appointments Committee under the current leadership of the Speaker. Basically, the people who are supposed to be appointed are supposed to serve the public and the public has more information about the people who want to serve them. 

Now, it would be very important for us to avoid problems because the public knows whom you are appointing and anybody who wants to raise a memorandum can raise it and somebody can defend himself. This, by the way, will develop integrity. Somebody will know that if in future they want to be appointed, they must maintain their integrity.

It will also eliminate issues. You are aware that some of our colleagues went to court during the interviews by the Appointments Committee. Hon. Kakooza and hon. Kamba went to court, but the court told them to go back. But if it had been in the public, everybody would have known how they faired before the committee and would have asked why they were going to court. 

So, we would plead with you that this is a committee of Parliament and it is your committee - I am talking because I am a member and it does work for you and you need to see what it does. The public must know because these people are going to serve the public. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, additionally, what I could add is that it is the Members of this House who went into their caucuses to attack the Speaker and the Appointments Committee – yes, telling the President that this committee exceeded its powers. How do you, a member of this House, go to speak against your committee in a forum which is not Parliament? So, we wanted to cure that by opening it up so that the whole world can see what we are doing and there are no questions asked. (Applause)

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I am still holding the Floor. Yes, this is a matter for due process, if we are to provide in the rules or any other amendments to the law that once the President announces his list, there should be other steps outside Parliament – other vetting. I think whether it is for the Executive or other organs that have information, that due process should be done before members come to the committee, and once they appear before the committee, they should be allowed to put forward their case and the committee in my view should be able to trust the members of this august House to proceed and do whatever it is that they think is necessary on behalf of the House.

There is the issue of Independents. The 1995 Constitution is so detailed about rights of individuals up to the core and probably in terms of rights of interest groups like women, youth and other groups. 

But fundamentally, when it comes to rights of Independents, they are so independent that in mathematics we call them discreet elements so different from each other. [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “Now you are speaking my language.”] If one is a triangle, the other one is a square. If one is a square, the other one is a circle. They are so incomparable that they cannot be joined to form any other association to speak about and that is what it is in our Constitution. These Independents are so discreet and independent from each other that we cannot even help them to form an association to be represented in the highest of the law of the land. Our Constitution gives each of them individual independent rights (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I recall when we voted hon. Otada; I think it was just our African culture of giving. We just meritoriously voted hon. Otada to the Pan African Parliament. It was just because - you know all of us were friends and, therefore, a good gesture. So, that should not be law because he is still Independent, but independent of the other and the other – they are an unrecognised table in the eyes of the law. They have their individual rights and there is no way we can stop that, but we allow them to participate. The law allows them to participate and does not bar them from participating, but when it comes to the East African Legislative Assembly or other things, they are so independent of each other and are free to participate and then we vote. Madam Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, we shall complete this debate tomorrow. I think I will allow maybe five people tomorrow and then we shall go to the committee stage.
 The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 8.12 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 February 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)  
