

Friday, 10 February 2017

The Public Parliament met at 1.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Jeff Wadulo, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the honourable Leader of the Opposition in the Parliament of Uganda, members of the public who have come today to act as honourable Members of Parliament for the purpose of the Public Parliament debate this afternoon. We have a short programme for the official opening of the people’s Public Parliament.

Madam Speaker, this morning there was a session of the Public Parliament and there was the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. I am glad to inform you that we have three shades of opinion in the House - the ruling party, a number of Opposition parties and those who subscribe to the independent school of thought.

Before the House can commence, we will have the honour of having some remarks from the Leader of the Opposition of the Parliament of Uganda who will then invite the representative of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of Uganda, who is also the Leader of the Government Business in the House. The representative will in turn invite the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda to officially open this session. We will then have a short suspension to allow them exit the Chamber and then we will be able to proceed. 

I now take this honour to invite the honourable Leader of the Opposition of the Parliament of Uganda to make her short remarks. Thank you.

1.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, honourable members of this august House, distinguished participants in the Public Parliament. Today is a historic event in the life and practice of the Parliament of Uganda. It is a day and a moment when the hitherto Members of Parliament, and indeed the leadership of Parliament, are sitting here as strangers and the hitherto strangers are actually the Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, it is indeed an amazing thing and I am suddenly enjoying the practice. 

I have taken time, Madam Speaker, to rehearse how any reference to the Speaker of this House is not to you, Maama Alitwala Kadaga, and then the reference to the Leader of the Opposition is certainly to someone else and not to me. What an amazing day this one is.

I would like to appreciate the Parliament of Uganda under the leadership of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, for organising this historic event. In the same vein, I would like to appreciate the role that has been played by the Department of Communications and Public Affairs for organising this historic moment and the events that have happened throughout the week.  

I was privileged to participate in the launch of this Parliament Week when all Ugandans were led by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament in a charity walk for persons with albinism. Madam Speaker, this was a nice thing for you to do and I wish to let the Members here know that it was a gesture from the Parliament of Uganda to speak for the voiceless. It is indeed our duty, as Members of Parliament, to speak what others may not want to speak, to expose what others may not want exposed, and of course, to represent the wishes and aspirations of the people of Uganda. I was privileged to be part of this charity walk, which was headed by the Speaker of Parliament and indeed, opening up the Parliament Week, which we are all enjoying and concluding with this Public Parliament. 

You are welcome, honourable members, and congratulations, Mr Speaker and your team. Congratulations, Leader of the Opposition and your team. Congratulations, Leader of Government Business and the team that you will be working with during the course of the day. 

Parliament is a place or an institution that is for all of us. Many people think that Parliament is for a few people. It is an institution where we come to represent your views. I am glad that today, you have not sent anyone but you have been here yourselves. My prayer is that the Members of Parliament here present and now in the gallery take keen interest in the deliberations that the Members of Parliament here sitting today will come up with. It is indeed our duty to follow up the issues that you will come up with from this House. 

I know that the deliberations today will come from different sides of the House, like we have been told. However, the common practice of this Parliament is that we accord respect to one another. Indeed, we may not have the same points of view but I pray that as you deliberate, take respect as one of our cardinal principles. Actually, our Rules of Procedure dictate that we respect each other. Even when you do not share a point of view, you should take time to listen to each other and interact. If a Member hurts you while you are inside here, please leave it here; that is our practice. 

We may haggle here or quarrel but when we go out, the debate closes here. Our practice is that whatever we discuss here, whether we have quarrelled or beaten ourselves, we do not take it out of the chambers. It does not spoil our relationships because we believe that all we have done is for the good of this country. We may use different approaches or ways but all is geared towards ensuring a better country for all of us to live in. As we go through this debate on the Floor of the House, I will respect the outcomes of this House. I pray that we treat each other with dignity.

Rt Hon. Speaker, this day is not mine. I know the Members of Parliament here present are eagerly waiting to present their views, wishes and aspirations. Throughout the week, I watched people coming into the stalls and saw how excited Ugandans were to see what happens around Parliament and to understand the different departments that we have as a Parliament and indeed the final destination, which is the chamber where we are right now.

It is nice for us to note that this is an event that will be taking place every year. Those Ugandans that have not been able to be here this year should prepare to be here next year courtesy of the leadership of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Alitwala Kadaga, and the entire institution of Parliament.

We would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to listen from those who send us here. During your stay here, you will be confronted with views that ordinarily you thought were the views that your Member of Parliament should carry. I was remotely witnessing how you were carrying out your elections and I thought to myself, “Let them also go through it”. I know that some of you, while you were going through the stalls, realised that many of the demands that you make to your Members of Parliament are actually not based on some of the roles that they are supposed to be doing here.

I excitedly look forward and I am eagerly waiting to hear your deliberations and as a way of accountability, follow up on what will come out of the deliberations. Having said this, I would like to, once again, thank you for the period we have had for the whole week. I pray that the deliberations in this House will be for the good of this country and for the good of our people as we espouse the notion of “One Uganda, one people” and as we try to move forward for steady progress.

I wish to take this humble opportunity to invite the Leader of Government Business in the Parliament of Uganda to make his remarks.

1.56
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, honourable ministers, Leader of the Opposition, Members of Parliament and distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. Allow me to convey the Rt Hon. Prime Minister’s apologies. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, is unable to be with you due to other official engagements.

Madam Speaker, I congratulate you for organising the Parliament Week purposely to bring the public closer to the Legislature. We have nothing to hide. The mystery that people used to see on the roadside can now be seen inside; there is nothing special here. This is your Parliament and you are now going to debate issues for the country.

It is also a step in the right direction because it enables the public to appreciate the role of Parliament, which I wish to briefly enumerate. Parliament is supposed to pass laws for the good governance of the country. Whatever is passed here is the same throughout the country. The law looks for lawbreakers and not for a particular tribe or religion or how short or tall you are. This law is passed by all representatives of the people in Uganda.

Secondly, Parliament is supposed to provide, by giving legislative sanctions, taxation and acquisition of loans, the means of carrying out the work of Government. It is here that the money that Government uses is approved. That is why when it is approved, the Auditor-General is able to follow and track how this money is used and report back here. This gives Parliament the opportunity to supervise and see what is happening outside.

Parliament also scrutinises Government policy and administration through the following: 
i) 	Pre-legislative scrutiny of Bills referred to the parliamentary committees by Parliament. When Bills are brought here, the Speaker refers them to the committees. The same Parliament scrutinises the various objects of expenditure and sums to be spent.

ii) 	Assuring transparency and accountability in the application of public funds. That is what the Auditor-General does, as referred to us here. 

iii) 	Monitoring the implementation of Government programmes and projects. 

Parliament debates matters of special topical interest usually highlighted in the President’s State of the Nation Address. The President comes here and addresses the Parliament and then people debate.

Parliament also vets the appointments of persons nominated by the President under the Constitution or any other enactment. If the President appoints people, they must be vetted by Parliament. If you are lucky, you go through; if you are not, you are rejected.

However, what is very important, before I sit down, is unity. We must be united. We are seated here from all over the country, each Member representing each section of the country. As the Leader of the Opposition said, whatever disagreement you have here, when you go out do not carry it. We are here managing the country on your behalf. 

Parliament is also officially a branch of the Government, which points out the shortcomings of Government officially. Although the Opposition is the government in waiting, as they are waiting they should continue informing us of our shortcomings. When their time comes, God forbid, they will then come and sit on this side. 

I should not take long. I want to stop here. I have the honour to officially invite the Speaker to come and open the session. Thank you.

2.04
THE SPEAKER OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, Speaker Wadulo, Members of the House, ladies and gentlemen. On behalf of the National Assembly, I would like to welcome you most warmly to your Parliament. This is your home and this is your place. 

We have invited you because in 2012, we had a very big meeting in this country - the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting – and one of the things we concluded is that we are distant from the population. We speak for them, budget for them but we are distant from them. Therefore, we agreed to bridge that gap. Since then, in 2015 we had the Women’s Parliament. The women came here and had their own sitting. We have also had the Children’s Parliament. Now you the people are here and we are happy that you have come to your House. 

When I was sworn in as the Speaker of the Tenth Parliament, I said I would continue the campaign to relate to our people so that they know the relevance of Parliament to themselves. We are going to continue with that. (Applause) This whole week, we have had over 2,000 citizens coming here. When you are outside the gate, you see a huge building, police and soldiers and you say, “I will not go there”. However, this week, over 2,000 people have come in, they have seen the exhibition, they have understood what we do and I now think they are more comfortable talking to their MPs and understanding their work.

We would like to thank you so much for coming. Of course, as we have said, the Parliament Week is going to be part of our calendar. Ugandans will continue to come here so that we can interact and learn more. There are even people who are here who did not know enough about Parliament but they have learnt during this week. 

I think you know where you are sitting; on my right is the Government side and on my left, the Opposition side. The independents sit around there. The UPDF normally sit somewhere at the back there but all of them are here and we speak and work together. When you get up to speak, press a button and say your name and your constituency because it is being recorded in the Hansard. You are in the Hansard very seriously. 

I do not want to take too much of your time, Rt Hon. Speaker. Let me declare the first Public Parliament open. I am handing over my authority to you as the elected Speaker. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Members of Parliament, Members of the Parliament of the people. I welcome you. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this initiative, which is an indication of the fact that this Parliament is practising open parliament as well as open government principles. We would like to thank you for that. We think that this initiative that you have ushered in should not just be a ritual. I propose that for the entire year, and I would like Members to agree with me at some point, this people’s Parliament should be able to have at least four sittings. (Applause) This is so that the issues that we generate are taken up by the Parliament of Uganda and also the Government of Uganda. 

I would like to believe that this is an initiative that will build the capacity and the leadership potential that we have in this country as we try to move this country forward. I would like to thank you once again for voting for me as your Speaker. I am an independent Member of Parliament and I would like to promise you that I will not only look on the left, right or in the centre when I am taking decisions but I will be fair to all. That will be the way forward for this country as we pull together for a better Uganda. 

By the powers entrusted unto me, I declare this session suspended. We will be back here in the afternoon for the real business of the day. I thank you. 

(The House was suspended at 2.10 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.20 p.m., the Speaker of the Public Parliament presiding_)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT (Mr Jeff Wadulo): Good afternoon, honourable members of this august House and Members of the Public Parliament. I would like to welcome you to the First Session of this Parliament, which brings together ordinary people of all walks of life from Uganda and people of different political shades. 

It is also a historic moment of this House that we are able to have a member of the public becoming your Speaker, who is very independent. I would like to thank you, Members, for trusting that I can do this job for us. It is our job to be able to have the feelers out there for the citizens of Uganda and bring matters of national importance for discussion into the House. 

I would like to congratulate you, honourable members, for being elected into this House. It gives me a rare honour and privilege to recognise that what we have seen here today is a reflection of the direction and aspirations of the people of Uganda. As aspiring leaders of this country, you were able to understand what is going on in this country and the way you chose your leaders this time round was to say that we all need to come together and pool together; that we should not be divided. If you looked at my campaign message, it was about pooling together to contribute to the national agenda. I would like us to maintain that during the term of our office. I think that is what will determine the pace and magnitude of the issues we discuss.

I will quickly reiterate the importance of respect for each other in terms of how we behave and how we allow others to speak. We shall listen to each other, even when you dislike or disagree vehemently with the position of the honourable members. Also when we discuss, we shall be to the point; we shall not delve too much into opening remarks because we shall be given only three minutes at most. 

At that time when the motion comes up, I will make sure that I look at all sides to be able to give a balanced debate on the motion of the day. At the end of it all, as I suggested, this session should not be a one-off; we should not just be going through the motions of simulation. I would like this to be real in terms of a parliament of alternative and a parliament of the people that sieves out issues out there and delivers those issues to the Parliament and the Government of Uganda. 

You are representatives in your right and you know the issues because you interact with the people every day. Therefore, you should be able to help your substantive Members of Parliament in your different constituencies and work together to solve the issues, given the four cardinal roles of a Member of Parliament namely oversight, legislation, appropriation and to be the watchdogs ensuring delivery of Government programmes. 

I welcome you once again and I should say that I am very excited to be with you here. Having made my opening remarks, I ask the clerk to read the next item on the agenda.  

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO TAKE MEASURES TO MITIGATE THE ADVERSE EFFECTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the mover of the motion, the Leader of Government Business?

2.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND THE LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT (Ms Flavia Kalule): Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Flavia Kalule Nabagabe from Mubende District, Kassanda North Constituency. 

The motion is for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change – (Interruption)

MR MUHANGUZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you give your name and constituency that you represent?

MR MUHANGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Muhanguzi representing Kampala. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to refer to Members as “Ladies and gentlemen”? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall address each other as “honourable member”. Proceed.

MS KALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I move a motion for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Is there anyone seconding the motion?

2.30
MS ELIZABETH WANYANA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Good afternoon, honourable members. I am here to second the motion for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have a second seconder and then we shall have the mover to present and justify the motion?

2.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT (Mr Mopendi Osinde): Mr Speaker, I stand on this Floor of Parliament to second the motion for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. Can we have the mover present and justify the motion.

MS KALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the seconders. 

“WHEREAS objective XXVII (i) and (ii) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy obligates the State to promote sustainable development and public awareness of the need to manage land, air and water resources in a balanced and sustainable manner for the present and future generations as well as taking all possible measures to prevent or minimise damage and destruction to land, air and water resources resulting from pollution or other causes;

AND WHEREAS Article 39 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 guarantees a person’s right to a clean and healthy environment;

RECALLING that the Republic of Uganda is a signatory to international treaties on climate change such as the United Nations…”- (Interruption)

MR DRANI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to continue presenting this motion to this honourable House when some of us do not have that write-up? (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted to believe that you had the statement on your iPads. (Laughter) Proceed.

MS KASULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

“…RECALLING that the Republic of Uganda is a signatory to international treaties on climate change such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1992 as well as the Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 1997, to take precautionary measures to anticipate, prevent or minimise the causes of climate change and mitigate its adverse effects;

CONCERNED that according to the climate change department of the Ministry of Water and Environment, Uganda is one of the countries that are greatly vulnerable to climate change impact in respect to climate variability, including increasing temperatures, increased frequency and intensity of rainfall, heat waves, droughts, floods and storms;

FURTHER CONCERNED that Uganda is currently experiencing higher than usual temperatures, changes in rain patterns, reduction in total rainfall amounts and reduction in the water table as well as lake and river levels, thereby leading to drought, floods and landslides that have not only destroyed property, human and animal lives but also have affected the general productivity of some parts of Uganda;

ALARMED that whereas Parliament enacted a number of laws aimed at protecting the environment such as the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2008, the National Environment Act, Cap. 153 including the national environment, and has created a number of institutions aimed at ensuring environmental protection, including the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and the National Forestry Authority, and there is enacted a National Climate Change Policy for Uganda, environmental degradation has continued unabated, resulting in wetland reclamation, illegal de-gazettement and destruction of forests and environmental pollution;

REALISING that unless measures are put in place to safeguard the environment, slow climate change and prevent further environmental damage, Uganda is likely to suffer irreversible climatic changes, which in turn will reverse the country’s development trajectory;

COGNISANT that there is need to introduce innovative strategies aimed at reducing and mitigating the adverse effects of climate change in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
Government strictly implements all the environmental laws enacted by Parliament;

Government removes all illegal settlements from wetlands and forests in Uganda;

Government cancels all land titles issued in wetlands and in gazetted forest reserves;

Government introduces strong and deterrent punishment against persons who degrade the environment;

Government introduces measures aimed at reduction and curbing of greenhouse emissions;

Government introduces specific obligations on recycling and emission control as well as the use of energy from renewable resources;

Government ensures that all contracts it enters into with other persons contain environment mitigation measures;

Government ensures regular and compulsory tree planting in all homesteads and public places in Uganda;

Government should ensure that trees are planted on all sides of major highways;

All homesteads should plant trees and failure to do so should attract a 10-year jail term;

All developments in wetlands and forest reserves should be destroyed within six months.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to request that we look at this issue very pertinently because it affects many of our lives in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Prime Minister. You highlighted very critical issues about climate change, which I acknowledge. Before I open the debate, I would like to underscore one of the issues about climate change. Climate change happens very slowly but it is real. The effects may not be seen immediately and, therefore, we may not be able to react to the adverse long-term effects of climate change in good time. 

It is, therefore, important for Government to be able to allocate enough resources for climate change mitigation. I would like us to look at, for instance, the budget proposed for the next financial year; look at how much has been allocated to management of pollution, for example, which is supposed to be in the ambit of NEMA? 

Under inter-sectoral collaboration, how is NEMA working with the Ministry of Water and Environment on issues of controlling water pollution? How about the role of NEMA in controlling issues of air pollution? This is because we see, all of a sudden, a rise in the rates and incidences of cancer. How does that impact on the way Ugandans are bearing the brunt of mismanagement of the environment?

With those remarks, honourable members, I would like to invite the seconders of the motion, who should make brief statements for not more than three minutes each, and then we shall open the debate to the entire House.

2.30
MS ELIZABETH WANYANA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I second the motion for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change. 

You all know what is taking place in Karamoja region where some of the animals are dying. Not only that, even human beings’ health is affected. Some of you were standing under the scorching sun and you almost fainted. The heat waves are life-threatening and so, we need measures and ways to deal with this. The forests are being cut down every day; what are we doing? As Members of the Public Parliament, what should we do? 

You also know that there is an impact on energy supplies. Crop yields are also being affected. For something you expected to harvest in probably one month, you end up getting the yields in three or four months. This leads to famine. I want to say thank you very much, Mr Speaker of Parliament and Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have the second seconder?

2.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mopendi Osinde): Mr Speaker, it would be a very big shame to this honourable House if we in the Opposition second this motion without first of all introducing the members of the shadow Cabinet. 

Unfortunately, the Leader of Government Business forgot this. I am very certain that she works with a team and it has not come to my notice as to the number of members in her team. Therefore, I just beg for one more minute, on top of the three which I am entitled to as the Leader of the Opposition, to briefly introduce the shadow Cabinet because you know it is us who shake the Government. 

THE SPEAKER: I will only give you one minute for that, honourable member.

MR MOPENDI OSENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My name is Mopendi Osinde; I am the Member of Parliament for West Budama North in Tororo and the Leader of the Opposition in the Public Parliament. I have a team that includes hon. Ruth Nansamba who is the Opposition Chief Whip; hon. Yusuf Njoroge, the DP Chief Whip; hon. Umaar Kisubi is the Minister for Agriculture- (Interruption)

MR JACOB EYERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable Leader of the Opposition to declare a member of the shadow Cabinet a Cabinet minister in this democracy? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It could have been a slip of the tongue. He is out of order.

MR MOPENDI OSENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You see, in most cases mistakes are human but it is the same humans who have to correct them. 

I have the hon. Paul Scholes Lopian who is in charge of lands; hon. Faizal Meddie Baguma in charge of education; hon. Enoch Mark Kasirivu in charge of defence and national security; hon. Oyuma Onyango in charge of water and environment; hon. Ibrahim Musoke in charge of Kampala City Council Authority; hon. Frank Nokrach is charge of the presidency -(Interruption)

MR JOSSY NUWABINE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I represent the people of Kabula Constituency in the south western district of Lyantonde. We need to remind ourselves that our Rules of Procedure advise us to strictly restrict ourselves to the subject matter. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to stand up and introduce the entire side of the Opposition as being members of his Cabinet? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member asked for permission, which I gave, and I only gave him less time so that he does not waste the House’s time. Honourable member, please proceed quickly. You have only half a second.

MR MOPENDI OSENDE: Mr Speaker, it has come to my knowledge that you are a very wise man and that is why you keep guiding these Members who go against our rules. Please, allow me to proceed by introducing hon. Hudson Ssebuliba, who is in charge of foreign affairs; hon. Jack Nsubuga for Karamoja affairs –(Laughter)- hon. Kevin Ouma Wanjala is the Attorney-General; hon. Daaka Ajuna is Minister for Finance; and hon. Asia Tusiime for Internal Affairs. Thank you.

I stand to second the motion well aware that we who happen to come from the eastern region are in a serious dilemma due to the effects of climate change. Personally, apart from being a Member of Parliament, I am a rice grower in Tororo. I lost 10 tonnes of rice because of the changes in climate.

It is very important today that as Members of this august House, we debate issues that will be for the betterment of this country and our people suffering there. Some of you have seen in the media how people are suffering in Karamoja because of the drought and famine, coupled with the current climatic conditions that are not favourable. We hope we shall come up with some measures to ensure that we control the effects of climate change. 

As the Opposition, I know I have very gallant Members who are going to debate these issues very passionately and give very many measures and strategies on how we in the Opposition would help Government to ensure that we control climate change. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before we proceed, I have a few announcements. In the stranger’s gallery, we have this afternoon some Members of the Tenth Parliament and I would like to recognise them: hon. Agnes Kunihira, MP representing workers; hon. Cissy Namujju, Woman Representative, Lwengo; hon. Veronica Eragu, representing Kaberamaido County; hon. John Bagoole Ngobi, representing Luuka North; hon. Joshua Carter Anywarach, representing Padyere County. They have come to observe the proceedings of the Public Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have a delegation from Lwengo District represented by the Tenth Parliament’s hon. Cissy Namujju. They have come to observe the proceedings of the Public Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you, honourable members. I now open the motion for debate.

MR FRANK TAREMWA: Mr Speaker, I would like to understand the kind of precedent that we are trying to set as we proceed with this motion. I do not know whether it was because of the internet, but some of us did not receive either a handout like this or anything on our iPads. Therefore, we cannot proceed on a pseudo motion or topic that we are not following. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I see by show of hands how many people do not have a copy of the motion? Can we organise internally? Clerk, can we get copies for Members? Can we proceed as Members get more copies.

Honourable members, we have two hours for this session and we would not like to bog down the gist of this discussion by indulging so much in the Rules of Procedure. I thank you.

2.52
MR TWINSON RUHIGA (NRM, Kinkizi County, Kanungu): Mr Speaker, I second this motion based on Article 245 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which gives us authority as parliamentarians to debate and enact laws that will help in the protection and preservation of the environment.

It is true that we made these laws like the National Environment Management Act and the National Forest and Tree Planting Act. However, despite enacting these laws, Uganda continues to face adverse heat because of environmental degradation. To ensure that this adverse heat is no more, we should, through the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, engage with the investors to ensure that their contracts are in line to deter the abuse and degradation of the environment. 

Yes, we are interested in investors coming to Uganda because they create jobs but we are neglecting the issue that Uganda and Africa as a whole depends on agriculture. Yes, we need jobs; I understand that we have many graduates who want jobs and I support the idea that we should look for jobs for our graduates. However, we should also make sure we conserve the environment first. 

If you look at the Namanve area where investors have set up factories and other businesses, which have created employment for our children, many swamps have been destroyed and this could be the reason as to why we are facing this adverse heat. Most of the districts in Uganda are facing adverse heat; it is not only the Karamoja sub region.

Mr Speaker, I would like to request that whatever contract we enter with investors, it should favour us. We should not look for jobs and yet we are destroying the swamps that will help us bring rain that supports our agriculture.

Another measure should entail the destruction of all developments in wetlands and forest reserves. I do support this and call on fellow Members of Parliament from both the Government and Opposition sides to support this. I will give another example of Namanve. If investors have already abused the environment and swamps are degraded, the Government should offer land to these investors to plant trees at no cost to the Government. 

The above is the only penalty for them because we may not be able to demolish all the structures that they have set up. Demolishing them may lead to loss of jobs for our people working in these factories.

Another measure is to introduce strong and deterrent punishments. We should punish these people who have – (Interruption)

MR EDWARD NATAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to remind the honourable Member of Parliament that our rule No.1 of this august House says that each Member should debate for only three minutes. Is it in order for the Member to take up time that would be used by other honourable members? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is summarising. Can the Member make his last point and give others an opportunity.

MR RUHIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was concluding by saying that Government should set up deterrent punishments. These people should be strongly punished for the degradation that they have caused to the swamps and forests. We should also make sure that people who are breaking the rules –

THE SPEAKER: Are you concluding?

MR RUHIGA: I am concluding.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR RUHIGA: Thank you. I conclude by saying that these people who are cutting down trees – (Interjections) - I am concluding.

THE SPEAKER: You are protected.

MR RUHIGA: These people who are cutting down trees, abusing and degrading swamps should be punished and they should pay money to the Government, which shall be used to buy seedlings for citizens in the villages such that every homestead –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your point is made.

MR RUHIGA: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have Members contributing to the motion? May we proceed with the subject matter of the motion? Can I have contributors?

2.59
MR EVEREST KADHOUM (Independent, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): I am the Chairperson Karamoja Parliamentary Group for the purpose of this House. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, to your substantive contribution.

MR KADHOUM: I support the motion although I have some additions to make to the motion. Basing on my place of birth, Karamoja, I am very conversant with environmental issues, which have now become a global concern.

For our case as Uganda, we are almost becoming a dumping ground. One of the issues that have been very pertinent in this environmental problem is liberalisation. We have opened our economy to investors who are only interested in maximisation of profit. However, much as Government has tried to put into place environmental impact assessments, these have all been flawed. I urge this House that when we are passing laws, we should put restrictions to ensure that these environmental impact assessments are strictly followed and never compromised.

I have observed that we are good at passing laws but never implement them. We should not only pass good laws but also ensure that these laws are followed and implemented. So, what does this call for? This calls for budgetary allocation. We have to make sure that when we are passing a law, we put a condition that it is funded so that it is well implemented.

THE SPEAKER: When a member is making a submission on the Floor of the House, please respect the Member by sitting down; otherwise, you will not be listening to what the member is saying and, therefore, it will not be easy for you to make a response to his submission. Let us remember our Rules of Procedure in the House. 

Let me now have the Member who was rising on information. I will take the Member from the corner and then come to this side.

MR MUHANGUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to my colleague here. The Tenth Parliament of Uganda carried out investigations through the Committee on Natural Resources. However, when they reached Lake Victoria where fish farming was being carried out, the person there had a permit for fish farming but was instead carrying out sand mining. This has caused climatic change in our country. Therefore, I want to inform my colleague. 

THE SPEAKER: Information taken. Member on the Floor, please proceed; you have only one minute. 

MR KADHOUM: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I was concluding my remarks. We need to investigate the scenario in Karamoja where it is alleged that there is environmental degradation caused by some Government personalities or investors who have the support of Government. This House should investigate the root cause of this problem and see if Government has a hand in this. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. Can we take the lady –(Member rose-) - Clarification objected. Let us have the lady. 

3.04
MS CAROLINE KEMBABAZI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to emphasise the issue of compulsory tree planting in all homesteads. 

We campaigns like “Youth Go Green Uganda”, dealing with climate change issues. We have our CEO, Mr Edwin Muhumuza and recently, he attended an international climate change seminar. However, I am surprised that in Uganda, Government does not support even a single homestead with regard to tree planting; we have not been facilitated at all. Therefore, I call upon the Government, through the Leader of Government Business, to take measures to encourage the youth to have every homestead plant trees. 

Let me also take this opportunity to say that Government is enacting laws but people are not vacating the wetlands. Look at the people of Kasokoso and Namanve, for example; people are not relocating. We need to encourage our people to respect the Government laws and appreciate that our Government is serious about climate. 

People are now dying from hunger because there is no rain; if these people leave the wetlands and plant trees –(Interjections) – You need to get permission from the Speaker and  –(Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know I would like to be as balanced as possible, but also, let us respect our time. When we speak, let us speak to the point and also speak with facts. 

The other issue is that I want us to use the little time we have well in terms of debating the substantive motion rather than pushing this debate astray through points of order and procedure. That will bog us down. 

Okay, there is an honourable member with disability; I want to give opportunity to that Member. Please, take the Floor. 

3.07
MS SARAH EPERU (Woman Representative, Ngora): This time I have come as mock, but I want to assure you that in 2021, I will come as a real Member. (Laughter) 

I am here to support the motion but with an amendment. I want us to insert a proposal that Government should improve on employment. I came from Ngora yesterday, and for some of you who use that route to Soroti you must have seen my home. The roof was blown off by wind and I am in the process of replacing it. Why did that happen? You know, in Teso we have many trees, especially mango trees, but the youth in Teso are unemployed and so they have resorted to charcoal burning. The trees we had have all been cut down. That is why we have terrible drought in Teso sub region. 

I asked the people at home – We no longer have rats in the house because there is no food for the rats. The environment is so clean; there are no flies because there is no food for the flies. That is the state that Teso and the whole of this country are in. 

However, if we improve on employment; for example, if you put up a juice processing factory in Teso, all my mango trees would benefit me. The few boys that are employed are in security firms like Saracen and they earn peanuts. The rest are cutting down trees for charcoal. 

Therefore, I advise Government to create employment. Look at the 87 per cent of our youth who are unemployed; look at that issue to stop environmental degradation –(Interjections)  

THE SPEAKER: Are you done with your submission, honourable member? If not, then conclude. Just summarise. 

MS EPERU: In summary, we should not come here to lament. I would want to see Government implement all the resolutions passed here. I do not want to have driven all the way from Ngora and then they sit on the resolutions. We have spoken about these issues over and over again. 

Another thing that we should emphasise is cutting of trees in forests. Much as my boys back in Teso are cutting down trees, even Government itself is doing so. You remember we almost lost Mabira at one time. Many of our forests have been depleted and that is why we have a drought in this country. So, Government should implement whatever we resolve here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I have one announcement. I have devised a way of making it equitable for everyone to speak; that means we are going to reduce on the time from three minutes to two minutes. Also, I would rather you stand to debate rather than on a point of information because you will be wasting your own time, which you will need to use later on. 

Let me make an announcement. Please, resume your seats. Actually, when the Speaker is speaking, Members should sit down. In the distinguished strangers’ gallery this afternoon, we have hon. Kakama Kankiriho Moses from Kashari North County, who has come to observe the proceedings. You are welcome honourable member. Now, two minutes and I will start with this side. 

3.12
MR FRANCIS YIGA (Ssembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the motion, I would like to bring it to the notice of this august House that the people of Ssembabule do not have piped water. As a result, we are facing drought and famine from January to December. Climate change has therefore affected us heavily. 

I request Government to extend piped water to Ssembabule because the people of Ssembabule are largely pastoralists and our cattle are dying. I, therefore, request the House to prioritise Ssembabule when we are taking action. Thank you.

3.13
MR PAUL LOPIAN (Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We should not come and lament over and again. We can come here to sing “songs of praise and worship”, saying that the Government should establish measures of resolving environmental degradation, but we have other important things to discuss. 

Let the Government first advance effective measures of eradicating illiteracy from the country. This will enable us to sensitise the public about the dangers of environmental degradation. We shall also be able to train anthropologists who will go down deep into the villages to establish the problems faced by the local communities. This will enable us to come up with effective solutions to environmental degradation. 

The Government should emphasise the establishment of measures that advance literacy so that we can come up with social infrastructure in this country. This will bring about radical changes in different localities instead of us coming here to lament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Just before you proceed, honourable member; I know that there are tactics that Members are using to catch my eye but also they are falsifying their intentions by telling me that they are rising on matters of national importance. I want to inform you that on today’s Order Paper, if there was space for matters of national importance, we would be discussing them. However, I will try as much as possible to give you the opportunity. You may proceed, honourable member.

3.16
MR FRANK SSENABULYA (Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I reside in Kampala and so the issues that I am going to raise regarding climate change concern Kampala. Before I proceed, I would like to invite her to ask you – You gave them chance to introduce their Cabinet on the Opposition side – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I know that you are trying to be innovative but I think in the interest of time, can we reserve that for another sitting.

MR SSINABULYA: Okay, thank you. The issue we are discussing today is climate change, but I have a challenge with the current Government on this, as much as I belong to the NRM and I am a minister of Government. 

Environmental degradation is continuing but Government is not helping people to be innovative in devising means of helping out. I have a group of youth that have displayed their charcoal-making stalls there but they have not been supported. I would urge Government to at least purchase these machines and give them out free of charge to the people that are interested in this kind of business, so that they can help reduce on the cutting down of trees. That is one way we can tackle the climate change that is affecting the country.

Secondly, when I look at resolution No. 6, it says, “Government introduces special obligations on recycling and emission control as well as the use of energy from renewable sources.” Government should come up with serious ways to deal with this. We have research centres like Uganda Industrial Research Institute where they research on everything. They should come up with serious ways to advise a layman on how they can preserve the environment. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.19
MS RUTH NANSAMBA (Kyadondo County East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from the constituency where Dr Besigye resides and I am the Opposition Chief Whip.

Uganda has been named among the countries that are greatly vulnerable to climate change. However, I believe that we have institutions to minimise the causes of climate change. What are the roles of NEMA? Talk of the National Forestry Authority; what are they doing to curb the situation? We have the Meteorological Department. What have they all these institutions done to curb the causes and effects of climate change to the country?

I urge these bodies to play their roles. Let them at least put in place mitigation measures. If any tree is cut from the village – The other time we were going to Buikwe and the forest that used to be thick, now even rats could pass through. (Interruption)

MR GEOFFREY MUGISHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to my colleague. She has been speaking on the issue of trees but I would like to inform her that we need trees for domestic use because the Government has not educated the people enough on how to utilise trees; for example, they can be turned into furniture. So, when you bring in laws that will negatively affect the people, it will not be good for the public.

I would also like to inform the Member that the Government has not sensitised people enough about the wetlands and swamps, which are reclaimed by people as the different Government bodies watch on. However, whatever is on the Order Paper –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the topic we are discussing now is sustainable resource management. Hon. Nansamba, proceed for one minute.

MS NANSAMBA: I urge the Government to let us sensitise the people. Some people do not know about climate change and what it means to the country. Thank you.

3.23
MS IMMACULATE AUMA (Workers Representative): Mr Speaker, the issue concerning climate change is urgent and there are many laws, which have been enacted to this effect. The problem we are facing in this country, however, is implementation. 

I would like us to find ways to enforce implementation and handle the issues concerning climate change. However, should we continue enacting other new laws we will not fight this problem. 

THE SPEAKER: As the honourable member finishes her submission, you would rather stand on your own point of debate. 

3.24
MR RICHARD MAYANJA (Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): The motion on this Floor is wonderful and timely because climatic changes cut across regardless of one’s political ideology, religious beliefs or cultural background. It is unfortunate, however, that today there is lack of will to ensure that the enacted laws are put in place to check these changes.

Today, we are talking about a project that has been broadcast in the international media, that is, the Lwera project. Many people entrusted with running public offices in the interest of the common man have failed to deliver as expected.

National Environment Management Authority recently gave evidence that it had certified the Lwera project for a different activity, which was cage fish farming, but they ended up doing sand mining. This means the people in these offices are either incompetent or not willing to offer Government the right service because of kitu kidogo. They sit back, relax, swing in their seats and let things go untampered with because the investor bribed them with some little money. 

Resolution No. 9 says, “Government should ensure that trees are planted on all sides of the major highways in this country”. I come from Entebbe and 10 years ago when Uganda hosted CHOGM, one of the biggest projects was tree planting along the Entebbe Highway. If you go to Entebbe today, you will cry with me because the trees, which cost Government a lot of money, have been cut down to give way to the Entebbe Express Highway Project. Who plans for this Government and does not know that in a given period of time, we shall have this project running and it should be instituted in the right places? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your point has been made.

3.27
MR SIRAJ KIBISIRA (Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to advise the Members that before we blame or urge the Government, let us first advise the Ugandans to come back to God. This is because however much we fight the issues of climate change, if people do not come back to God, God may not restore the climate, no matter how hard we work. That is what I had. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am going to take another round of Members. I want to consider gender balance as well and I will give special recognition to some Members. There are Members who have given me their requests to speak; I will give them a minute after this.

3.29
MR TIMOTHY TYSON (Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to talk about the issue concerning climate change and what the Government has done so far. I am standing in for the Deputy Prime Minister. We will look at what President Museveni has done so far to address the climate change problem. 

We all remember that late last year, the President was camping in Luwero Triangle to promote irrigation farming. He moved from village to village showing people how to carry out irrigation using the bottle - simple methods that can be carried out by the members of the Opposition in different constituencies. I know that such type of information is affordable –(Interruption) 

MR INNOCENT T.: The honourable member is talking about agriculture and yet today we are discussing climate change. We should be advising Government on how to solve environmental problems but not telling us about agriculture, which can be discussed later. Thank you.

MR TYSON: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Irrigation is a way of setting up crop plantation that will attract rain, which will end up solving the issue concerning climate change.      
                     
THE SPEAKER: Allow the Member to make his point. 

MR TYSON: I come from Bulambuli Constituency and we are located in the Mt. Elgon region. We have forest cover and land that has been gazetted by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development away from the intrusion of the people, the wanainchi, who carry out charcoal burning and so many more activities. The Government is trying to find solutions to the many issues that we are facing in relation to climate change. Government is not slumping, but it is taking action and it is going to provide a solution. 

We are looking at solutions to climate change problems and we are also looking at the issue of tree planting. The Central Government of Uganda, in conjunction with the Buganda Government, has ensured that during introduction ceremonies - Okwanjula as popularly known in Luganda - the groom’s side is given a tree as they return to where they came from. I, therefore, believe if - 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude, honourable member. I tried to redefine the Rules of Procedure, honourable members because we have little time and we would like to vote on this motion. We could wrangle in points of procedure, order and so on and then, you will end up with no resolution. Can we actually debate? I would rather you stand up and say you would like to speak, honourable members. Can we have people who want to speak on the substantive matter of the debate? Can you proceed, honourable member.  

3.34
MS AISHA NAMAYANJA (Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the motion is, we are looking for procedures that can allow our people, who voted for us, overcome the issue of climate change effects. 

First of all, let us educate the people that voted for us to love their lives. The Government is not going to go door to door planting trees and doing everything for each of them. We, as the Members of Parliament, need to educate them to plant trees, clean their environment and prepare for the future. 

Tree planting is almost everywhere but take a look at what the Government is doing. Look at the area surrounding you; we are surrounded with furniture that was made out of trees. If people plant trees, the Government is the one that sends their -  

THE SPEAKER: You have made your point, honourable member. Can we have the next honourable member. 

3.36
MS ESTHER NAMBOKA (Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About 78 per cent of Uganda’s population is comprised of the youth, not forgetting the immense contribution that they have made in this country. 

It is on that note that I propose that the Government uses the same youth to become the ambassadors of climate change effects. A big recognition should be given to five of them that have done outstanding work in tree planting. They need to be rewarded with national medals. In doing so, we motivate this network of youth and a big change will be started in this country. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for managing your time.

3.37
MS KEVIN WANJALA OUMA (Busia Municipality, Busia): I am the Attorney-General in the Shadow Cabinet, so my colleagues there should not be worried. Objective XXVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy is clear and the honourable Members of Parliament have been commenting about it. 

I would like to relate the above objective to Article 22 of the Constitution that talks of protection of the right to life. As the Attorney-General of the shadow Cabinet, it is my duty to enlighten you on matters of the law and also to call your attention to this Article. The Article states that no person shall be deprived of a right to life intentionally except with the execution of a sentence passed by a competent court of law. That is clear. 

Let me relate it to this debate. We have our colleagues in Kaberebere and Isingiro District dying of hunger because of environmental degradation. We also have relevant state authorities like the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) that have failed to play their role. I am, therefore, calling upon this House to consider it relevant that we increase the agricultural budget as well as put emphasis on sensitisation on agriculture. 

If farming can be boosted at subsistence and extensive level, probably championed by Government or some sort of SACCOs, - whatever they call them- I apologise for the language, this will boost the agricultural sector. On the farms, people will be able to grow trees to improve the environment.  

Government has come up with the bottle scheme of irrigation, which is not sustainable. I am calling upon the Government to launch a mass irrigation scheme - (Interruption) 

MR SADAM HUSEIN DRANI: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give this august House is that Uganda has one of the best policies that relates to issues to do with environment. 
Uganda also has a fully-fledged Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA). However, ask yourself, do these people have enough manpower to handle all this? 

The other issue ignites the question of funding. It would be very important for this august house to put the Government to task so that the issue of funding and staffing can be handled through its authorities. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. The information has been taken. You have one minute to conclude. 

MR WANJALA: Honourable Members of Parliament, our colleagues out there are suffering because of hunger. A kilogramme of posho costs Shs 3,300 in Teso and the eastern region as a whole. We, therefore, cannot stand here and talk about this pseudo environmental policy without talking about the issues that are depriving our people of a right to life. A right to life is inherent and not granted by the state. 

We have to uphold values of farming and extensive irrigation other than talking about planting a tree and burning charcoal because these are small issues. We are dying of hunger and very soon Members of Parliament will not be able to come here because they cannot afford a plate of food. 

THE SPEAKER: The lady in specs, could you come and make your submission? I will take another round; just take your seats. Honourable member, can you proceed?
 
MS JANE FRANCIS NAMBASA (Kajjansi Town Council, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, I have been reading Vision 2040 and Chapter 2, No. 2.2.8, is about sustainable and equitable development. Sustainable development is about using resources to meet human needs, while preserving the environment for several decades.

Now to relate it to this issue that we are discussing, I am thankful that Government has come out and seen that we were using analogue type of technology and we have migrated to digital technology. We were using this kind of technology that was able to preserve the environment. Government needs to introduce deterrent punishments for anyone who defiles the environment.

MR JOSEPH OKEDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to request that you give opportunities to all people from all walks of life. I represent the UPDF and being a soldier, I feel that our voices should also be heard. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You will be considered for the next round.

MR DALTON MUTAWE (Kyadondo North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to make my submission about climate change. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, we need to focus on practical ideologies to counter these changes. Change itself is not the problem because it can be good or bad, but we need to understand the climate. You cannot talk about the climate without talking about the weather, and you cannot talk about the weather without understanding the atmosphere and the components that make it.

There is an ecosystem that God created and man is just a beneficiary of it. We, therefore, need to understand the sources because we need to focus on the prevention. It is cheaper than looking at the punishment that will be administered on people who distort the environment. I, therefore, would like you to know that this ecosystem is designed of water bodies, wetlands, land and the wild animals. The animals are very big participants in this ecosystem. Man – (Interruption)

MS NAMBOZO: Is it in order for an honourable member to directly approach the Speaker when there is a Member holding the Floor? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: The Sergeant-at-Arms should do his job.

MR MUTAWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was trying to bring out the point that there is a lot of ignorance among people that we represent. This is supposed to be our job and we need to understand what we are going to teach them. There is no reason why we should think of the 10 years and the like in prison as punishment for people who are ignorant about the need to have the environment preserved.

Talk about deforestation; why shouldn’t people deforest? That should be the centre of our focus. People need to understand that climate change issues include rain formation, wetland conservation and land. They need to be told that they need to stop poaching wild animals because they too are participants in the formation of weather. I, therefore, would like us to look into this - 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude, honourable member.

MR MUTAWE: I am writing a research proposal and I have liaised with Ms Kaaya Christine, the programme coordinator. When it is complete, I will present it and then they will be able to peruse it as well. However, I would like us to focus on conservation and preservation of these – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you allow the honourable member to make his submission. You are actually eating into your time which you would use to make your submissions.

MR MUTAWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the protection. We need to understand the ideologies that we are going to teach the people, other than telling them about the laws under which they will be prosecuted if they break the rules. We need to impart knowledge right from schools. We need to make work plans and teaching manuals for the children, among others, so that they can know exactly what they are dealing with and why we need to conserve the environment. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are remaining with about 20 minutes only. Clerk, can I get clarification on that? Yes, we have got 25 minutes only. In the interest of time, I am going to choose two female members from one side and two male members on the other side. Please, mark your numbers in that order else somebody takes your turn.

3.28
MS SARAH AGUTI (Woman Representative, Dokolo): First of all, I would like put forward a question; I would like to know how much the Government of Uganda invested in the Ministry of Water and Environment. The topic we were given is broad and so, we need to give it a broader perspective. 

It also moves hand in hand with agriculture. Under this, I would like to say that there is a lot of cutting down of trees, which is done everywhere due to an increase in the population. The people in the villages are producing many children, a fact that has been ignored. We need to realise that as a family expands, a child grows up and wants to begin their own family away from his or her parents. This makes them cut trees to create homes and gardens. Therefore, what are we looking at in form of population control?

We are talking about environmental degradation and mitigation; what are we doing about that? We need to come up with a conclusion on that. Furthermore, people do not have enough land and have thus resolved to encroach on wetlands. This takes us back to population control, which also has a negative impact. As I said earlier, it is a broad topic. We do not have to look at it narrowly and just talk about people getting away from the wetlands. What is making them go to wetlands?

The other issue I would like to talk about is poor supervision and management. We agree that people should be removed but management and supervision is so poor. Who is supposed to do the monitoring? On management, people are given offices but they abuse them. We may talk about evicting people from wetlands but you will find it done in a wrong way without proper supervision and monitoring. Those are the things that I would like us to look at before we leave this House.

In addition to the point that my sister from, oba Soroti or Kaberamaido, made about agriculture, we have abused the system of seed distribution. I have a picture on my phone where a truck was loaded with cassava stems to take for people to plant in November when we are already –(Interruption)

MS SARAH KALULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for an honourable member to refer to another Member as “oba” so and so while debating?

THE SPEAKER: The Member is still learning how to use parliamentary language. (Laughter) 

MS AGUTI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that –(Member timed out.)

MR HERBERT MWAMBU: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Speaker to forget the backbenchers? Mr Speaker, in the beginning you said that you are going to be a Speaker for everybody; please, see us also.

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure noted. However, honourable member, if you noticed, the people who are speaking are from all shades and location in this House. Can we proceed with the honourable member who was scheduled to speak?

3.58
MR BERNARD TURYAMUREEBA (Bukanga, Isingiro): I am here to emphasise resolutions 2, 3 and 11. We are talking about destroying wetlands and other places that should be preserved. However, we should first consider the reasons as to why these people think their activities are good. 

How can we advise people and tell them how their activities are destroying the environment; for example, if someone is reclaiming a swamp to make a farm and rear animals? It is best for us to carry out public education, like we have had this public debate today in this Parliament, and tell them that it is good to have farms and increase on milk production but we also show them the other side of the coin on how such an activity will affect Uganda at large. 

Secondly, about illegal settlements in swamps, ignorance of the law is no defence according to the laws of Uganda. Therefore, for those who have settled in wetlands or other reserves illegally, the Government should destroy those settlements.

Lastly, I will talk about procedures. When you read the Registration of Titles Act, there are procedures followed to register land. The people who have been registered to carry out any activity in wetlands should be removed, and it is Government’s duty to show the public that it still has interest in that land –(Interruption)

MR LOITOKORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have reservations to resolution No. 11. Basing on the point that my brother raised, I beg to comment that we should not pass this resolution as it is because it will have legal implications. There could be people settled on the said land as bona fide occupants. If we pass this law like this, we will be dragging Government into litigation because they have genuine land titles on the said land. Otherwise, we should be prepared to compensate the said people. Thank you. 

MR TURYAMUREBA: In conclusion, considering the registration of land law, when someone is going to register as the proprietor, Government should try to do enough surveys before registration. This is because you may find that the authority responsible has carried out registration without making due diligence and later conflicts are created between people and the authority responsible. Therefore, in my view enough surveys should be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: When an honourable member concludes a submission, it is better that you let it pass, honourable members. Let us hear from the Member who is rising on a point of guidance.  

MR MUSEMA SWALI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For the purpose of guidance to my dear honourable members in the august House, it would be in the interest of Members to stick directly to the point so that we have enough time to debate, other than giving us a lot of historical background which may not help the august House. Let us stick to the point and give resolutions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you sit down. I will give you privilege to make your submissions in one minute. 

MR MUSEMA SWALI (Terego Constituency): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, the issue we are talking about today is climate change and we must understand the economic activities that are taking place, which are affecting our environment today. One of them is environmental degradation and the other is unemployment. 

On unemployment, the youth now engage themselves in cutting trees in order to burn charcoal. Towards the end of last year, you will bear witness that a number of trucks were loaded full with charcoal heading to Kampala. Are there no other alternative sources of energy in Kampala that people can use like electricity?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your point is made; can we proceed with the earlier selections that I had made? There was an honourable member I had chosen in the corner over there. I will substitute that. 

4.05
MS IRENE AYAT (Gulu District): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I appreciate Government’s effort but unless we change our attitude, some of these issues we are discussing may not be resolved.

On charcoal burning for sale, unless we stop it - trucks are ferrying charcoal to Kampala and I have never heard of any forest guard impounding trucks of charcoal. They move in the night impounding trucks but they get money from the charcoal dealers and they are released; that is corruption.

The level of poverty among people is high. People are going to wetlands to mine sand for sale to have a source of income. Unless Government finds means to reduce poverty levels, this debate will not be of help.

Lastly, I would like this House to decide on an alternative source of energy. Much as we are talking about banning the cutting of trees for charcoal, if we do not look into any other source of energy, what do you expect a poor woman from my village to use apart from charcoal or firewood? We should look for a way forward. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like Members to stand to debate. I do realise that I had neglected the middle; after this we shall go in that direction.

4.09
MR PIUS OKIROR (Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I would like to defer from the position of the honourable member who has just made her submission. Charcoal burning is not the problem. I think the bigger problem that we should be looking at is the implementation of the laws that we already have in place. 

We need to look at the laws mandating Government to take necessary steps such as the environmental impact assessments. We need to look at the Land Act and water and environmental Acts. All these laws mandate Government to take environmental impact assessments before any project is put in place, whether in a swamp, near water bodies and other sensitive areas. What has happened with the implementation of these laws?

I would rather call on Government, and this is my emphasis in this august House, to implement the laws that have already been put in place. We do not need more laws; we need implementation of existing laws as well as sensitization. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have information to give, it is good to give it when the honourable member is making a submission. 

After these three Members, we will go to the centre and give them an opportunity. You also realise, honourable members, that not everyone can be able to speak at this time. 

4.11
DR AKONGO (Soroti): I am going to state what Government must do to mitigate climate change: One, Government must look at how to reduce electricity power tariffs first, to enable the people who are living in towns not use charcoal while the people in the rural areas use firewood. This will reduce the degradation of the environment. 

Secondly, to solve the problem of encroachment on the wetlands, the Government should revive the national housing policy and accommodate very many people so that the high costs of rent do not chase people away to look for where to build. If there were houses in areas like Bugolobi, nobody would go to Namanve to look for land for construction.

Thirdly, the Government should hire extension workers for agriculture and forestry in each subcounty so that they can advise the villagers –(Interruption)

MR WILSON ABAHO (Gomba West County, Gomba): I rise on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, you realise that what we are raising here is a very pertinent issue. Climate change is an issue that concerns our nation. We are here as Members of Parliament for just a single day, meaning that we have our ministers for today only. It is therefore my humble prayer that we shall have to consider and give time to the Government to look at what we are advising them to do.

Secondly, when you look at our Order Paper, we are supposed to debate this motion for only 45 minutes. Therefore, is it procedurally correct for us to violate our own rules? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Speaker has the timing. He is aware about when this debate is supposed to end. He is trying to give everyone an opportunity but you also realise that not all of us can speak because of the time limit. I will ask the honourable members to sit down and we proceed as we had agreed. Interjecting in the middle of another Member’s contribution is going to derail us. Honourable Member, conclude your point.

MR OKUMU: I do not know whether the honourable member is guilty or he is a victim of the problem. 

The fourth thing that must be done is implementation of the laws that have been made. The problem is that we amend laws and after amendment, people start doing the construction. When the construction is done and the law jumps into effect, somebody says “leave my people”. The person who passed the law in Parliament is the same person who runs to court to seek for a court injunction. It will, therefore, be a waste of time of Ugandans for us to talk about things which are not going to be implemented. The solutions to these things are known –(Applause). 

You will find that a Member of Parliament or minister is the one building a factory in Namanve, which is a gazetted wetland. When the forestry department goes there to demolish, they find policemen with guns. When they inquire from the policemen who they are and ask them to vacate, they say they have “orders from above”. You can talk today, tomorrow and you will not do it. The laws were even there in the 1960s when Parliament opened. We just need to revise and implement the existing laws.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the moment you seek to give information after the honourable Member has concluded, it actually becomes information too little too late. Can we listen to the next Member?

4.17
MR DARIUS NSABAOMWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You all realise that climate change is a great human threat. We are talking about chasing those people who have occupied wetlands. However, those mistakes are brought about by Government technocrats from the ministry in charge of water and the environment, who are issuing land titles to companies. We are saying “chase them”, but where are you chasing them to? You are not bringing up a strategy or policy on how you are going to deal with them. We need to work on corrupt officials, especially in order to mitigate the effects of climate change.

4.19
MS TUMUSIIME MAGEZI (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to emphasise some of these issues that have been raised but not particularly well explained. The first one is about pollution in regard to factories. We have had a lot of foreigners come in and they have constructed factories which have gradually led to water, air and land pollution. This is a major problem which is affecting our climate. 

The fact that the Government is getting revenue in taxes from these foreigners does not mean we have to neglect our climate. Therefore, the Government should regulate these factories because these people are putting up these factories in swamps and also causing deforestation.

The other issue is about the sensitisation of the people of Uganda. We are discussing it in Parliament but most Ugandans down there in the villages do not know exactly what the solution to this issue of climate change is. 

The other issue is that the education system is not creating climate awareness. We need the people who are teaching these children to let them know about these issues of climate change so that we can find solutions to them.

The other issue is that the Government should encourage people who are engaging in tree planting activities to continue doing so. The people who were massacred in Kasese, for example, were involved in planting trees, which were helping mitigate the effects of climate change. However, these same people are being massacred. Therefore, the Government should realise that at the cost of security, they are also contributing to the negative effects of climate change. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, can you resume your seats so that I can guide the House. Honourable members, if I give everyone here a chance to speak, how many minutes will we use? I am just giving a way forward. You remember I made a suggestion that this should not be a one-off. Already, our proposal that it will not be one or two sessions is being considered. 

May I request that for those who have burning issues and may not be able to get the time or catch the eye of the Speaker, write them down? Many Members of Parliament have done that; otherwise, you will end up speaking until the cows come home and you will not have the opportunity to take decisions on the debate as well as vote rightly on the motion as is presented. That is how I have decided to guide the House. 

The Members who are going to speak are on this side. As I said, honourable members, not all of us will be able to say a word, but put your issues down; we shall take note of them. Honourable member, I thought you made your submission. You didn’t? Can you please go ahead? Honourable members, resume your seats.

4.23
MR OKEDI JOSEPH (UPDF, Representative of the Public Parliament): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to add my voice to those that have already spoken. In the interest of time, I will go directly to my points.

My first point is on sensitisation. Today, we are talking about climate change but if we went back to the beginning, you will find that the problem is that most people do not know what climate change is and we do not have the figures on the ground. If climate has changed, how hot was Uganda 50 years ago and how hot is it today? What amounts of rainfall are we receiving? We do not know.

Secondly, we are trying to introduce this programme of rural electrification but the problem is that the cost is not affordable. What Government can do is to charge people maintenance costs other than making it a source of income. With this continuous increase in charges, people who were using electricity for cooking are now reverting to firewood.

Lastly, there is implementation. Our performance record in the UPDF is very unquestionable –(Interjections)- Am I protected, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT: You are protected. 

MR OKEDI: Thank you very much. Our performance record is very unquestionable. Whatever we set out to do, we have done. I am requesting Government to give us the mandate to implement environmental protection and it will happen. I thank you.

4.26
MR JOHN BAGENDA (NRM, Nansana Municipality,): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity given. Once again, thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

It is a great surprise to me that honourable members have discussed this matter and left out some important elements. Resolution No. 2, for example, suggests the evicting of people who are settling in these areas, but without an alternative strategy. Some of these people that have settled in these areas have lived there for many years. We also know that some of them are our voters; it will be a betrayal to them if we move this resolution further without considering a resettlement strategy. 

I, therefore, advise Government to consider putting in place settlement areas for those people that will be evicted from those areas because they are Ugandans too. It is also our duty and role to protect our people. It is actually wrong to call them illegal settlers; they are people that need settlement.

Mr Speaker, I have a concern about the resolution application strategy. In many cases, as we have all witnessed, we have had policies that have been implemented partially. I am not trying to insult anyone, but we have all witnessed cases of eviction of people from wetlands and they are only evicting the locals but the Asians and their companies are left to operate. Therefore, should we suggest that the law will not apply to them? I would like to advise this Government that it is important that we consider a comprehensive application of these resolutions. Thank you very much.

4.29
MS NAMBOZO MARTHA (Bukooli North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although we have deliberated, it is indeed good that we are now back to the motion. 

Mr Speaker, I will begin with the issue of implementation. I would like to request my fellow honourable members that whatever we have done and whoever is coming to speak must follow what is here. It is not that we are bringing in our own issues as the people’s Parliament, but we are trying to add to what the Parliament of Uganda has already come up with 

My fellow honourable members have talked about implementation, but who implements? Our Government has failed to implement because it has not monitored the public offices and what they do –(Interruption)  

MR JACOB EYERU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member to allege and mud smear the Government as failing in its bid to maintain monitoring and evaluation of Government programmes yet it is true that this Government has the Auditor-General’s Office that audits all Government procedures and accounts?

THE SPEAKER OF THE PUBLIC PARLIAMENT: Honourable member, if it is in the opinion of the honourable member that Government still has some challenges in some areas, it is her opinion. Honourable member, proceed and conclude.

MS NAMBOZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like I said, we have come here to add to what is being implemented. Therefore, for whatever I am discussing, I am representing Bukooli North. 

The environmental officers at the districts are not executing their role. I, therefore, urge that the Government comes up with regulations to put in place serious monitoring of the district workers to implement these issues. They should not wait for complaints and then come up to implement. Let the implementation be done first so as to improve our services.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point is made. You can now resume your seat.  Can we resume our seats, honourable members? Thank you.

4.33
MS KUBUSINGE (Ntoroko District): I am a second year student of Makerere University Business School. It is very important to conserve the environment. I advise Government to add value to the way we celebrate our public holidays. On the youth’s public holiday, for example, Government can encourage the youth who cannot participate in the national celebrations to plant trees. 

On Independence Day in my district, I was one of the people who spearheaded the tree planting campaign. We can carry out environmental conservation activities on each of our public holidays. On Independence Day, we can organise all the regions to improve on environmental conservation by having every able person contribute Shs 2,000 to promote tree-planting activities. Therefore, I urge Government to add value to the way –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have made your submission. After he makes his submission, I will have two more people from the middle, and then we shall have the mover of the motion and the Leader of the Opposition to make his last remarks before voting takes place.

4.36
MR ERIC AHIMBISIBWE (Kabale Municipality): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring it to the attention of this august House that in actual sense, this mayhem of climate change has been mostly brought about by the abuse of our rights. There is a new dimension of rights referred to as environmental rights that have been greatly abused in Uganda. 

It is common knowledge that most of the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and stakeholders who fight for human rights and the environment concentrate on one particular thing. The NGOs which are concerned with human rights usually neglect the impact of environmental degradation. People tend to abuse their rights by impacting on the environment. A person who owns acreages of forest can just cut down the trees because that is his land and it is his right to own that property. That is an abuse of one’s right to own property, but it impacts on the environment –(Interruption)

MR OKIROR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague holding the Floor that we have laws that cater for that. We also have laws that mandate you to meet certain requirements before you cut down trees in your compound; so we should discuss something else. With regards to human rights, the law is clear. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you give your information or stand up to speak, do not forget to say who you are and where you come from. Can you conclude, honourable member.

MR AHIMBISIBWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable member, you are referring to environmental impact assessments and public interest litigations, which have all been grossly abused.

I wish Government could collaborate and compromise on human and environmental rights because if those two rights are considered together, then people can take into account the impact they have had on our environment. If someone is trying to set up infrastructure for a factory, for example, they would consider the impact it has on the environment. In that way, people can exercise their right to own property and set up –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are done with your submission. In the interest of time, can we have a person with disability and then we shall have the last person speak on this matter before we give the proposer of the motion a slot to defend the motion. Honourable member, you are jumping the queue. If you want clemency from the Speaker, that is another matter.

4.40
MR CHARLES BUKENYA (Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seem to be the youngest here. (Laughter) 

Having heard clearly what my other colleagues have said, it is very clear that most of the Members have not understood our motion clearly. Nobody has come here to talk about the resolutions that have been made. At the end of the day, we are going to find ourselves deciding on a motion we have not even understood. 

If you permit me, Mr Speaker, to speak on the 11th resolution that says that all developments in wetlands and forest reserves should be destroyed within six months. It is a very good resolution but the problem is with the timeframe suggested.

Mr Speaker, if you look at the developers in wetlands, you realise that most of them are companies. Have we catered for those people who are going to lose their jobs? As we speak, Uganda is faced with high unemployment levels. If we failed over decades to create jobs for the unemployed people, shall we, in six months, be able to create jobs for them? 

Mr Speaker, the 10th resolution suggests that every homestead should plant trees and failure to do so should attract an imprisonment of 10 years for the culprit. Looking at the economic crisis in the country, we all understand that most people in Uganda cannot afford more than 50 feet of land. If someone can only afford to buy land which can accommodate a two-roomed house, how will he be able to plant a tree?

Mr Speaker, my last submission is about the treaties that Uganda subjected itself to. We subject ourselves to several treaties like the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Kyoto Protocol. However, how many Ugandans understand this? Before we speak and offer our views, we must understand clearly how many Ugandans understand this. It is very irrelevant for us to come here and discuss issues we do not understand. Ninety per cent of the honourable members, with due respect, do not understand these conventions and treaties -(Interruption)

MR FRANCIS YIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it in order for the honourable member to waste the august House’s time? He started by telling us that he is the youngest here, which is irrelevant, and now he is telling us that according his statistics, 90 per cent of us, honourable members, do not understand the motion. I guess it is irrelevant and he should suspend his argument. Finally, Mr Speaker, let the honourable withdraw his statistical statement.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, resume your seats. I will give the honourable member the right of reply as well and once he is done, he may be asked to withdraw that statement.

MR CHARLES BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is very unfair to misunderstand some people and I have been strongly and vehemently misunderstood-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, it is a point of order. So, you either withdraw the statement or you do not proceed. 

MR CHARLES BUKENYA: Mr Speaker, I lay all my apologies before the House.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude; he has withdrawn. 

MR CHARLES BUKENYA: I conclude with the resolution that says that Government is to cancel all land titles. If you look clearly, you can see that most of the land titles that have been given to these people have been given through a process; how are we going to compensate people who obtained these titles through a genuine process? Therefore, when we are moving this motion, we must clearly look and be fair to those people who acquired all the land titles in a proper way.

4.48
MR HERBERT MWAMBU (Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Aware that 70 per cent of our wetlands contribute to the rains, and also aware that 30 per cent of our rains are from the forests or the trees, also considering the fact that we have a very huge unemployment problem in the country, it is important, therefore, and I want this to be added as the 12th resolution, that there be established a national tree planting authority. This authority will basically do two things; it will employ 90 per cent of our youth and after that, this tree planting -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I just want to give guidance. Everyone standing up will submit for a minute. You have 30 seconds. 

MR MWAMBU: The national tree planting authority should be partly financed by Government and by contributions from the environmental levy of vehicles in this country every year. If you are driving a car, you are contributing to carbon emissions; so we want to tax you a little bit and contribute to this national tree planting authority, which would employ the youth. Thank you.

4.48
MR MAURICE LUKOYE (Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank Parliament for the opportunity given to us to debate the adverse effects of climate change. However, I would like to inform the august House that beside the adverse effects caused by climate change, there is a group of people living with albinism and I am an example. They are so affected by the strong sunshine rays. (Applause) 

In addition, there is the need to promote afforestation as a measure of mitigating climate change. I thank the Government of Uganda for bringing a policy on afforestation through the Operation Wealth Creation, where they encourage people to plant trees. However, the tree seedlings are brought during the drought. It may, therefore, not be possible unless the Government revises the timing and season. 

Secondly, there is need for the Government to revise the rates of electricity supply in the policy on rural electrification; the cheaper the electricity, the less the encroachment on forests.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, may you please conclude.

MR LUKOYE: Thank you. In conclusion, I would like to urge the Government to look at the issue of food security since the problem of climate change – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The member on that side is the last. There are those whom I had given an opportunity but they kept moving out of the chamber. Therefore, when I look to my side and I do not see you, your chance goes to another person. I have given you the opportunity as the last person. We have the two ladies, the Deputy Speaker, the mover of the motion and then the Leader of the Opposition before we can vote. Can we proceed?

HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, I have given the opportunity to the other honourable member. I had given you an opportunity but you moved out. Thank you.

4.53
MS JUDITH NAKAYUNGA (Makindye Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Members of Parliament from both sides have been advising Government, which has already been advised; the MPs are always here to advise the Government. 

Since the Government has always been advised, let us develop this patriotic feeling within us as Ugandans. Let us be the first ones to do what the Government is supposed to do. Let us not wait for everything to be done by the Government. If a family is led by a man, it does not mean that the man is supposed to look after everything. The wife is also supposed to come in to help the head of the family. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: May we have the last Member to submit from this side before we go to the Deputy Speaker.

HON. MEMBER: Mr Speaker, please give me a chance. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: May you resume your sit, honourable member. Is the microphone not working? Can we find another? If it is not working may I then give that opportunity to somebody else?

4.55
MS ANNET KIBADA (Lwemiyaga, Ssembabule): Today’s motion is a song that we have been singing for over 10 years. On resolution No. 11 of today, it is the same Government, which contracts the investors to destroy our wetlands. A few years ago, people in the Lubigi swamp were chased by Government, claiming that it was a wetland. However, today another wetland in Lwera along Masaka Road is being damaged. 

It is Government that signs contracts with the investors to construct factories in those wetlands. Under resolution No. 11, we are saying that all homesteads should plant trees and failure to do so should attract a 10-year jail term. I suggest that Government officials who enter contracts with those investors who damage our wetlands should also face the 10-year jail sentence. 

How do we benefit from being forced to plant trees in our homesteads? I cannot see my neighbour planting cassava and you tell me to plant trees; how?  Ugandans today do not have the country at heart and, therefore, the Government should ensure that it makes contracts with land owners to plant trees knowing that our energy and power is not wasted – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Your point is made, honourable member. There are many ways of catching the eye of the Speaker, honourable members. You could also be a defiant honourable member. I will now give an opportunity to the Member who almost wanted to shed tears in this House. (Laughter) She is the last before I give way to the Deputy Speaker. You have one minute.

4.58
MS GABRIELLA MNEZERO (Kira, Wakiso): I would like to request that I use both English and Luganda – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the language of the House is English.

MS MNEZERO: I would like to request that we all be observant as to what is causing environmental degradation. We may think of planting trees but in actual sense we do not have rain. What has caused this? We have investors and through them we are welcoming technology in the country, but this technology has contributed a lot to environmental degradation. For example, there are solar systems which are “fighting” with the sun.

THE SPEAKER: What can we do? Make your suggestion and conclude

MS MNEZERO: They are competing. Even if we plant trees and we do not stop bringing solar systems into the country, they are going to contribute more and more to degradation. For generations, we have been cutting trees for charcoal - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your point is made. I thank you so much. May I now invite the Deputy Speaker.

5.00
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Wilson Owere): The Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, the ministers from both sides, the chief whips from both sides and honourable members. I would like to remind Members about the procedure. When you rise, do not put up your hands; the Speaker will still see you when you rise.  

I am very excited and happy to be the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament where the level of debate has been high. You can clap for yourselves. (Applause) We are discussing a very important issue today. Climate change is not a joking subject. You have seen the drought; there has been no rain in the entire country for many months. 

When we are talking about climate change, let us not just look at Uganda. We should look at the cause and global implications. Now we are talking about things that are bringing in the changes we see. When we were growing up, we used to see a lot of forests, but most forests have been depleted. There are so many things that are happening. 

As Government, what we need from Parliament is to see them come out with clear policies that can mitigate climate change. I was expecting the Government minister to come out clearly and speak on climate change by mentioning the areas of improvement. There was a suggestion from a representative from UPDF and I was very happy with it. You know how the army plays a key role – in fact the army is closer to the forests than all of us because they are on the ground. We would buy the idea. There are so many things that bring changes in our climate. 

Mr Speaker, I want to remind Members about procedure because I can see the honourable member over there raise a hand, which is not the right procedure. I remind you, honourable members, to please follow the procedure. 

Mr Speaker, we import vehicles from Japan but some of them are very old or in dangerous mechanical condition. When you go to the taxi park, there is a lot of pollution. The smoke that taxis emit into the atmosphere is bad. So, Government needs to do something about that as well. 

I do not want to waste time, but I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank you for voting for me to become the Deputy Speaker. In our resolution, I want to see the Tenth Parliament – I have not seen them plant trees. I want to see this Parliament reaching out, the way they reached out to the albinos. I want every Member of Parliament to plant at least ten trees – (Applause) – and also encourage all their constituents to do their best in dealing with climate change. 

Lastly, since this people’s Parliament started today, we proposed that we should have at least four sessions in the year – (Applause) – so that by the time we hand over in February, we would have made a mark. (Applause) Further, I propose that from today, we also get views from the people as the Tenth Parliament also gets views and then we harmonise them and see if they are indeed representing us. Mr Speaker, I did not mention my constituency; I am a representative of the workers. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member. Can we now have the mover of the motion. Order is rejected, honourable member; let me have the mover of the motion. We have one minute, honourable member and you could also help Members especially on the resolutions they have to vote on. That will be very useful. Thank you. 

5.07
MS FLAVIA KALULE (Kasanda North County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable members for very passionately debating the motion brought by the Government side.  

I want to recognise the Deputy Speaker’s remarks, telling the honourable Members of Parliament to go and plant trees. Mr Speaker, I want to be exemplary by inviting Hajati Ssebyala, an environmental activist, to deliver this tree to you so that together we can make Uganda a better place. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member.

MS FLAVIA KALULE: Thank you and I hope the other honourable members have borrowed a leaf from that gesture. 

I want to note that there are so many resolutions that emerged from the motion. However, there were key voices that I kept hearing; one is that we have many good laws but they have not been implemented. Therefore, as Government, I think that is a calling on our part to follow on with the laws that we enact and ensure that we stop environmental degradation. 

I also note the fact that so many forests have been endangered. This has an effect on all of us as evidenced by the drought we have witnessed and the lack of water in so many places. This calls for innovation on the part of Government in setting up more water sources and planting more trees. However, this can only be successful after sensitising the communities on how they can go green in Uganda. 

Other than that, the rest of the motion and resolutions and debates have been heard and will be subject to further analysis. As Government, we are here to serve Ugandans and we shall ensure that we are more innovative. I am happy to note that we have a young Parliament today, which means we will be engaging more often with you, young people, to take this country forward. Thank you very much and may God bless you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, there are Members who did not get a copy of the resolutions yet they have to vote on those resolutions. Could you just repeat them for emphasis?

MS KALULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For those who do not have a copy of the motion, we have eleven resolutions that the Government side proposed to be voted on, and they are that:
 
Government quickly implements all the environmental laws enacted by Parliament; 
Government removes all illegal settlements from wetlands and forests in Uganda; 
Government cancels all land titles issued in wetlands and in gazetted forest reserves; 
Government introduces strong and deterrent punishments against persons who degrade the environment; 
Government introduces measures aimed at reduction and curbing of green-house emissions;
Government introduces specific obligations on the environment;
Government ensures that all contracts it enters into with other persons contain environment mitigation measures;
Government ensures regular and compulsory tree-planting in all homesteads and public places in Uganda;
Government ensures that trees are planted on all sides of major highways; 
All homesteads plant trees and failure to do so should attract a 10-year jail term; and 
All developments in wetlands and forest reserves be destroyed within six months.

Mr Speaker, those are the resolutions that I beg the House to vote on. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I think that was well clarified. Can we have the Leader of the Opposition. 

5.13
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Osinde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. An English man once said, “A man married to a wicked woman is the last to know in the entire village that his wife is promiscuous.” I use this proverb to pass a message to the Government, especially the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who has just spoken. 

If she knew that all these were supposed to help us mitigate climate change, we would not be discussing much of this. You have dedicated much of this country’s resources – It is you who are in charge of the allocation, it is you who are in charge of giving bonuses to people who have not even done anything. As the Opposition, we would prefer this Government to leave un-prioritised areas of the economy like giving out bonuses and put much of that money into development activities, which can take this country to the next level.

Mr Speaker, it will be unfair and unjust if the shadow Cabinet, which consists of a minister in charge water and environment, fails to give our resolutions as the Opposition. We have a functioning ministry, which is well equipped with a minister, who is very capable, by the names of Oyum Onyango.

As the Leader of the Opposition, I conclude by wishing all the Members journey mercies back home. I wish you a re-election to the next Parliament, which will be the Eleventh Parliament. You should also wish me well because I also have to go back and get re-elected.

Honourable members, conclusion is always part of life and a man has to conclude his life by dying. I am not doing that but I am sitting down and my conclusion as the Leader of the Opposition is going to be given by my Shadow Minister for Environment. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want you to flout the rules. When the Leader of the Opposition speaks, it degrades the side of the Opposition for anybody lower than that to speak after him. It is in your interest as Leader of the Opposition and also in the interest of the Member who is coming to speak; so I would rather suggest that you decline.

Thank you very much, honourable members. I think this has been a very interesting and informative debate. I would like to congratulate you because if you were to be the real Parliament, I think the decisions that you are going to vote on would have been very effective. I believe that Government and the Parliament of Uganda are going to take due consideration.

I now want to guide Members on the voting procedure. We are going to use what we call a “voice vote” method. That means that if you are in favour of this motion and all its resolutions, you say “aye”, which actually means “yes”. If you are not in favour, you say “nay”. Once I put the question, I will listen in; depending on whether you want to support the motion by saying “aye” or disagreeing with it by saying “nay”, I will know which side takes the day. Is that okay?

We have listened in and we are now going to vote. I know we had Members who had contributions to make but as I told you, this is not going to be a one-off. Please make sure that you come to the Clerk to Parliament who will make them part of your submissions.

Now, Members, it is time for voting. I now put the motion to you. The motion is for a resolution of the Public Parliament urging Government to take measures to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for voting. I now declare this session adjourned sine die – that is indefinitely. We shall tell you when the next session will be held. Thank you. (Applause)

(The Public Parliament rose at 5.17 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 