Thursday, 26 February 2015

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to clarify that I have made some adjustments to the Order Paper because on Thursdays, private Members’ business ought to take priority, but we have three motions and I think they are going to take more than two hours. We have agreed that we start with the clauses of the Bill still remaining and then spend the rest of the day on our work. 

I think hon. Ssekitoleko had something to report, briefly. 

2.52
MR ROBERT KAFEERO SEKITOLEKO (Independent, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you aware that on 4 November 2014, this august House resolved that a select committee be put in place to investigate the procurement process on the standard gauge railway. 

On the 11th day of November, the Speaker went ahead to announce the names of the members. The investigations progressed very well and in a letter addressed to you on 9th January 2015, I requested for an extension for the reasons that I stated in that letter and you granted it, Madam Speaker.

The committee has been and is still expecting very crucial information from the Ministry of Transport of the People’s Republic of China. This week, we were reliably informed that we can only get this crucial information three weeks from now due to unavoidable circumstances. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, pursuant to rule 207(2) of our Rules of Procedure (2012), the committee prays that you grant an extension of another three weeks in order to accommodate and let the committee get this information and report to this House thereafter. I beg to move. 

2.54
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will try to be very brief but to the point. There is a big problem about land in Uganda today and if we don’t wake up as Parliament to rescue our people, then they are in danger. 

Permit me to raise a matter of public concern on the land grabbing question together with my colleague, hon. Kaahwa Tophace, who is now receiving the President in her area and is unable to be here. 

In Kyangware Sub-County, over 2,000 people holding “Bibanja” are threatened with eviction on the orders of one person who is also a minister in Government and is none other than hon. Muruli Mukasa, the Minister in charge of Security. He claims to own 2,000 acres of land on which he does not want anybody to stay and he has fronted a fake company known as Nguse Ranchers Limited.

Nguse Ranchers Limited, which the minister fronted to acquire land under questionable covers, is a briefcase company, as I will testify here. This company has already been pronounced as a briefcase company by the Registrar of Companies in Uganda. This is a very serious matter, a person misusing his own office to render people homeless in the Uganda of today, which should be celebrating its independence after 52 years.

I would like the Government of Uganda to seriously answer these questions; its failure to answer these questions will render it inefficient and incapable of governing the affairs of this country.

Why is the police siding with these land grabbers in that area? As I speak, most people are in hiding for fear of being arrested without reason. What are the police doing? They are supposed to act impartially in protection of civilians but they are siding with the land grabbers and our people are most insecure.

I would like to request Government, through its mechanisms and possibly Parliament, not to just look on about this matter. Let investigations be carried out to find out whether that minister went through the right channels to acquire that land. If it is found that he went through the wrong channels, misusing the President’s office, he should be censured as we have done to so many other people.

Finally, Madam Speaker, in light of that, you allow me next week to present and appropriate petition in order to establish the stand of these people who need immediate rescue. Otherwise this Government, led by President Museveni, stands warned that for as long as the general population is insecure, you are equally insecure. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the minister to just say a few words, if he knows about this matter.

2.58
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have listened carefully to what my colleague has said. There is absolutely no jot of truth in what he has mentioned here. The matter that he has touched is already in Court. 

Nguse Ranchers Limited is company that exists and is not a brief case one. That company was offered land by the Hoima District Land Committee through proper channels. Nguse Ranchers Limited is not evicting anybody. There are a number of encroachers who entered that land from the time the offer was given up to today. These encroachers went to Court and this matter of their stay there is still in Court therefore, it is subjudice.

Madam speaker, as a minister -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is true that the matter is in court, we do not need to discuss it. It is sub judice; so there will be no other petition on the matter until we have had from the court.

Concerning the request by the committee of hon. Ssekitoleko, your request is granted for three weeks.

2.59
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the fate and future of Uganda’s football. Two rival broadcasting companies - that is Azam Television and Super Sport - were each offered separate full rights to televise Uganda’s super football league. It is alleged that separate offers of the same league were disguised to the companies as being different tournaments. Azam Television got the rights under the name of Uganda Premier League and Super Sport under the name of Uganda Super League, only to find themselves later televising the same matches. This rivalry has meant that the Uganda football league or whatever name it is, cannot be televised today.

As a consequence, a number of clubs have either pulled out or have threatened to pull out of the tournament because failure to televise their matches reduces chances to market their players for professional football. This would again mean that Uganda will not get a chance to be represented at regional and world club championships because a team must qualify from this local league before being admitted to regional and world club championships.

My request to the minister is one and simple; to come out and explain the fate and future of Uganda’s football vis-à-vis this impasse. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. At an appropriate time, I hope the Minister of Education and Sports can come and explain the issues of the league.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION BILL, 2014

3.02
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament, I wish to lay before the House, the Uganda Development Corporation Bill, 2014, for the first reading.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the Certificate of Financial Implications?

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, in accordance with the Budget Act requirement, I hereby lay before the House a Certificate of Financial Implications.


THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry for expeditious perusal and report back.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker and honourable members, every year 8th March, was designated by the United Nations as the International Women’s Day and member states have commemorated this day since 1975, which was the UN International Women’s Year. 

In Uganda, the International Women’s Day is gazetted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national level as well as within local governments. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by Government to the goals of gender equality and empowerment of women. Gender equality and women empowerment is enshrined in the Constitution, which guarantees equality of all citizens irrespective of ethnicity, age, sex, faith and ability without discrimination. 

On this day, honourable members, Government takes stock of the achievements attained towards improving the lives of women and girls and also helps to reflect on the challenges that still hinder emancipation of women. In addition, it is a day when acts of courage and determination by women who have played extraordinary roles in the empowerment process of the women of Uganda are remembered. 

The actors in both the central and local governments also take stock of the contributions made towards the empowerment of women and sets forward-looking strategies for women and girls to accelerate gender equality and women’s empowerment through tackling the unfinished agenda.

Honourable members, the observance of the International Women’s Day, this year, is very important for the women of Uganda because of the following: 

The year 2015 marks 20 years since the adoption of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, which Uganda signed to and has guided the global gender agenda for the last 20 years.

In March 2015, at the 59th Session of the Commission on the Status of Women, which will be held at the UN headquarters in New York, the world will gather to review the progress of implementation of the platform for actions and lay strategies for the future. 

In addition, the year 2015 strikes in the Sustainable Development Goals, which are to replace the Millennium Development Goals. The goals focus on equality and women empowerment agenda with specific targets to be achieved by 2030.

The targets include: 

    i. Ending all forms of discrimination against women and girls.
    ii. Eliminating all forms of violence and harmful practices against women and girls.
    iii. Promoting shared responsibility within the household and ensuring women’s full and effective participation in leadership.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the continental level, Agenda 2063 is the strategy to optimise the use of Africa’s resources for all Africans. It aspires, among others, for a prosperous Africa based on inclusive growth and sustainable development, which is people-driven and unleashing the potential of women and youth. It also emphasises inclusive development where no child, woman or man is left behind or excluded on basis of gender among others.
In Uganda, this year marks about three decades since the assumption of the NRM Government to power. The NRM 10-point programme and subsequently the 15-point programme committed the Government to empower women in all spheres of development. 

In the same vein, the NRM party has been at the forefront of inclusion of women and gender equality issues in its policies in order to deepen the commitment for advancing the cause of women. 

At the planning level, the draft second National Development Plan (NDP II) envisions a transformed Ugandan society from peasant to a modern and prosperous country within 30 years.

Honourable members, all these global, continental and national events and initiatives offer opportunities for addressing the unfinished agenda for empowerment of women and girls of this country. Therefore, this year’s International Women’s Day celebrations provide a unique forum to start on the processes at the country level.

Madam Speaker, over the years, the International Women’s Day is celebrated under a theme selected by the United Nations. The United Nations’ theme for 2015 is “Equality for Women is Progress for All.” In line with domesticating the celebrations, the national theme is “Empowerment of Women and Girls is Progress for All; Three Decades of Gains for Ugandan Women and Girls.” 

This theme has been selected to demonstrate that the empowerment of women and girls is a human right and benefits everyone in the families and the society at large. The theme shall enable state and non-state actors to showcase best practices that have empowered women in the last three decades.


Empowerment is a journey that cannot be attained within a short term but it is a process that needs continuous efforts towards its attainment. Since 1986, the NRM Government has put in place several strategies and programmes that have promoted women’s empowerment. The theme will provide an opportunity to evaluate the achievements and set forward-looking strategies for Ugandan women in the post-2015 global development agenda.

The theme draws the attention of all actors - Government, civil society, faith-based organisations and the private sector – to review and re-examine the extent to which their respective policies and programmes have responded to the agenda of empowerment of women and girls in all spheres of development.

I wish to inform you that commendable progress has been attained in promotion of gender equality and women empowerment in the country. For example, the country has achieved in the parity in enrolment of girls at primary level, critical mass of women in the national Parliament, institutionalised gender planning in all sectors and increased access to social services. 

To propel these achievements further, Government is prioritising women’s economic empowerment. When women have economic means, they are in better positions to seek better healthcare for themselves and the family members, cater for non-tuition costs for their children, thereby contributing to reducing dropout rates of school children and are able to contribute to the welfare of their homesteads. In this regard, my ministry has formulated a women’s enterprise programme to support entrepreneurial initiatives of women. 

This programme will enable women to access funds for their enterprises, develop their skills and access markets for their products. It is within this context that the national theme this year is focussing on empowerment of women and girls in order to attain gender equality.

As I conclude, honourable members, you are all informed that Kabale District Local Government will host the national celebrations for this year. The national venue is Kabale Golf Course – Makanga Hill. His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda is expected to officiate at the national celebrations.

During this national celebrations event, the “He for She” campaign will be launched by H.E the President. “He for She” is a solidarity campaign for gender equality initiated by the United Nations. The campaign intends to mobilise one billion men and boys, globally, as advocates and agents for change to end the persistent inequalities faced by women and girls. This campaign is premised on the fact that gender equality is an issue that affects all people and that all women and girls’ empowerment is progress for all.

The day is usually preceded by the Women’s Week from 1st to 7th March, during which various actors engage in self-help activities to show solidarity with women. In this regard, all actors in various sectors, including districts, political leaders, women leaders, the civil society, government departments, the media and the private sector are expected to participate in the preparations to ensure that this year’s International Women’s Day is memorable.

I, therefore, call upon all of you to show solidarity with the women of Uganda and join us to observe the International Women’s Day in Kabale District at the Golf Course, Makanga Hill and also support your constituencies to commemorate the day. I thank you very much and I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, especially for coming well ahead of time. At least now we know the theme and your plans. 

Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming a number of guests. We have students from Uganda Martyrs University, Rubaga Campus. They are represented by hon. Kasibante and hon. Naggayi of Kampala. We also have students of Kawempe Muslim Secondary School, represented by hon. Latif Ssebagala and hon. Naggayi. We also have pupils of St Anthony Primary School Mutungo. They are represented by hon. Fred Ruhindi and hon. Naggayi. Therefore, Kampala is here today. Thank you very much.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The statement the minister has made is very important and I wonder whether you would allow for some interventions from us since it is a ministerial statement. Is it possible?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you were happily seated; so, I thought you were really satisfied. Let us have three comments. I do not see the shadow cabinet minister here.

3.17
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for this very important statement that she has made to this House. I also congratulate her and the women of Uganda because we are heading for yet another International Women’s Day celebration, something that we always look forward to. 

Madam Speaker, I am particularly encouraged by the theme – “The Empowerment of Women and Girls is Progress for all”. As the minister was talking, I reflected so much on how many times we have had such very nice themes for Women’s Day celebrations. I would like to ask the honourable minister: Is it just a question of a theme for each and very Women’s Day celebration or are there provisions within the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs and indeed Government as a whole, which allow for the reflection on interventions thereafter? 

Therefore, when we gather in Kabale next week or the week after, do we have a provision within our ministry, which allows us to reflect on the achievements in regards to that particular theme before we get into the theme for the next Women’s Day? This is because the celebration is not just enough for us to gather, to dance and don party colours or whatever else we do on that day. I think there is something more than that, which the women of this country need to take home.

In that regard, Madam Speaker, I want to raise two very pertinent concerns. If you are thinking about empowering the women of this country, can we call on Government - if they are committed to this theme - to ensure critical investment in agriculture? Over 90 percent of the women we are talking about survive on a daily basis in the agricultural sector, the most underfunded sector in our economy. Therefore, how well can we empower them if we are not empowering agricultural production?

Secondly, as we reflect on this theme and empower the girl child, how can we empower girls who experience the highest dropout in our education system? If you put 100 girls into primary one in the universal primary education cycle, by the time they reach primary seven, 70 percent of them will have left the cycle. Is it possible for us to pay serious attention to those dynamics in the agricultural and the education sectors? Then and only then, shall we begin to realise the dividends of this theme. Without that, it will be very difficult. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the honourable minister for this wonderful statement. What caught my eye in this statement is the “He for She” solidarity campaign.  I am so impressed that our President will be launching this campaign. I want to say that in this campaign, the men really need to support women. Whenever I watch TV, I have been perturbed for the last one week, by the number of women who get battered by men. If you watched NTV last night, there was this lady who was beaten badly by the husband. These are the ones the media have been able to capture but how about the thousands of women who have been beaten by their husbands or spouses in their various villages and districts? 

I really want to ask, starting with the men in Parliament, that now that we are having this “He for She” campaign, the men should come in solidarity and we try to promote equality and support the girl child. It is not fair when women are being battered. It is not fair for you to see a woman being cut in the face just in the name of money. 

The women in this country do everything within their means to look for money, to fend for their families, but many people treat it as a passion issue; that the woman has been beaten because of love. I want to call upon the ministry that we should not just stop at watching this on TV and say it is after all because of love that this woman has been beaten and therefore she will recover. 

I want to call upon the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Affairs and Government to try to reach out and support these women. After they have been beaten, we should extend a hand of help to them. Not only financial but even strive to see that we give them medical care and sensitise them further. It is not enough to see a hundred women and three hundred men in Parliament and therefore think women are doing just fine.

Madam Speaker, women suffer in this country. They get beaten every other day by their spouses and other men. Therefore, as we celebrate the International Women Day –(Interruption)

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Thank you so much, hon. Evelyn Anite. Madam Speaker, as we are talking about the “He for She” campaign, last week, it was on various TV channels that we have in Uganda; acid was poured on a woman by her husband. This is because of the attitude men have that women cannot get rich. They want to own women’s property.

The information I want to give to men in this country is that you are our husbands. We go to our bedrooms together and lock the doors as husbands and wives. We are your mothers. Therefore, treat us like human beings. As we celebrate this year’s Women’s Day, let men stand up and be examples in this country so that we co-exist just like it is written in the Bible. That is the information I wanted to give, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, thank you, Jacqueline, for that information - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! The mothers are now coming in. Please, use half a minute to conclude, honourable.

MS ANITE: I just want to say something for the girls because I am just transiting from a girl to a woman. This is a special call; not only to the mothers here in Parliament but even the ones who are outside in public. There is an issue of lack of sex education to the girl child. The girl child does not know - gone are the days that the senior women teachers used to talk to the girl child about menstrual periods, and that if they had intercourse they would get pregnant.

The girls outside there have been left by themselves. A girl gets pregnant at the age of nine years. This is happening, Madam Speaker. I move in villages -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it will be limited time for each of you. We will also have a male voice.

3.26
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You can see how important a woman is because many people want to contribute. I hope they will be given chance, like me. 

I would like to thank the minister for this loaded statement. For me, the biggest statement is that we are being given an opportunity to address the unfinished agenda for women empowerment and girls of this country. However, unfortunately, the minister has not highlighted the unfinished business. She has left it to us to fill in the gaps.

The women of this country are in real trouble. I will give an example of a case that is on my hand in Masindi. This lady has been constantly battered by the husband and eventually - (Interjections) – well, you know most of us are not married officially in terms of customary or church. After this last recent beating, the woman went to her parents’ home but during the holidays, she paid a visit to her children who were staying with the grandmother. During her visit, the children cried and the grandmother allowed her to take these children with her.

However, this man connived with the police. As I talk, the woman is in jail being accused of kidnapping her own children. The reason as to why I say there is connivance is that the police knew that the Chief Magistrate who was supposed to handle this case was on a retreat in Kampala. The Grade One Court where she appeared had no jurisdiction to grant bail to this lady. Therefore, since Monday - and of course they finish on Friday - she will stay in prison until next Monday. 

As we look at the unfinished business, it is not enough to empower women economically only. We have to look at the social but also the cultural aspects. That was just an example.

Speaking of unfinished business, the minister is aware that one of the ways we empower women is through affirmative action. In our Constitution, this affirmative action is supposed to be reviewed after every five years. The fifth year is 2015. She has not updated us on the progress of this revision. I have not heard any initiative so far to review this affirmative action - (Member timed out.) 

3.30
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for this statement. My contribution will be very brief. 

First of all, I am glad that they are preparing for the women enterprise programme. I believe, in case it works well - she said it will help our women to come out of poverty. I am not an economist but I believe that it is always good to start programmes and finish them before starting others. I am happy with this but I know in that ministry, there is a programme for the elderly. They have started in some districts. In those districts, they are giving money to the elderly and that is Shs 25,000 per month. It has made tremendous changes among those old people.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether before this programme comes in, the ministry has a programme to make sure that they bring on board all the other elders in other districts. I believe if they are also brought on board, that part of it will go well. Most of these elders have orphans, for example, those who were left by the parents who died of AIDS or other sicknesses. The elders are doing a great job.

Equally, the Youth Livelihood Fund Programme did not go well. Some of us are not happy with it. I believe that if this women enterprise programme comes, the ministry should sit down, plan very well and make sure that these funds are not misused - like the youths are suffering. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is in accordance with the slogan, “He for She”; I thank you for the struggle you have gone through. 

Whereas it can be noticed that there is progress in the struggle of women, there is still a gap in our legislations, in our politics, election of people and the placement of women to different positions in the country. When it comes to the upbringing of the rural women vis-à-vis the urban women, there is still a gap. 

I would like to draw your attention to the women in the rural areas. Is this emancipation only meant for the people in the urban areas and only those who have gone to school? What about the women in the villages in the rural areas? I would like to say this with pain; Madam Speaker, you are a witness to the people of Obongi’s problems. The Minister of Education, hon. Alupo and hon. Betty Aol, are women of great respect in the country. They have been to Obongi but each time they went there, they saw the plight of the women there. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that before we go for the celebration of this day, every woman Member of Parliament who is here should bring statistics from her own sub-counties and villages, reflecting the progress so far made in her area in terms of women emancipation including - (Interruption) 

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been keenly listening to the honourable minister as she delivered her statement to the House. I am very sure that the honourable member from Obongi, hon. Kaps Fungaroo, has also been attentively listening. The minister made it strategically clear that this is empowerment of women irrespective of where they come from, whether rural or urban. In her conclusive remarks, the minister made it clear that in Kabale, it will not be the seal; it will be a launch of the “He for She” campaign.

Therefore, is hon. Fungaroo in order, when we are going to launch the “He for She” campaign, to task the honourable members, who are the female legislators, to bring accountability to this House yet he knows that we all represent the people of Uganda and not only women? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is out of order. (Laughter) You are voted for by both the men and the women. They are all your responsibility. Please conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: Okay, Madam Speaker, I will also do my part. Thank you for the wise ruling. As a Member of Parliament, for “He for She”, I promise here to bring the statistics in Obongi. I am not a woman but I love women; so I am going to bring -(Laughter) 

As I conclude, I would like to draw your attention to the sorry state of the maternity centre at Obongi Health Centre IV. There is also a dormitory of girls at Obongi Secondary School that was visited by the Minister of Education and girls were found sleeping on the floor without beds. The window of the dormitory does not have shatters. The women in Obongi do not have the opportunity for emancipation. This is the data that I bring to you before we celebrate the Women’s Day. I support women but I call upon you to also look at the rural areas. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am proposing that after hon. Ibi, we shall defer further debate so that we give it sufficient time. We have never debated about women deeply here. Therefore, next week, I will give you time. Let us close with hon. Ibi.

3.37
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will pick up from where hon. Fungaroo ended. There is a misconception that a woman Member of Parliament represents the women. We are a woman Member of Parliament, the female Member of Parliament. We do not represent women but we are the only woman Member of Parliament in the district. Therefore, this should be taken right. Otherwise you make it appear that it is only the women who are supposed to look at the plight of the women in this country. I call upon our male colleagues to advance for the concerns of the women in this country.

As I advance this debate, my concern on this question is about climate change. The question of climate change is a reality. For as long as we do not do anything on issues of adaptation and mitigation, the woman will continue fetching water, walking long distances, carrying heavy jerry cans on the head, walking over five kilometres looking for water.

The men of this country will show that they care and are concerned, if they repair the alarming state of the boreholes in the country. Most of us who come from communities that use boreholes, over 80 per cent of the boreholes are broken down and need serious attention. It is until you begin doing some of these things that we will know that you are reducing on the burden of the woman.

The other issue is the question of firewood, the fuel –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, hon. Ibi.  Madam Speaker, this country has never fast-tracked the impact of the budget we have here, on women. Every ministry in this country has a gender officer but today, if you asked the impact of the last three budgets on the dropout rates of girls, on the reduction of maternal mortality rates in specific figures, Government would never give them to you.

Therefore, as we sit here contemplating about the broken boreholes, my plea to this Parliament and to the Ministry of Gender is that every year, these gender officers placed in these ministries should do this country one favour. They should give us a statistical definition, definite figures, as to how budgets have impacted on the lives of women. 

Otherwise in agriculture, you will have wave creations, while leaving women very poor. Florence will be talking about 80 percent of boreholes in this country being dysfunctional and they will see you - 

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving information or are you now smuggling?

MS BAKO: No, I am giving information.

MS EKWAU: Thank you, hon. Bako, for the information. Lastly, Madam Speaker, I wind with a question of funding for Women’s Day –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think I will invite hon. Ninsiima, who is the host, to say something as she welcomes us to Kabale. We shall debate the rest next week.

3.43
Ms RONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and I wish to thank Government for thinking about Kabale District and giving us the opportunity of hosting this occasion, after almost 20 years.

I wish to begin by extending an invitation to everybody here, to come and join us as we celebrate. There is a lot to see in Kabale apart from the Women’s Day. You will be able to see some of those interesting sights, which have contributed to the tourism sector in this country.

Madam Speaker, because we are hosting this occasion, I have been able to interact with a number of members of Parliament, who are concerned that in their districts, this day will be celebrated on 8th March. They suggest that we may perhaps push for a circular to be given to the districts so that the function is extended by a week, after the official function so that those who would want to move to Kabale are not hindered by the fact that their districts are celebrating on that day.

This function has also brought me into close understanding of what happens in the Gender ministry. I will talk for Women’s Day but I think as Parliament, we need to do something about the funding that is usually given for bigger functions and national functions in general. We cannot single out the Women’s Day.

I was privileged to attend one of the National Organisation Committee meetings and I saw how the Ministry of Gender is struggling. They have very good ideas for such days’ activities to mark the national women’s week but they are depending so much on donors, or maybe sympathisers. It hurt me a lot because I was looking at -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, item 5.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

Clause 57

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 57 –(Interjections)- was it clause 55 of the main report? Okay, clause 55, honourable chairperson.

Clause 55

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 55, protection of members and employees from personal liability. The committee proposes to amend, by deleting the phrase “Acting on the directions of such a person” on the second line and replace with a phrase “acting under such capacity.” 

The re-draft will read, “A member of the board or staff of the authority or a person acting under such capacity is not personally liable for any act or omission done or omitted to be done in good faith in the exercise of the functions of the authority.” The justification is for clarity. 

Allow me to indicate this to the Members that what I am reading is on page 49 of the main report. There was a problem with numbering; it is item 26, which is clause 55 of the original Bill.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the principle but I am uncomfortable with the phrasing because Article 164(2) of the Constitution, if I can read verbatim, says “Any person holding a public office who directs or concurs in the use of funds or contrary to existing instructions, shall be accountable to any loss arising from that use and shall be required… ” 

The principle here is that these are public officers. When you protect them, I find it contradictory to the spirit of this Constitution. 

Two, maybe we need clarity. What sort of protection will be given to a public officer who will do activities that cannot be checked? That is where my problem is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether you have read the proposal in full. The test is the “good faith.”

MR KAKOOZA: The good faith should be defined. In the interpretation clause, there is no good faith. I remember in 2004, we had the same issue when we were amending the Customs Management Act; that a proper officer, who is acting on behalf of the Commissioner-General must be sued or be held personally liable. If you protect members and employees from personal liability, when they are working in public offices, I find it inconsistent with other laws. These are public officers whose activities must be checked and therefore we need clarity on what the spirit of this is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What the clause is saying is that you do not sue them personally but you sue the Attorney-General.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to refer to clause 8, which we passed and I promised to recommit later. “Powers of the Minister; the minister may give directions in writing to the authority in respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the authority and the authority shall comply with those directions.” In short, the board has no power if the minister directs.

For example, if you say that in this context where a member of the board, staff or persons acting on the directives of such a person - the minister may give directives on wrong activities. This means that the person may implement knowing that activities are wrong. It means as long as the minister gives wrong directives, the person is not liable by action, yet he would have advised that the activities are wrong. 

Therefore, I would like to amend that a member of board or staff who acts as per the laid regulations or rules in good faith and something goes wrong, he/she will not be personally liable.

I would also propose to redraft that we remove the words “Acting on direction of such a person” and replace it with “He/she should act as per the laws and regulations.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, are you dealing with clause 55?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson, because I would like to remove the words “A person acting on the direction of such a person.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have your report? There is a proposal by the chairperson, which is different from what you are reading.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First and foremost, as you rightly pointed out, there is a proposal by the committee chairperson to amend clause 55. The concerns of hon. Nandala have been taken care of by the said proposal. 

In respect to my brother, hon. Kakooza, I am constrained to say that good faith must always be protected. The import of this clause is not to protect an officer of the authority who has committed a crime and acted in bad faith. Good faith is the opposite of bad faith. If you act in bad faith, you are not protected.You have committed a crime and you are held liable. 

In all legislations this House has passed, including the Uganda Revenue Authority Act - yesterday we were going through the National Information Technology Authority Act -officers of an authority acting innocently during the course of their business must always be protected. I beg that you withdraw your objection.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, if you say “Any person not personally liable”, like you have guided, the drafting could be that this person if he/she is not liable, who do you sue -you sue the Attorney-General and it must clear. However, for an employee of any government institution, it is not that all times, you perform in good faith.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Good faith is also a question of proof. You will be taken to Court and they check whether it is good faith. It is test.

MR KAKOOZA: Then the drafting should not be “Any person”. When you look at the Bill, “A member of the board, staff of authority or person acting on the directives of such a person is not personally liable for any act or omission done or omitted to be done in good faith in the exercise of the functions of the authority.”

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I believe the committee has given us the basic laws. In my view, the import of the clause is not only to protect officers of the authority to perform their duties but also to make them perform their duties in such a manner that will not involve them in being personally liable. The good faith under the clause envisages acting not negligently, not criminally and the like. He/she will only be personally liable if there is evidence to suggest that he/she has acted not in good faith. I believe we could adopt the committee’s recommendations and move forward.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have another understanding of clause 55, on the basis that we do not need it.  It should be deleted because it is redundant. The principle of vicarious liability is clear and the principle of delegation is also clear. What in essence are we trying to cure here?  By saying there will be actions in good faith, others in bad faith - I think the whole of clause 55 is in bad faith itself. (Laughter)

 THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, is the vicarious liability principle clear to you or to somebody in Mbulamuti in my village? This law is not for us.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the point I would like to raise is that this is a matter of interpretation of your acts in law. Now, we are using the law as an eye to determine whether what you have done is right or not. You may not need to understand it but you must know that the principle of the law is that if somebody is acting on your behalf, you are the first to be vicariously liable for his acts.  If you delegate -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing he is not acting in the course of his employment, what happens? If I am on my own frolic; you are liable for my frolic!  

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, as I said from the beginning, there was a problem of arranging papers. What I am reading is on page 46 of the report and it is number four; “Review of the seasons of the authority and appeal. Replace the two existing sub-clauses with the following sub-clauses:

    1) The board shall -
    (a) Establish an identification and registration committee to adjudicate over matters arising and all related to the registration under this Act.
    (b) Publish the general rules and guidelines to be used by the committee in execution of its work.

    2) A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the committee established under sub-clause 1(a) may appeal to the High Court.

    3) Subject to sub-section 1(a) offences under this Act shall be tried by the High Court.

    4)  Prosecution for any offence under this Act may, without prejudice to any other powers granted to any other public officers, be instituted by registration officer on his/her own initiative or on a complaint made by any person.

    5) Proceedings instituted under sub-section (4) shall be conducted by the office of the Director of Public Prosecution.”

The justification is: clause 56(1), to clearly state the responsible committee to handle matters under this Act; clause 56(2) to provide for the appeal process under the Act; clause 56(3), (4) and (5) to clearly state the Court to try offences under the Act and procedure for commencement and for prosecution of such offences. Thank you.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairperson to assist me to understand sub-clause 5. I have gone to the Court but sub-clause (5) says; “Proceedings instituted under this subsection shall be conducted by the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions.” These days, we are allowing people to institute private prosecution. The DPP may refuse to prosecute someone that warrants to be taken to court. So, why should we limit it to DPP yet we could do it under private prosecution?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the rationale for your proposal, honourable chairperson?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, we were advised by the legal officer that it would be proper to indicate the procedure for commencement and prosecution of such offences.

Indeed, we were advised to include sub-clause (5) but the fact that we did not have any other legal person apart from the legal officer on the committee, we can be advised by the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, maybe the private prosecution would come in if we had a tribunal or something like that. I do not know what other court is available to try these matters.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, prosecution under our Constitution in Article 120 is the mandate of the DPP. The DPP even has powers to take over any private prosecution, which is instituted.

The overall mandate, under Article 120 of the Constitution, this is the mandate of the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, this is too much detail, which could go to regulations. Being new to the Members, it will take time to internalise all the clauses read. Instead of two, we are receiving seven or more.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I am to go by the explanation given by the learned Attorney-General, hon. Ruhindi, it is the very reason that same clause is redundant. The purpose is intended to limit a right because it specifically closes out. He is raising an issue that the powers to institute and takeover are vested on the DPP.

However, in the same Constitution, that must be done in the interest of Uganda. We have seen instances where the DPP has taken over matters treated as private and the only thing he does is discontinue at that point. The point raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi is valid. If the power is vested on the Director of Public Prosecutions, then we do not need to restrict it. We can leave it open.

Therefore, let sub-clause (4) be deleted so that it is up to anybody who has interest to institute a matter of that nature to raise it to Court. But immediately it will be filed, someone will come and raise a point of law. But the mandate to institute, under this Bill, is specifically vested on the Director of Public Prosecutions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should anyone walk in and sue on behalf of the Republic of Uganda?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, as we speak now, if I think that an action or maybe something is taking place in this country, I can institute private prosecution.

However, the DPP has the powers to come and take over and conduct this matter. We have had many matters in this country where DPP has not taken action. For example, I am fortified by the criminal case against the former FUFA President, David Obua.

Private people came up, instituted these proceedings in Buganda Road High Court, the DPP just came in and took over. As a result, it helped us improve sports in this country.

Madam Chairperson, there is no harm allowing an individual; I have a right, if I am aggrieved by inaction of the DPP, to take action. 

After all, the Constitution still empowers the DPP to takeover; it does not stop him. If there is inaction, I can start on the process and then he takes over.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make some amendments. To begin with, sub-clause (5) should be deleted. The DPP is free to take on any criminal issues or institute proceedings against anything he wants. In case, he fails and a private person has awakened him, he or she is free to come and take over. If we leave it this way, it means nobody will ever raise anything. That would ring fence.

The second amendment is; you are limiting it to High Court. I do not think we should limit people to High Court. Supposing in  a High Court you appear before one judge, he could err. We should allow a provision that says; “…may appeal to courts of law…” so that you go to High Court, Court of Appeal up to the Supreme Court so that you are satisfied that you won or lost. It is very dangerous if we leave it at High Court. For example, if a minister and says, “Nandala, you are no longer a Ugandan citizen.” Then when I go to the High Court, they say, “You have lost” - the Kavuma case - that would be the end of me.

I need to proceed to the Court of Appeal where there are five or 10 judges, the Supreme Court where I will get a number of them. If I lose, then I can become a non-citizen.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a court of first instance before you proceed to the Court of Appeal. You must start somewhere not straight into the Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court. There must be a Court of first instance and that is the High Court.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am raising it is because it says, “A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the committee established under sub-clause (1) may appeal to the High Court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The decision begins with the authority; the authority’s decision will take it to the High Court by way of appeal – (Interjections)- you proceed. There is no bar to the higher courts.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I concede on that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to clause 56 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWIRU: The question was put but was it amended by hon. Nandala or by the Chairperson.  The Chair had proposed an amendment – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: By the Chair; hon. Nandala abandoned his. 

MR MWIRU: No, he conceded on the last one but there was the first one, which he brought up in the same section.

THE CHAIRPERSON: About sub-clause 5? I am not quite convinced that we should cross out the DPP. I do not know what the Attorney-General says. 

I can institute proceedings as an individual but will I be doing it on behalf of the Republic of Uganda?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, under the Magistrates Courts Act, a private person has the right to arrest a person who has been caught committing a crime in flagrante delicto and even the right to commence proceedings of any nature is not closed out by the right vested on the DPP.

Although a private person may have a right to commence criminal proceedings, that right can only be extinguished upon the DPP taking over the proceedings commenced by a private person. Therefore, trying to legislate out a private person from exercising the rights under the Constitution may end up being unconstitutional. 

We leave the provisions of the law giving any citizen a right to commence proceedings of any nature but if they are criminal in nature, the DPP, if he so wishes, can take over.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose we say “May be conducted”, will that help? “May be conducted” so that the private people can also do theirs because that is not a directive; can we put “May”? 
I put the question that sub-clause (5) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause before clause 57 with a headnote “Power to arrest” and it will read as follows: 

(1) “A registration officer  or a police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed an offence under this Act shall, if it appears to the registrar or the police officer to be necessary to do so in order to ensure that the purpose of this Act are not defeated, arrest that person without a warrant.”

(2) “An arrest made under sub-section (1) shall be subject to the relevant provisions of the Law.”

The justification is to provide for powers to arrest by the officers concerned.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I have no objection to the proposal of the committee. However, for consistence in drafting, I propose that where in proposed clause 57(1), reference is made to the registrar, it should be the registration officer. The rest stays the same and I agree with the committee chairperson.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: We add the word “officer” after the word “registrar” in the third line. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced into the Bill as proposed?

(Question put and agreed to.)
New clause introduced.

Clause 57

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you say “Statutory Instruments” we are putting ourselves in danger. We would want the minister to have an approval. We are not saying he should not amend his schedule. Therefore, we want to say “The minister may, with approval of Parliament, amend the schedule to this Act.”
The justification is that if you have gone through some of the schedules, he can come and say “I do not need you to show me your parents”, he has as amended and yet it is necessary that what has been put here is good and if he wants to amend –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Member is moving ahead of the gun; the question you are raising was on the new clause 57 that was introduced where you are posing a question and we are not yet on that one.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if some people are sleeping in the House, it is very dangerous. (Laughter)  

Clause 57 is amendment of schedules. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Page 32 of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment that “The minister may, with the approval of Parliament, amend the schedules to this Act.” The justification is to avoid the minister making arbitrary decisions.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think amending or laying Statutory Instruments is the work of the minister. It will be the first time that Parliament approves the instruments. They are usually laid and after some time, you give your opinion and maybe the minister may respond –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, is my colleague in order to say, that I am talking about Statutory Instruments when I am saying “The minister, may with approval of Parliament, amend Schedules to the Act?” Where are Statutory Instruments here? Is he in order to put words in my mouth? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you suggesting that the words “Statutory Instruments” be deleted? Therefore, you will come here with an Act to amend a Schedule? Is that your suggestion?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is what I am saying that for Schedules to be amended, the minister may bring proposals to amend but the approval should be sought in the House.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want him to bring an Act to amend a schedule here?

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am at pain to understand what the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking about. I have been looking at the schedules; this Act has three schedules.

Schedule 1 is in respect to currency points; schedule 2, meetings of the board and schedule 3, information required at registration. I do not know why Parliament cannot grant the minister permission to amend the schedule in respect to currency points and in respect to procedure of the meetings of the board and the information required at registration. Shall we sit here as Parliament to really discuss the procedure for the meetings of the board?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am inclined to partially believe what hon. odoi is talking about in as far as the first and second schedules are concerned. However, when you move to the third schedule; it contains very important information that if we leave it to the minister, it raises some – (Interjections)- I would like to give an example.

Of course, I talk in this Parliament after very serious consideration and I want to review the registration, which took place about the national identity cards we are talking about. There were no proper guidelines; there were no registration centres and two, they adopted that you register where you originate from or where you reside. Yet, the purpose of this activity of the national identity was broad in as far as the one of voting is concerned. This was as a result of the information of the minister. 

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I am wondering how best we would do it to leave the minister to have powers to amend schedules 1 and 2 but then schedule 3 does not fall under that, which can be amended by the minister?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will they not be laid here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am getting worried. Schedule 1 is currency points and I do not know why my brother hon. Odoi believes that the minister of Internal Affairs has authority to amend currency points. It is the Minister of Finance. Therefore, these are things we must read first before you raise them.

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is that there is a schedule, which we can allow, like the one for the board meetings but schedule 1 is the responsibility of Minister of Finance and it is very clear. To amend that, you must come to Parliament to change the currency points.

Schedule 3 has gaps, for example, it is talking about information for registration. If I look at the first 1(a), it talks of name, date of birth but it is forgetting where I am born. It is clear you must state where I am born. Who -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we amended those issues yesterday. We carried out a number of amendments on the required information.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, will the Minister of Internal Affairs have authority to amend Schedule 1?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Maybe hon. Nandala has a problem with me but we are legislating for a future, efficient department of Government that is consistent with how departments of Government are run and any attempt to subject such amendments to Parliament may create an inefficient department of Government, especially this one we are creating.

I suggest that we maintain the formulation as it is.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to add on what the minister has just said. Clause 57 “amendments of schedules” does not mean, as hon. Nandala-Mafabi is trying to imply, that you will go and amend word by word. It says; “The minister may, by Statutory Instrument, amend the schedules to this Act”. Meaning he may add more schedules on top of the schedules which are here -(Interjections)- yes.

I would like to add that the minister has the powers - you cannot take away the power of the minister to do what is already given to him by the Constitution. Parliament cannot say that we stop the minister from doing what the minister has to do. The Executive has a role to play and we should give them an opportunity. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would Members be comfortable if we added a Clause to say that “The instrument shall be laid before Parliament?” [Honourable Members: “Yes.”] Honourable members, let us create sub-section (2) under clause 57 to state that “The instrument shall be laid before Parliament” so that you have access to it and you can attack the minister.

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 57 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 58; Regulations: The committee proposes to amend as follows: 

i) “By deleting the phrase “To give effect to the provisions of this Act” after the word “Regulations” and insert the phrase “For the better carrying out of the purposes and provisions of this Act”. Thus the re-draft to read, “The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations for the better carrying out of the purposes and provisions of this Act.”

The justification is to eliminate any limitation as to implementation.

ii) Insert a new paragraph (l) to read; “Provide for anything required or authorised by any provision of this Act to be prescribed by regulations.”
The justification is to cater for provisions that may not be provided under this section.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this also follows the same because these regulations you have made become part of the rules or laws. It would be also important that these regulations shall be laid in Parliament. 

The justification is so that Members of Parliament and the public are aware of the regulations and can raise or make comments or make any adjustments on them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a problem with that? I think there is no problem. So, we also add in a new clause that the regulation shall be laid before Parliament. 

I put the question that Clause 58 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 59

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, consequential amendments. The committee proposes to insert sub-clause (3) to read; “The Births and Deaths Registration Act, Cap 309 is repealed.” The justification is that the function of registering births and deaths was given to the authority under this Bill, so it will be a duplication of roles if the said Act is not repealed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 59 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, do you have something on clause 59?


GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, consistent with that, in addition, the following laws are hereby repealed:
 
a) The Birth and Death Act, Cap. 309;
b) Paragraph 2 of the First Schedule to the Uganda Registration Service Bureau Act Cap 210; 
c) Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, Cap. 66;
i) Section 7(1) (a) and (e);
ii) Section 7(2) by repealing the reference to (a);
iii) Part IV;
iv) Sections 56,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,79; and
v) Third Schedule repealing forms D and F.

Notwithstanding sub-clause 1(a) and (b), the Birth and Death Registration Act shall remain in force until parts IV and VI come into force on a date appointed by the minister by a Statutory Instrument.

The justification is to cater for the transitional arrangements that we have provided under clause 60 and in line with the commencement clause which provides for parts IV, V and VI to come into force at a later date to enable the function of the registration of birth and deaths to be carried out in accordance with the current legal framework until such a time as been provided. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 59 be amended -

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, apart from what the minister has proposed, apparently in these provisions, my fear is it would take endless - I thought that once a Bill has been enacted into law, with the Certificate of Financial Implications, the minister should move very fast to have it operational.

I do not think that this transition should be legislated; supposing it takes a year or three or more time? That is why I propose that the minister - is there a way we can find a middle position so that once these are repealed, then we should be able to take off into the new legal framework, without the minister saying they shall continue in existence until such a time. We are not given the approximate time the minister is talking about.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think there was concern in this House about the transition and that is what the minister is trying to accommodate. 

I put the question that Clause 59 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on clause 60, “transitional provision.” As earlier indicated in my response on the proposed clause 57 of the committee’s report;
I propose to redraft below to take care of the concerns of the committee as had been proposed in clause 57(1).

The proposed draft is as follows:

1) “The National Identification Register, records relating to the registration of citizens and aliens, national identification cards, alien identification cards and related documents granted under this Act repealed by this Act or under any law in force prior to the coming into force of this Act and which is valid immediately before the coming into force of this Act, continue to have effect according to its terms as if it had been done or granted under this Act.” 

2) “Registration of births and deaths will continue under the mandate of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau until parts V and VI of this Act come into force.”

The justification is that this seeks to improve the existing provision of clause 60 of the Bill to allow for a saving provision for the National Identification Register; records etcetera acquired under this Act repealed by the Bill and clarify on commencement dates and transitional issues, which had been proposed by the committee report under clause 57(1). I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 60 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.

First Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the First Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question out and agreed to.)

First Schedule, agreed to.

Second Schedule

MS NAMUGWANYA: Schedule 2, Paragraph 1: “Meetings of the Board

    i) Amend paragraph 1(1) by replacing the word “two” on the first line with the word “three”

    ii) Amend clause 1(3) by replacing the word “executive director” with “chairperson”.

    iii) The justification is, for paragraph 1(1) to provide for a more realistic period for board meetings and for paragraph 1 (3). The practice is that the chairperson convenes board meetings and not the executive director. 

    iv) Paragraph 3, Decisions of the Board: Delete clause 3 (2) and the justification is to eliminate the vulnerability process that is subject to forgeries and manipulation. Electronic evidence is also hard to prove. 

    v) Paragraph 5, Minutes of proceedings 5 (1), insert the phrase “Chairperson and” between words “the” and “executive” and delete the word “and secretary” between “executive” and “to” and replace it with the word “director” 

Thus the re-draft to read, “The Board shall cause the minutes of all proceedings of its meetings to be recorded and kept, and the minutes of each meeting shall be confirmed by the board at the next meeting and signed by the chairperson and the executive director”

Madam Chairperson, part of the redraft is fine but then the reference to the “executive director” - we agreed in our prior discussions here that we leave the Office of the secretary and that means that the minutes will be signed by the chairperson and the secretary. 

The justification is that the secretary and chairperson are responsible for the minutes of the meetings. Madam Chairperson, issues referring to the part of executive director where we were replacing the executive director with the secretary to the board - we have vacated that amendment but retained the rest.

MR KASULE: The question on who is responsible for the minutes – if we say chairperson and secretary, then who is responsible? -(Interjections)- you cannot say both. When you say that “The secretary shall be responsible for the minutes” you say it but do not say that “Both shall be responsible for the minutes.” We do not want wars in the board. Decide on one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is your objection?

MR KASULE: My objection is on her justification that those responsible for the minutes shall be the board chairperson and the secretary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But is the justification part of the clause?

MR KASULE: It is in the clause that she read. Let her read the clause and then we iron it out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: All that she is saying is that they will be signed by the chairperson and the executive director, which is ownership. Honourable members, I put the question that the Second Schedule  be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

 Third Schedule

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, on the Third Schedule - “Information required at registration. The committee proposes to amend (c) (iv) by deleting the word “to” and replace it with “of”. The re-draft will read: “Details of parents.” The justification is for grammatical correction.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not see where it mentions the place of birth, descendants or clan. I would like to propose that we add under (a) name and date of birth, place of birth, clan and descendants.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that not under (b) on information relating to citizenship and instances of such citizenship?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you can say “information” which is just relating. If you can see here, it is not just the details of parents. What I am trying to raise is that your place of birth must be clear, the clan must be known – (Interjections) - yes, in Uganda we have clans and so, your descendants must be known because you could be registered by birth or by descent and that is why I would like us to add them on the form so that you can identify the person adequately. 

The justification is very clear. Currently, when you apply for a passport, they will ask for your place of birth, clan; they will ask whether you are descent or birth. So, that is why it is important that we put it here. 

In justifying of this- if I do not put a clan, somebody may come from Sudan and will not be able to be identified because there is no clan being mentioned. We should also add a tribe – The Luo exist in Kenya and Uganda so let us also add “tribe” so that we are able to identify a person clearly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have any objection to that?

MS KABAALE: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to add (f) onto the Third Schedule to read: “Any other information as maybe required by the authority from time to time.” -(Laughter)- I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, justify.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As we advance, there is certain data that goes with globalisation, so, the minister will not constantly come here to make requests for inclusions. That is why I am proposing “……from time to time.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have any objection to that? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: No, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Third Schedule  –

MR LWANGA: Madam Chairperson, I did not quite understand where we were concluding because actually hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a very good point.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is what I am putting the vote on. I am going to put the question. The minister has no objection to hon. Nandala’s proposal.

MR MULONDO: Madam Chairperson, section 30, which provides requirements in addition to requirements in the Third Schedule  there is a host of other information that a person due for registration is supposed to provide, which includes things like birth certificates, driving permits, baptism certificate, voter’s card and all these contain information about somebody.

Issues of citizenship of all categories in subsection 5 also are requirements. So, I do not know - my brother’s proposal good as it is, it is already covered in the detail.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the proposal made by hon. Nandala. What he was adding had to do with information not documents for identifying or for proving the credibility of information as hon. Mulongo would like us to believe.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is no problem having as much information as possible for registration. I put the question that the Third Schedule be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala and hon. Kwagala.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we had a lengthy debate on this matter but we had not agreed. So, I now put the question that clause 40 – 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Before you put the question, mine was really to appeal to the House that the progress on this Bill has been largely achieved by consensus and to that extent, now we here we should still be governed by consensus where at the end of the day, the entire Parliament will be winners.

I would like to propose an amendment to say: “For purposes of this section a ministry, department, commission or agency of Government may access and use the information contained in the register.”
For those who are interested in the Electoral Commission, let us put this commission to also cover other commissions that we have in the country. Secondly, it is not prudent to legislate a particular provision here with eyes looking at the Electoral Commission.

For those who had strong feelings, the win-win position should be to put the word “commission” here without necessarily having the Electoral Commission singled out. That is why I would agree with the chairperson of the committee but just to add that small amendment and then move that we delete clause 40(2) because it would really go against the spirit of consensus. 
For those who are interested in the Electoral Commission, if we insert here “commission” then Electoral Commission for purposes of avoidance of any doubt would be covered. 

I seek the indulgence of Members that really if this is the spirit – and colleagues, when you over emphasise Electoral Commission you are making it suspicious. If you are legislating in good faith, for the betterment of this law and for all Ugandans, then if you over emphasise you are not allowing any amendment; you make it appear that, indeed, the fears of Members could be true. In that spirit –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving me the opportunity to inform you. Madam Chairperson, for all the times we have discussed about this section, we found out that it is the Electoral Commission, which almost does the same thing like the authority we are setting up. So, we saying that may be if they feel that they can use the information, let them use it. If we generalise and say “commissions”; there is no problem. In case, we do not have enough money, the Electoral Commission may not be willing to say, “Let us use this information.” Honourable colleague, without any bias, if we do not make it this way – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give the member holding the Floor, hon. Ssekikubo, is twofold:- First, that the proposal as forwarded by the minister supported by the committee is that it leaves room for manipulation and uncertainty. They may use this information to update the register. Assuming there is a by-election today in Kabale and they decide to go to this database and use that information. Then there is a by-election somewhere else in Kanungu and they will use their discretion to say that, “Now, we are proceeding under the conventional electoral law.” On the same day in the afternoon they will say, ”No. We shall proceed under the Registration of Persons Act and therefore, we will not do this update of the register as provided for by the conventional electoral law.”  As Parliament, we need to allow these agencies to be consistent.

Secondly, the reason we make laws and we prescribe details is to guide and guard the parameters within which discretion is exercised. When you say “Today, the Electoral Commission may” means that that they can use this information under this Act, then the following day they can change. Agencies must be guided and their discretion must be guided by Parliament. We must have standards, honourable Colleagues.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, we here and we debated this for about two hours and by the close of the day, we were only remaining with this House to take a decision. May I know whether we are still debating the same issue? (Interjections) My colleague, this is the information because if we are opening a new debate on -(Interjections) may we also -(Interjections) With due respect, my honourable colleague, we debated yesterday for about two hours.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, my good colleague.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Chairperson, lastly, I thank colleagues who have given me information. But the last point I would like to give to colleagues; let us not attempt to smuggle amending of the Electoral Commission Act under this very Bill. Let us not try to even attempt to amend the Constitution through this Registration of Persons Bill. If we wanted to do that, there is an opportunity where to find it but not here. And to that extent colleagues -(Interruption)

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I thank you, hon. Ssekikubo for yielding the Floor. I agree with you hon. Ssekikubo fundamentally that if we move by consensus we move well. The problem here is that in order to build consensus, the minority should always be in the position to concede. You know the position of the majority must always prevail and it is apparent on the face of the record that there is a majority and a minority opinion on this matter right from yesterday.  May I request hon. Ssekikubo that you concede and we move? (Mr Ruhindi rose_)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I would with great pain also allow information from the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have taken over my work. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am very happy that with a lot of pain, we are going to generate some harmony on this issue. You see, there is no contradiction of laws, first of all, let me clarify -(Interjections)- give me the opportunity. This authority will have a register of persons. It will not have a register of voters. That is number one.

The register of persons can be accessed by these agencies you are talking about. For instance, with the case of the Electoral Commission, this is in respect of the section that was being cited by hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi, section 19 of the Electoral Commission Act, which says: “A person must apply to be registered.” You cannot conscript a person to vote. In other words, the Electoral Commission will announce or update the register. People will express interest to vote and then, the Electoral Commission will ask this person who wants to vote; “Are you a citizen of Uganda?” “If you are a citizen of Uganda, do you have an identification card?” Then you become eligible to vote. Even in applying for a job, for instance, by necessary implication, you must attach you necessary testimonials -(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. From the statement that the Electoral Commission will ask a person; “Are you a citizen?” At that point, is the Electoral Commission with that person or it goes to the database and just gets the data and uses it? If the Electoral Commission is asking the person when he or she is present, it means the Electoral Commission is using his identity card without going to the database.  So, why do you put this thing here that the Electoral Commission may use the data when it is supposed to ask me whether I have an identity card? (Members rose_)

MR RUHINDI: You see, let me finish my contribution if I can be given your ears. There is nothing to stop the Electoral Commission from accessing the register of registered persons of Uganda. So, against the people who wish to vote, the Electoral Commission verifies its necessary requirements vis-a-vis that register of persons. Is that clear?

Now, why we are putting in the Electoral Commission in sub clause (2), not only is it for avoidance of doubt but given its mandate and we all know its significance as Electoral Commission particularly as elections are concerned -(Interjections)- let me finish, please. We did not want to leave this to mere interpretation where you have to say, for instance, hon. Ssekikubo is moving an amendment that we insert only the expression “Commission” then we may have to go into interpretation that commissions includes Electoral Commission. We cannot afford that lacuna. We have got to be as clear as possible in the law, that the Electoral Commission can access that information from the authority. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have debated this matter since the 19th December when two reports where presented; we debated it again on 3rd February and yesterday. There were two reports; a majority report and a minority report- (Interjections)- The proposal of the minority report was that clause 42 be deleted. So I want to put the question, honourable members. I put the question that clause 40 (2) be deleted.

(Question put and negatived.)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I realise that what my brothers and sisters on the other side want is the dominance mention of the Electoral Commission. I beg to move an amendment to say that “The Electoral Commission like other commissions can have access” and then include the word “….for verification only”. You can say anything but “…for verification.” 

So, the Electoral Commission can use a passport or identity card for verification purposes. (Interjections) Madam Chairperson, if we have good intentions and I am saying this because the Bible tells me under Isaiah 33:20-24 “The Lord said, For the Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King”.   Therefore, today whoever is standing with God, the truth is that what the Attorney-General has said comes to one conclusion that the ID will be used for verification. That is what has been emphasised over and over again.(Interjection) Madam Chair, I am at pain. 

I would have wanted, as a legislator who was sent here by the people of Dokolo, to be involved in vetting Col. Kwiringira to preside over the process. But I was not given that opportunity. Why? It is because there was no law. Therefore, what we are doing is to cure the faults and mistakes of the past; what has already been done. That is a fact. You know very well that the whole process was managed and supervised by the military. Even up to now - go to that office in Kololo - so, we are willing to compromise, but use the ID for verification purposes – (Interjection)- we will agree otherwise if this House -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank hon. Cecilia Atim Ogwal, for giving way. Madam Chair and colleagues, the information I want to give hon. Cecilia Ogwal is from what hon. Fred Ruhindi said - and I want to agree with him on the interpretation of the law. One, taking the background that somebody wishing to participate in voting will apply. Therefore, you cannot say, in anticipation that this person applying to vote is in the register. 

The Electoral Commission will receive somebody’s application – and that is where I agree with him.  The information of the person wishing to vote will be supplied by the applicant. There is a specific form designed by the Electoral Commission onto which the applicant supplies that information. That information will be verified by the Electoral Commission using all manner of avenues available to them. The Electoral Commission, at that point, will wish to ascertain whether this person is a citizen because that is a key qualification in the electoral law. In doing that, they will look at the database under the Persons Registration Act as one of the sources. If that source can’t work for them, they will look the other alternative sources to verify whether the applicant is a Ugandan or not. At that point, if we conscript the Electoral Commission and force it into using this data at a point even before the electoral process has begun, we would be offending the Constitution. That is the information I want to give the member. So, verification is acceptable.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chair, as I said, certainly we need a compromised position on this. We are making the law for posterity, not for the next election only. Let us look at each person’s eye and see whether it is correct. Mr Minister, you look into my eyes and tell me whether you are moving with God. (Applause) 

Madam Chair, my amendment would read – and I am appealing for compromise. As I said, I am standing on the side of the Lord. He is the lawmaker. I am just doing it on His behalf and I am quoting the Bible – Isaiah 33:20-24. Anyway, as I said earlier, my amendment would read as follows: “For the purpose of this Section, a ministry, department or agency of Government may access and use the information contained in the register for verification purposes.” That is my amendment, Madam Chair.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, we are proceeding well and I can see some light at the end of the tunnel. However, let me tell you that the challenge we have had in our electoral process is the lack of a credible register. It is not only a challenge in the national elections, but in our own electoral processes in the intra-party activities.  Yes, for verification purposes, that is okay. Why not? However, take it further because these identification cards have more details. The biometrics, which are in these identification cards are very critical so that at the time of voting, an election officer can identify you by them. This means that it is not only for verification purposes. These identification cards will also be a critical element at the time of voting.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, I agree with hon. Ruhindi 100 per cent. However, I also agree with the hon. Cecilia Ogwal 100 per cent. The point of agreement is here. Her proposal was that if we put it on (3) that, “For the purposes of this section, a ministry, department or agency of Government may access information contained in the register for verification,” then our presumption is that any other ministry, department or agency must use it only for verification purposes. 

However, we should put it in (2). In (2) which says, “The Electoral Commission may use the information contained in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ register.” But also I suggest that we include another clause, which reads: “The use of information referred to in clause 42 shall not be conclusive evidence of a voter’s registration -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are going round in circles. I now put the question that clause 42 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as we close, I want to announce that there are 140 members present in the House.

Clause 3

MS NAMUGWANYA: In clause 3 on interpretation, the committee proposes an amendment on the definition of the word “citizen” by adding the phrase, “under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to appear after the word “Uganda” on page 5. The amended clause should read as follows: “Citizen means a citizen of Uganda under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.” The justification is to clarify on the definition of a citizen of Uganda.

Madam Chairperson, I propose that we leave clause 3 (2) as a subsequent amendment after deleting the sub clause on “burial and disposal permits.” Consequentially, that has to be edited out after deleting those words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are not listening. 

MRS NAMUGWANYA: I am reading clause 3 (1) at page 23 of the report, on interpretation. The committee proposes an amendment on the definition of the word “citizen” by adding the phrase “under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda” to appear after the word “Uganda” on page 5 so that the amended clause reads: “Citizen means the citizen of Uganda under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.”  The justification is to clarify on the definition of the citizen of Uganda.

In clause 3 (2), the committee proposes that it collapses with the consequential amendment that edits out the words “burial or disposal permit.” Sub clauses 2 (a) and (b) should be dropped. We further propose a new definition of the phrase “Registration centres” to reads as follows: “Registration centres mean centres that are designated as such by the national identification and registration authority in accordance with clauase 33 of this Bill.”

Further, we propose another definition of the phrase “Registration Officer” to mean any officer appointed by the National Identification and Registration Authority with the responsibility of registering of citizens under this Bill. The justification is to eliminate any possibility of ambiguity in the words.

 The committee also proposes the amendment of the definition of the term “identity documents” by replacing the phrase “birth weighing card,” under paragraph (c) at page 7, with the phrase, “immunisation Card.” The justification is that in Uganda, hospitals issue and use immunisation card rather than birth weighing cards. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We have a commencement clause, Madam Chairperson. 

MR FOX-ODOI: Madam Chairperson, we intend to recommit clause 1 when the House resumes.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I intend to move a motion to recommit clause 42 when the House resumes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I also intent to move a motion to recommit clause 8 on the powers of minister, after the House has resumed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister, move the motion for the House to resume.

5.13
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed.)

(The House resumed, The Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
5.13
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled:  “Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and passed clauses 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60  as new clauses and  passed  First Schedules , Second  Schedule  Third Schedule  and clause 40 with amendments plus three interpretations and clause 42.  I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.15
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014
5.15
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that we recommit clause 1 of the Bill.  The justification for this motion to recommit clause 1 is as follows: Clause 1 of the Bill, as passed, is in respect to the application of the law. You may notice that we inserted parts V and VI to deal with the registration of births and deaths, but we did  that rather late. Therefore, when we were dealing with application of the law, we did not specifically address the operation of Parts: V and VI.

 I propose that we amend clause 1 to read as follows: “This Act applies to the registration of all persons in Uganda. sub-clause 2: Subject to sub-section 1, save for Parts V and VI and their related provisions, this Act does not apply: (a) to a person who is not resident or a person visiting Uganda for a period not exceeding 90 days; and (b) to a refugee recognised by the government and the United Nations High Commission for Refugees.

Madam Speaker, under Article 18 of the Constitution of Uganda, if you permit me, I will read it verbatim, it is stated thus: “The state shall register every birth, marriage and death occurring in Uganda.” What that means in effect is that only Parts V and VI of clause 1 will apply to persons visiting Uganda for 90 days and to refugees who are governed under the international conventions. It is very important that we make that distinction for the law to be effective.

Madam Speaker, I also intend to introduce a clause in respect to the commencement date, which should be actually clause 1 to read as follows: “This Act shall come into force upon assent to by the President and publication in the gazette and Parts V and VI of the Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by a statutory instrument.”

This principle was largely agreed upon by the House when we were dealing with the transitional provisions. But because we have segregated sessions of the Act that will come into effect at different dates, it is very important that we provide for this. I had indicated this to the chairperson and she has no objection. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do you have any objections to that?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I have no objection with the formulation by hon. Fox Odoi.

MR KAKOOZA: I was here when we were debating this Bill at the beginning. The practice of this House is that once the principles of the Bill in the Second Reading are accepted, that is reflected in the sections of the law. 

When you read the clause which is being re-committed, you realise that it changes the first principle of the Bill. The principle of the Bill, which was accepted at the Second Reading was to harmonise, and consolidate the law on registration of persons; to provide the registration of individuals; to establish a National Identification Register; to establish the National Registration and Identification Authority; and to provide to the issue of the National Identification Card and therein identification card and related matters. 

This is the first section of the Bill it reads that this Act applies to all registrations of all persons in Uganda. Basing on your earlier ruling, Madam Speaker, while we debated this Bill, I do not think that amendment will concur with the principle. I beg to object the amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have noted that. 

MR KAKOOZA: The procedure I am seeking is whether the re-committing and amendment will not change the principle of the Bill which was agreed upon before.

THE SPEAKER: We shall do that at committee stage. Let us get all the proposals for re-committal.

5.20
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County, West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move a motion to re-commit clause 8, which talks about the powers of minister. From the phrasing you realise there is a problem because it should be the  powers of the minister. 
The other point is about the phrase, “the minister may give directions.” In the law we have passed, we have said that the minister will make regulations - see clause 58 - to give effect to the provision of this Bill. And of course without prejudice to the above, he can make more regulations under clause 58 (2). Therefore, if he has powers to make regulations, why should the minister now give directives? These directives could be very dangerous to the organisation.  We have made the law and the authority should follow this law and the regulations that the minister will put in place. If they divert from any of those, they will be held liable.

Madam Speaker, I would like to first recommit clause 8 by moving that we correct the errors in the phrase, “Powers of minister” to read as “powers of the minister.” 

Secondly, that we replace the word “may” appearing between the words “minister and “in” in the phrase: “The minister may in consultation with the authority make rules, regulations in respect to the policy and observance  of the law by the authority,” with the word “shall.”  This is because they do not necessarily need to compile with the authority because they can accept or reject them. If the minister is giving directives and they must comply, it means in effect the minister is the overall. 

5.24
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for bringing this up. I wanted to point out that if you look at what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking about, you realise it is actually directions not directives. 

My understanding of this is that directions are some kind of guiding principles. It is different from directives, which are a command. The direction that the minister is supposed to give is in relation to policy. I think the two are quite different. These are guiding principles which are quite different from regulations and rules. They should not be confused with directives because in the English language the two are different. I thank you. I oppose the amendment as suggested. 

5.24
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): I rise to re-commit clause 42. The justification is that when you look at clause 59, which talks about consequential amendments, it is very clear that Parliament did not intend, in any way whatsoever, to amend Section 19 of the Electoral Commission’s Act. 

It is a known principle of interpretation of the law that when a latter Act is amended and it is about the same subject in a former Act - Parliament was alive to the fact that there existed a former Act and therefore the latter is effected when the former is amended.
When you look at the arguments given by the Attorney-General to the effect that whereas, we had first agreed to the use of the register for purposes of verification, it is stretched by saying that the same can be used for purposes of voting.  If Parliament adopts the clause and passes it in the current form, it has an effect of amending the Electoral Commissions Act and the Constitution.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am fortified by the case of Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere Vs the Attorney-General of Uganda. This Parliament passed a law, which had an effect on other laws and the Supreme Court said that you cannot do something indirectly, which you cannot do directly.  What are we doing in the instant case - by passing clause 42 in the form we have passed it, we are in effect amending Article 61 of the Constitution and Section 19 of the Electoral Commissions Act.

When hon. Cecilia Ogwal stood to make an appeal that we need to compromise, I construed it to mean that as Members of Parliament, we can perform better than voting. That means that we learn how to use our wisdom. It has three elements - judgement, justice and equity.  Those three elements require us to take a decision today to authorise the use of law and to compromise the electoral processes in this country.

The effect of what we are doing - I am a progressive reader - we have talked to the youth in this country -(Interjections)- that is my opinion. You can have yours too. We have to comfort the youth of this country by telling them that that option still exists to change leadership through a democratic process. When we move along this path - that we close and whoever is in power can use the state machinery to do whatever they wants, it creates danger for this country.

There has been an argument that when we allow the Electoral Commission to use the Register for purposes of voting - we are not opposed, in any way whatsoever, to the use that register to verify with the voter. What we are saying is that the process must be transparent. 

When there is suspicion on our side - we are not here ceremoniously to just strike a balance on this matter for having -(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, we have all been around as debate on this Bill went on.  By the time we reached a conclusion, the honourable member was in the House. At least everybody was given chance to speak. I do not know why the honourable member holding the Floor, is blackmailing Parliament that we have not given him chance to debate this matter.

The House gave chance to everybody before we made a decision. He is bringing in other issues like we have not used judgment and we have not used equity. Is the honourable member in order to impute to this House that we have made this decision without consensus?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have given sufficient time to this matter. We have spoken for and against. I think all opinions really have been heard on this one. You cannot claim that no one has been given an opportunity.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be re-committed - Okay, honourable members, I put the question on clause 1 to be re-committed. 

(Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the results of the voting as follows: in favour of the recommit – 13 and those against are 15. We shall therefore not recommit it.

THE SPEAKER: Clause 8, honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be recommitted. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 8, not recommitted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 40 (2) be re-committed.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 40(2), not recommitted.


BILLS
THIRD READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

5.34
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014,” be read the Third time, and do pass. I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 be read the third time and do pass.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

Bill passed.

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED: “THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the lengthy engagement. We have taken a lot of time on this Bill. However, I think that we have given the country something to work with. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Leader of Opposition and all the members for their participation. Thank you. 

5.36
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, thank you for congratulating us upon passing this law. I believe that as we go back, there are those of us who will rest knowing very well that we have done the right thing and those who will be searching their souls. Madam Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to say that we must, from now onwards, use the electronic voting system, when handling such kind of controversial Bills. 

It is very important for this country to know, and for the future, who has acted appropriately in legislating for the people of Uganda and who has not. I would have wanted to be put on record that, I have not and would never have allowed section 40(2) - and because of that Madam Speaker, I beg that from now onwards, we must vote by the electronic system. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are in the process of putting up a training for you on the use of the electronic voting system and also looking at amending the rules, to make it  part of our rules. We will be getting there. I do not know whether you know how to use these things as of now. But I want to say that the voting was thorough and the questions were clear; I am satisfied. Let us go to the next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

5.38                
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, very much Madam Speaker. I beg to lay financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following local government entities: 

    i) Buwabwala Sub-County, Manafwa District
    ii) Bumbo  Sub-County, Manafwa District
    iii) Buwagogo Sub-County, Manafwa District
    iv) Tsekululu Sub-County, Manafwa District
    v) Bunabwana Sub-County, Manafwa District
    vi) Sisuni Sub-County, Manafwa District
    vii) Lapono Sub-County, Agago District
    viii) Arum Sub-County, Agago District
    ix) Adilang Sub-County, Agago District
    x) Omot Sub-County, Agago District
    xi) Pabbo Sub-County, Amuru District
    xii) Amuru Sub-County, Amuru District
    xiii) Lamogi Sub-County, Amuru District
    xiv) Masaba Sub-County, Sironko District
    xv) Bukiyi Sub-County, Sironko District
    xvi) Bukiise Sub-County, Sironko District
    xvii) Bunyafa Sub-County, Sironko District
    xviii) Butandiga Sub-County, Sironko District
    xix) Buhugu Sub-County, Sironko District
    xx) Bugitimwa Sub-County, Sironko District
    xxi) Bukyabo Sub-County, Sironko District
    xxii) Zesui Sub-County, Sironko District
    xxiii) Lira Sub-County, Lira District
    xxiv) Agweng Sub-County, Lira District
    xxv) Amach Sub-County, Lira District
    xxvi) Barr Sub-County, Lira District
    xxvii) Unyama Sub-County, Gulu District
    xxviii) Patiko Sub-County, Gulu District
    xxix) Paicho Sub-County, Gulu District
    xxx) Bobi Sub-County, Gulu District
    xxxi) Awach Sub-County, Gulu District
    xxxii) Alwi Sub-County, Nebbi District
    xxxiii) Pakwach Sub-County, Nebbi District
    xxxiv) Parombo Sub-County, Nebbi District

I beg to lay.  Thank you very much

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, commissioner. All will be sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling and report back. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE PATIENTS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES BILL, 2015.”

MR MILTON MUHUMA (NRM, Kigulu South Iganga): Madam Speaker and Honourable members, I move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2015.” 
The motion is moved under Rules 110 and 111 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda and reads thus:

“WHEREAS Article 93 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda allows Parliament to proceed on a Bill or a motion that does not impose a charge or alteration of  taxation otherwise than by the reduction or the imposition  of the charge on the  consolidated fund;

WHEREAS article 94(4b) of the same Constitution empowers Member of Parliament to move a Private Members Bill;

AWARE that Article 8 Aof the Constitution provides for national interest and dictates that Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy and enjoins Parliaments to make relevant laws for purposes of giving full effect in the Article 8 A;

NOTING that the ministry responsible for health launched the Patients’ Rights and Responsibility Charter, the objective of which is to empower health consumers to demand high quality health care to promote the rights of patients and to improve the quality of life of all Ugandans;

FURTHER NOTING that the ministry responsible for health in a bid to promote a right to this approach in the provision of health services, issue directive on access to health services without discrimination; 

REALIZING that the charter and directives authored by the minster do not provide any enforceable assurances that discrimination in health services will be prevented or even monitored;

FURTHER REALIZING that there is need for law to be enacted to prohibit discrimination in health care delivery, safe guarding the right of patience to confidentiality and requiring informed consent to be obtained from patients undergoing treatments, as well as, giving full information to patients about the risks involved with medical procedures and medication undertaken; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved with the following prayers:  
    1) That this august House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members Bill for an act entitled, “The Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2015” and a draft of which is here attached and is hereby laid on Table; and
    2) That this House orders the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its First Reading.” 

This motion is moved by I, hon. Milton Muwuma, Member of Parliament for Kigulu County South, Iganga. The motion is to be seconded by hon. Wangolo Jacob,	Bunyole County West, Butaleja, hon. Dr Bayigga Lulume, Buikwe County South, Buikwe and hon. Sylvia Namabidde, among others. I beg to move.”

THE SPEAKER: Can you justify your motion?

MR MUWUMA: In Uganda, we have a lot of legislations that are related to health among which the national Constitution, the Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Act, the Mental Treatment Act, the Nurse’s and Midwives Act, the Pharmacy and Drugs Act, the Allied Health Professions Act, the Public Health Act, the Food and Drug Act, the HIV Prevention and Control Act, and the Uganda Patients Charter by the Ministry of health. The closest, in ensuring that the rights of patients, which the Uganda Government has, is the Uganda Patient’s Charter, launched in 2009.  

This charter is not legally binding and does not provide any enforceable assurances that discrimination in health services will be prevented or even monitored. The charter does not properly guarantee confidentiality to patients. Some legislations like the HIV Prevention and Control Act fuels fear and discrimination as it allows medical providers to disclose patients HIV status and others, contrary to international practices and violating fundamental human rights. 

Therefore there is need for Parliament to enact a law to prohibit discrimination in health care delivery, respect patients confidentiality, privacy and informed consent to all treatment including fully informed patients of the risks involved with medical procedures and medications.
Two days ago, members raised concern about the intended Bill by the Minister of Foreign Affairs to expel health workers to Trinidad and Tobago well aware that we have shortages in the health sectors to do with human resource.

When we visited the Cancer Institute recently, the key doctor we have is one of those who have been enlisted for export to Trinidad and Tobago. We feel we are causing more problems and shortages to the country. The patients in the Cancer ward now will be at risk because they will not have people to attend to them. 

Last week, we had a case in Kasese, where a patient died at the door steps of the health centre. The cause of the death was that, there was no health personal at that particular time to attend to this patient. This case has also been replicated in today’s The Daily Monitor newspaper.  Therefore, we feel that patients need their rights protected. 

Madam Speaker, the latest case is the one of Mulago where a child got deformities as a result of negligence of some health practitioners. Mulago is supposed to be paying Shs 500 million to one family in terms of compensation as a result of a bill that was sanctioned by Judges against Government. We feel such cases can ably be addressed under this Bill if at all it is granted. I beg to submit.

5.49
MRS	SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Muwuma Milton for bringing this motion. I support it. Madam Speaker, we know that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees many rights, but it does not guarantee the right to heath. When this Bill is enacted into law, it will be a way of guaranteeing the right to health for Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, the rights-based approach talks about bringing the citizens to participate in decisions that affect their lives. I believe that there are so many issues in our health services where people feel that they should have a say. But because we have not been using the rights based approach many things have not gone right.

Madam Speaker, we know that many patients have suffered at the hands of health workers. We know that many people have lost their loved ones during child birth. But it has not been possible to bring health workers or Government to account for these losses.

In addition to being a rights Bill, it will also act as an accountability law where people will be free to air the issues they feel Government must address and also put Government to task to account for the inadequacies in the health system. Madam Speaker, I would like to support hon. Muwuma and appeal to Parliament to grant him leave to bring a Bill titled; “The Patients’ Rights and Responsibilities Bill, 2015.”

5.52
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole, County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank hon. Muwuma, for moving a motion to seek leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to guide this country especially our people.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, according to Kagoya 2013, at least 36.5 per cent of patients faced a challenge regarding their rights while seeking healthcare.

Madam Speaker, 79 per cent of patients who met challenges never attempted to demand for their rights in this country. 81.5 per cent of the patients and 69.4 per cent health workers in this country had never heard of the patients’ charter. Awareness of patients’ rights was significantly higher amongst health workers - at 70 per cent - than patients at 40 per cent.

In most circumstances, patients feel powerless to negotiate for their rights because they fear being discriminated. Only those who have the ability to bribe health workers can access medical care. Madam Speaker, we have cases whereby politicians go and help their patients to access medical care, which is based on a social-economic and tribal status yet we know that all citizens of Uganda have a right to healthcare. 

Madam Speaker, after three years of inception of the Patients’ Charter of the Ministry of Health, Uganda in 2009, 81.5 per cent of patients and 69.4 per cent of the health workers are not aware of its existence. This is according to survey conducted at Mulago National Referral Hospital and published in the African Journal of Primary Healthcare and Family medicine.

The existing laws relating to health sector are health workers centred. They are reactive than proactive. Not patients’ rights and responsibilities based, thus relegating patients to mere spectators yet it is their health at stake. Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, I will give an example of a disabled woman who complained of mistreatment in one of the health centres in Uganda. This woman called Aida Nakyanzi 25, gave birth to a baby at the Government-owned Makindye Health Centre III in Kampala, in March 2013, who was 4 feet and 5 inches tall, and has a hunchback. She did not know her condition. People like her, across the country, raised many challenges they face in accessing public healthcare because of the nurses’ negative attitude towards them and the lack of ramps, doorways and beds designed to accommodate their needs. 

Madam Speaker, private hospitals offer better services but most of our patients do not have money to access medical services in privately-owned facilities. I would like to give another scenario that happened in Pallisa District, Eastern Uganda where an HIV positive lady was denied a right to ARVs because the nurses and doctors were saying: “…after all she is about to die, why do we waste time and our medicine on such a person?”

Madam Speaker, all human beings are entitled to medication.  As I conclude, equipped with knowledge of their rights and obligations, patients can be empowered to demand their rights. On the other hand, the health workers will be in a more informed position to oblige. 

Government should find more resources to better equip the health sector. However, this argument ought not to be used to justify violation of patients’ rights in many instances which only require observance of simple ethical practises. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

5.59
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion for a member to bring a Private Member’s Bill.

Madam Speaker, many patients suffer in this country and they do not know how or where to seek redress. Just the other day in my constituency, a mother was taken to a health centre III for delivery and the midwife told her she was not yet ready and she moved away. 

Hardly had she moved - I think the final stages had come and the other mothers who were around helped her to deliver her baby but they did so in a wrong way and up to now, the baby is disabled as a result. The midwife knew that the lady was due but she just moved away. When she approached me, I did not know where to go to help this lady.

Madam Speaker, as I thank hon. Milton Muwuma, this Bill is supposed to protect the patients and the patients in a way are consumers much as they are called patients. In this House, we have been demanding for the Consumers’ Protection Bill. I believe that it would have covered some of the aspects hon. Muwuma is going to address. 

However, we have resorted to a Private Member’s Bill because up to now, Government has failed to bring back the Consumer Protection Bill. I would like therefore to appeal to Government as we support hon. Muwuma that the other aspects of consumers or clients or patients that have not been covered should be put in the Consumers’ Protection Bill and brought back to Parliament for Parliament to consider and pass into an Act. I beg to support.

6.01
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Milton Muwuma for coming out with this important proposal. Certainly it is his right and it is also our right as members of Parliament to legislate on matters that pertain to public order and other things.

Madam Speaker, this Bill is going to help us to examine how our patients are accessing health and also to examine how health service delivery is being conducted. Therefore, we shall be in position to empower both sides of the equation; the patient on the one side and the health practitioners on the other side. This is because we know that even on the patient’s side, there are people who are not following instructions and therefore even cause death. We need to examine what can do with them so that instructions given by health practitioners while treating their clients are indeed followed in order to make health better. 

On the other side, we also need to examine how health workers conduct business in order to help the population to access the quality of service that we need and of course the State obligations. Therefore, this makes this Bill quite important for which I would support hon. Muwuma’s motion for him to seek leave together with us to bring up this law.

I would like to emphasise, Madam Speaker that it is important for Parliament to understand that we are here to legislate no matter where an idea for legislation has come from. A few days ago, I was denied an opportunity to seek leave of this Parliament, of which I would like to use this opportunity to appeal to my colleagues on that side so that we can become sensitive to each other when we bring business to Parliament as it is our right.

I am going to reintroduce this, Madam Speaker, when you grant me permission so that I get support from my colleagues on that side to reintroduce this Private Member’s Bill seeking leave of Parliament to introduce the Presidential Transition Bill in the offing. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he wants to see the principle of reciprocity.

6.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support hon. Muwuma in bringing this very important motion concerning health rights and responsibilities. One of the things that have really moved me in this motion is that it will go a long way to address discrimination in our societies. 

At one point as we were moving as a Committee of Parliament on Equal Opportunities, we were very alarmed to see the situation and how disabled women are suffering out there. They do not have any rights, nobody cares for them and for example, the beds, which are in hospitals, are just for normal people and the disabled women have no way to climb on top of the beds. Therefore, I believe that this kind of Bill will go a long way to address those kinds of imbalances, which have been in the health service systems.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to say that information is power and many times when patients go into hospitals, sometimes they are denied the information concerning what is going on in their body systems. For example, at one point I was in one of the hospitals and a patient was trying to find out what was going on in order to make an informed decision but the doctor barked at her saying, do you want to begin learning medicine right now? Just wait and see what I am going to do and the prescription that I will give you.  I felt very sad and for that reason I find that this Bill is going to empower as many Ugandans as possible on issues concerning their lives.

Finally on the issue of responsibility especially on the side of medical personnel, once the law is there, it is like a guiding tool that brings a sense of responsibility and shows direction of what each party is supposed to do. I thank you so much and I support the motion.

6.07
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank hon. Milton Muwuma for moving so that we give permission that a Private Member’s Bill be brought in respect to rights of patients. This definitely demonstrates that my brother hon. Muwuma is on the ground and he would like to fix things, which he thinks are still loose.

Having said that and I am glad I speak after my brother Dr Lulume, in passing this Bill when eventually it comes or in processing it, we need to be balanced the way hon. Lulume put it. There are needs and rights on the side of the patients. Likewise on the side of the practitioners; the health workers, there are obligations and also constraints and rights. 

Therefore, my request would be that we should give maximum facilitation to hon. Muwuma and those who will move with him and the committee so that the consultations are thorough. We need to go across all the health providers in the country; the government side, the faith based, the private sector and maybe even the traditional ones to see what they do to the patients. 

Once we have done that, we also need to move to the individual health workers because in the practice of medicine, we have ethics and it is important that as MPs, we understand these ethics, probe the health workers; what difficulties they have and why they are not fully following these ethics. I would even propose that before we finally come on the Floor, a formal seminar could be organised for us as MPs so that eventually when we come on the Floor, we pass a law that is practical and is going to be helpful.  I support the motion that we grant leave to hon. Muwuma to process this Bill. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two other motions and I would like to give them adequate time. I want to put the question that this House do give authority to the member to move a Private Member’s Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Finance is directed to issue a Certificate of Financial Implications to hon. Muwuma within 30 days. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO URGE GOVERNMENT TO 
INQUIRE INTO THE RECURRING ILLEGAL LAND EVICTIONS IN THE COUNTRY

6.10
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to urge Government to inquire into the recurring illegal land evictions in the country and I am moving this under Rule 47 of our Rules of procedure.

“WHEREAS Article 237 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure system provided for in the Constitution and;

WHEREAS Section 32 (a) of the Land Act provides that a lawful or bona fide occupant shall not be evicted from registered land except upon an order of eviction issued by a competent court and only for non-payment of the annual nominal ground rent, which is Busuulu and in consideration of time, expenses, damage, compensation or any other relevant factors;

AWARE THAT there is an unprecedented rise in allocation of what was formally public land to foreign and local investors by the Uganda Land Commission and District Land Boards without due consideration of the sitting tenants who should ideally be given the first opportunity of applying for ownership; 

ALARMED THAT alleged corruption in land administration offices has resulted in production of either fake or multiple titles for the same land resulting in land conflicts, financial losses to financial institutions and individuals as well as erosion of public confidence in the government system of record keeping, especially for land matters;

AWARE THAT the area land committees that were established at sub-county level and are in existence are dormant because districts lack capacity to facilitate their operations neither are they sensitised on their role in the arbitration or determination of land conflicts;

FURTHER AWARE THAT despite the existence of the land division in the High Court, delays in the determination of land matters have persisted thereby aiding land grabbing and evictions; 

GIVEN THAT the Minister of Lands issued a statutory instrument No.55 of 2011 approving an annual nominal ground rent aimed at recognising registered land owners, which would not be subject to commercial market rates, however some occupants are unable to locate the registered owners or their representatives to whom the Busuulu should be paid, while other landlords have deliberately declined receiving the Busuulu, this situation has made the occupants easily susceptible to evictions;

RECOGNISING THAT in February 2013, His Excellency the President launched the Uganda National Land Policy, which established a land fund;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT since then, the Land Fund has been operationalized; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:

    1. Government capitalises the land fund to ensure that it performs the purpose for which it was intended and tame the land evictions and in fulfilment of its commitment to its citizens.
    2. That the proposed Land Commission Bill be tabled before Parliament within six months.
    3. That the Minister of Internal Affairs intervenes into the actions of the Police in the way court orders are executed.
    4. That Government conducts an investigation by setting up a commission of inquiry into the alleged malpractices in the land registries.
    5. That the Judiciary assigns more manpower to the handling of land cases to ensure their expeditious hearing and determination.
    6. That Government expedites the adoption of the proposed legal aid policy so that the poor are also able to acquire free legal services and justices.
    7. That the Minister of Lands and the Minister of Local Government spearhead the operationalisation of the national land policy.
    8. That Government rolls out sensitisation and awareness creation campaigns on the land laws and policy in Uganda.”  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several Members from both sides of the House.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to remind this House that I was appointed on the committee on illegal land evictions, which was chaired by hon. Nantaba. Unfortunately, this committee could not continue because its legality was challenged in the courts of law.

Madam Speaker, I present this motion out of experience and the serious land challenges in my district. Land is a vital factor and once it is at the centre of serious conflicts, it may lead to deaths or revolutions. For instance, what happened in Zambia, Britain and Ireland because of the oppression that the landlords were causing the tenants at that time?

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this motion is to come up with resolutions that may help in coming up with lasting solutions while appreciating and highlighting the gravity of land based conflicts and acknowledging their potential for social anxiety and unrest, which in the long run can lead to unbearable challenges.

Madam Speaker, as we speak, in my district and I believe not only in Wakiso but in most parts of the country, people’s houses, properties and crops have been destroyed as a result. The number of the angry is increasing rapidly, which may be dangerous if we do not address this problem. Dear colleagues, we must avoid landlessness of our own people because it may turn out to become a security risk. We must intervene seriously with real solutions that are in the context of the land law and policy.

Madam Speaker, in addition to Article 237 (1) of the Constitution, which provides that land belongs to the people of Uganda, point eight of the NRM point programme is about ensuring the protection of people’s land. The Land (Amendment) Act of 2010 and the land policy were also intended to create harmony between the landlords and tenants.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are seriously wondering why land conflicts are escalating day by day in the presence of laws and the policy. The biggest problems stem from the lacuna in the law that is the issue of dual ownership. This needs to be reviewed honestly. In addition, the lack of implementation of our laws and policies should be checked. 

This is the problem and I want to inform this House that when sharing land, landlords forcefully take 75 per cent leaving 25 per cent for the lawful or bona fide occupants without their consent. We need to address this conflict by maybe considering the precedent that was set by the Chief Government Valuer who established a practice that 60 per cent is given to the bona fide occupants and 40 per cent is given to the landlords because the tenants have more interests on this land.

Another issue is that the Land Act is clear on eviction of bona fide occupants. However, I would like to inform my dear colleagues that the issue of busuulu has also become a serious problem. The law is very clear on the issue of busuulu. The land policy is also very clear on where the busuulu should be paid. It has been provided in the policy that busuulu shall be paid at the sub-county headquarters. 

However, as we speak, that has not been implemented and the bona fide occupants are wondering where to pay the busuulu. This is because there are absent landlords and also some landlords are refusing to take up this busuulu because they do not like it as the money is very little and yet we know it clearly by the law, it must not be commercial.

I also want to bring out the issue of the area land committees. These were established to help in the arbitration of land conflicts but unfortunately, the districts that are supposed to cater for their facilitation have not been given that money and they do not have the capacity to help the land committees execute their work. They are also not sensitised and so do not even know what to do and, therefore, they are rendered irrelevant.

Madam Speaker, there is also a conflict arising from the allocation of formerly public land to foreigners or local investors without giving sitting tenants the first opportunity. I think that we need to help Ugandans to implement the laws so that these issues can be rectified.

The public is not even sensitised on the law. We pass the laws here but Ugandans are never sensitised on these laws and at the end of the day, they do not know what to do. As we speak, the conflicts that are arising are because the landlords do not know their rights, they do not know the rights of the tenants and the tenants do not also know their rights. Now who is supposed to do this? 

I know that the ministry of lands is supposed to do this but the challenge is that in the last budget, we cut the budget of the ministry of lands. It is my humble appeal that probably this time, because of this challenge, we increase the budget of the ministry of lands so that it can be able to sensitise Ugandans on the land laws to avoid the conflicts of land. 

It is very clear that justice delayed is justice denied. Land cases in court take years but to me, they are taking centuries. At the end of the day, they aid land grabbing and evictions as they dampen citizens’ confidence resulting from long and costly legal processes.

Madam Speaker, I think that as a government, we need to try our level best to gain the confidence of Ugandans. We have talked about impunity and I cannot rule out the fact that there is also a tendency by groups of individuals who invade other people’s land in total disregard of the law and it is rampant because we are not implementing our laws, which makes it a big challenge. 

We have talked about allegations of corruption in the land administration offices and we would like to ask government to seriously investigate this because it is also becoming a serious challenge. 

I would like to beg on the issue of the Legal Aid Policy that is before Cabinet. We are requesting Cabinet to pass this expeditiously. Bring it to Parliament and we also pass it expeditiously. Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that in the High Court, self-representation is not permitted. That is what I learnt and if it is not true, then I beg to be guided. Since the poor cannot afford legal fees, we need to help them.

As I conclude, let government fulfil its obligations and commitment to Ugandans as provided for in the Constitution, in the laws and policies for the good of our nation and our people. I am a back bench member of Parliament and I have struggled with my people’s land challenges together with my colleagues in Wakiso but at the end of the day, we are in a dilemma because we do not know what to do and where to go.

Recently, 40 houses were put down because the police came to protect those who were breaking the houses and yet they were doing it illegally. I think that we need to help Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this motion on Table and I also beg to lay a report that I had prepared in view of the land matters in the country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the seconders will share 10 minutes therefore two minutes each because we have another motion.

6.25
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, I am seconding this motion because of its great importance to the ordinary people in Uganda. I am seconding this motion for four reasons.

The first reason why I have risen to support this motion is to confirm that land evictions are not only rampant in Kampala or Buganda but also a nationwide phenomenon affecting not the upper class but the rural population.

In most cases, what concerns you and me who are leaders in this country is that people who are behind land evictions are privileged people who are already wealthy and have strong connections with the military and the police. They tend to use the military might and the police weight to evict the ordinary people, knowing very well that ordinary people do not know their rights and do not have money to go and take the matter to court. 

This is a matter that concerns us because we know that land belongs to the people; the citizens. When that land is vested in the hands of the government, the government is supposed to hold it in trust. In my little understanding of the law, when you are a trustee, you have no authority to transfer that ownership without the authority of the owner. Therefore, any land in the hands of government can only be transferred to the investor or to any other person on our behalf with the approval of Parliament because we represent the people of Uganda.

My second reason is that –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one extra minute.

MS OGWAL: I am not contributing but speaking as the seconder -   

THE SPEAKER: We have some time constraints. Okay, two minutes.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I know my rights. 

THE SPEAKER: Your rights are not absolute.

MS OGWAL: I am the bona fide occupant of the microphone. My only concern is that government is the key driver of the land evictions in Uganda. The reason why I am saying this is that the government, who wants to give away Mabira for the purpose of investment, is the same government that evicts people encroaching on forested areas in Kyenjojo, Mubende and several other places.

You wonder what the policy for government is concerning the preservation of our natural resources and so on. We need to understand this and in some cases, one would tend to imagine that the government seems to be more sympathetic to the investor than to the ordinary person who is being affected. We need to know and fully understand the policy of the government in the management of our national resources. 

I want to conclude by saying that this government - I had four points to raise but time is against me - needs to bring to this Parliament a complete and comprehensive list of pieces of land in the country, which government owns. This Parliament has requested for that list but up to now, the Ministry of Lands has not brought that information. 

I think we should use this motion to again ask the government to bring information concerning pieces of land owned by government. I would also want to plead with the House that this Parliament has a right to protect the interests and rights of schools and government institutions, which are right now occupying land purportedly belonging to government. 

This is because government assumes that every government school sits on land owned by government. We have seen Shimoni being given away but it was not in the power of government to give away land, which belongs to us. I think it is important that we clearly come up with a policy to guide eviction of schools and institutions in favour of a few investors. 

I support the motion, Madam Speaker.

6.32
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion and I want to agree with the mover and even my other fellow seconder of the motion from Dokolo.

The issue of land is the most unifying factor that cuts across. Though the districts may be varied in Buganda with other regions, we have very recent legislation on land; the Land Act of 2010 and a recent policy on land utilisation, management, distribution and allocation. It is a very good policy and I have a copy of it through the Ministry of Lands.

My experience with the Ministry of Lands is that they need a lot of money or enough money to do certain things. Nobody knows about the land policy in any part of this country - and hon. Migereko, you know I am being very honest in this. We had a big issue about land where minerals are contained. You get involved as a member of Parliament, you go and sensitise your people and you run a risk of government branding you anti-development.

If you do not go to the people and wait for government to do that, the land owners will say you now want to connive with investors. Why do we let political leaders to be in such a quagmire where there are these guiding policies but no initiative is taken? 

I love the example hon. Seninde gave about awareness. I would support any move to give more money to Ministry of Lands for sensitisation and creating of awareness so that people get to know about this policy and so that our poor people are not taken advantage of.

Regarding the issue of disposal of land disputes, we had the land tribunals, which had their own challenges. Now we have the Land Division at the High Court. Land should never be handled as an ordinary dispute. Tensions are so high when litigation is going on – (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute extra for the seconder.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government should be able, and I agree with the proposal that land disputes should be handled with a lot of experience. You have a Commercial Division of the High Court with mediation and other things. We would like to see this down to the lower levels where everybody can reach. 

Whatever happened to the land tribunals should be able to help us draw lessons for better dispute handling and resolution of land matters. I want to agree and call upon all of us to urge government to have a mechanism of helping those in mineral rich areas like Tororo. An investor comes from Kampala or China, they see them in a place called Yolwa putting pegs and the LC1, LC3 and the district do not know and if they know - with the police behind them!

When people complain, are branded anti-development -(Member timed out.)

6.37
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I represent a constituency, which is found in the central region where we have got a lot of land problems. When the mover of the motion was introducing it, she talked of how she was involved in the issues of land grabbing.

These issues are not only around Kampala but also in Mubende and particularly in Kasambya County. Our people are affected by land grabbing and land disputes.

I have risen to support the motion raised by hon. Seninde. This motion has come in time and I think it is going to save us from the problems bibanja holders are facing in our localities. These people are being sent away from private land and also government land.

I represent a constituency where you find Kabamba Barracks. Of recent, more than 600 families were sent away from Kabamba and others are about to be evicted. I think this motion is going to help us to resolve this matter once and for all. We have got a big problem; now land disputes are a function of a member of Parliament. You have to be keen to listen wherever some people are affected; you have to run around. 

I support this motion and I call upon honourable members to support it. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.39
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Parliament enacted the land law in 2010, we thought the problems and issues of land conflicts would be solved because we were convinced that the law was a good one. Unfortunately after that Act, there are so many cases of land evictions that I think this motion by hon. Sseninde is the right one to make us look into where the problem is coming from and where the gap is so that we can once again look into them and get solutions.

Madam Speaker, one main problem that I have witnessed is that the tenants who sit on land, just stay there without knowing what they are supposed to do or what they are supposed to claim and when people come to evict them, the most unfortunate part of it is that these are poor people who fear the rich when they come with money, police and bailiffs. 

Therefore, my concern is that there is need for us to make the people know what exactly their right is and when you are going to be evicted, what the Land Act or land law says of the bona fide occupants on the land because this is the first problem.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it is true that there are unprecedented plans to grab land because Ugandans have realised that land is actually now a critical factor of production and its value has increased many times because in the past, people would just give land away. I would say, hon. Paul Mwiru is my good friend, take these five or ten acres but today, that is no longer possible.
 
What I would want us to consider in this report is that the cost of getting support from lawyers for people who have land disputes is so expensive that maybe government, through Ministry of Lands, would provide legal support for those who have got land related disputes because they cannot afford - (Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information for the minister to benefit from hon. Tonny Ayoo’s debate. One may find that even land officers connive to deny people their rights regarding land. We have live examples and we have been hearing this over the radio. Most times they work a few hours and come unnoticed in the offices. I will give a clear example like the one of Wakiso, which is always mentioned on the radio; that the time of his operation is not known. 

Shouldn’t people be aware of how to transact land because sometimes the land is sold four times? They sell to three Africans and when an Indian who wants to plant a sugar plantation comes, they sell to that one and matters end in court. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR AYOO: Thank you, honourable member. The concern is, those who are working in the Ministry of Lands and who know what they are supposed to do, pretend and do the opposite simply because of the high value of land. Because very many people are running to acquire land, they end up getting so corrupt that they receive money from several people and whoever comes with money on issues of land is the person they are going to listen to. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very big concern and I hope that the investigations will help us to come out with a lasting solution to this problem. I thank you.

6.43
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Seninde for bringing this issue because the issue of land is very critical. In my constituency, I think I have had close to 30 land cases of attempted evictions but good enough, no one is evicted. However, I know what I have gone through in the fight to make sure that those people remain there. 

The problem of land is that there are so many parties involved. Mention has been made about the police. The police are supposed to protect these tenants but in most cases this defeats my understanding. I will give you a case in point. There was a time when a certain lady came to my constituency with a lorry full of policemen with the regional police commander to come and protect her. This lady was calling herself Omumbejja, she never had any papers and here was the regional police commander camping there for about three days. We had to intervene up to the Inspector General of Police. Gen. Kayihura came and told him to go away. As such, the role of the police in these issues defeats my understanding –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: The information I want to give to the member is that in that particular incident, the regional police commander was directed to apologise for having attempted to evict that lady.

MR BABA: I am grateful to hon. Sseggona for the information he has given. The police have no role in any land eviction except by a court order to come and observe that the evictions are done legally under a court order. Their role is to make sure there is not chaos in the eviction. The evictions are done by bailiffs not by police officers. 

Any police officer who is involved in land evictions is doing so illegally. Therefore it is right that the police commander gave an apology that what was done was wrong. I thank you for that but the critical information I am giving is that, the police under the law are not expected to participate directly in evicting people from land. The law does not allow it.

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague. Allow me to inform the honourable minister that the Police of Uganda headed by Assistant IGP Grace was evicting people in Amuru using the police lorries. The police, together with the UPDF, would be seen escorting people to the roadside and dumping them there. They would then come back and ferry more. 

Therefore, the information I would like to give you is that the Police are directly involved in evicting the community without court orders. More so, when we presented the court order to the Assistant IGP Grace, he said that his role was to evict people and that he knew nothing about the court order. Therefore, the Police of Uganda are the ones helping the land grabbers.

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House that this is a general practice of the police to evict people by only quoting one case, which is exceptional when the law generally forbids the police? Is he in order to mislead the House and the country when the role of the police is clearly spelt under the law? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not had time to study the statistics of where the police have or have not been involved so I cannot really rule on that matter. Please conclude.

MR KAKOBA: Madam Speaker, my time has been taken and I hope I will be considered. What the honourable minister has pointed out is an ideal situation but what is on the ground is quite different and this is what I am reporting because as I speak, I have been involved in about 30 attempted evictions and that is what has been happening. 

As we carry on this investigation, if it takes off, the other thing we need to look at is the issue of the land office itself. Of recent, we have also had cases where people come with titles when they know there is a piece of land somewhere and they start claiming that land. Of course what they do with the forged titles is that they back date them to 1950s. When you put someone to task to explain how he got his land, you discover that actually he has never owned the land –(Member timed out.)

6.49
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Seninde for the motion. However, I was wondering because at one time, as she has stated in her report, she happened to have been in a committee, which was supposed to investigate this matter. Somehow they did not conclude.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how we expect the government or the ministry to implement this because the government is aware of these problems of land evictions in the land sector. We have a problem in Katakwi, which has been lying for very many years in the Ministry of Lands. Up to today, they have failed to solve it. I do not know how we shall be able to use the same ministry to solve this problem. 

I think that ministry needs an overhaul. Maybe we need another Musisi or Kagina in that ministry. In a ministry where the ministers are not talking to each other, how do you expect the recommendations of the motion we are discussing here to be implemented? 

This is a ministry where someone is occupying office illegally. There is a gentleman called Kajumba. His contract expired three years ago but he is still in the office. Kajumba is in charge of the survey department at Entebbe. His contract expired three years ago, it was purportedly renewed for seven months but this expired. They gave him another three months, which expired in July last year. The committee directed the minister that this man should leave office. They wrote to this gentleman to vacate office but up to today, he has refused to leave office.

If a mere head of department can defy the minister and the permanent secretary, what miracle do you expect in such a situation? This is the department that is responsible for surveying land and here is somebody who is occupying the office illegally, what do you expect?

I do not even know how this gentleman who is occupying office illegally is being paid. There are people who are seated comfortably in this House who were involved in taking the Soroti Flying School land. We cannot expect anything better if we say it is the same ministry going to do the same work of implementing the recommendations.

There is land in Kasilo; Labor Irrigation Scheme. This land has been given to some person in the names of an investor. We passed a loan here to revive irrigation schemes. In July, an Ethiopian company was contracted by the ministries of Water and Lands to undertake a feasibility study and the design. Who is fooling who -(Member timed out.)

6.52
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the mover of this motion and the seconders. I would like to talk about the issue of sensitisation that was raised in this motion. 

The government has left this very important task to the NGOs. I talk about this because before coming here, I implemented a project called Land Justice; Access to Land. Sensitisation is the most difficult thing to do because in helping people to understand their land rights, you will definitely get labelled anti-development and so on. 

Therefore, I think the government needs to invest more in sensitising the people. Our people must know their land rights so that they are helped even before these evictions start. 

I would also like to add my voice in saying that the police have been around whenever evictions have taken place, even during mediations. There was a case in Atiak in Amuru where the RDC was actually using the police in a mediation case. This was not supposed to be done in this way. 

Therefore, it is not true that the police are outside. They are there being used even during mediation. When we talk about mediation, it is supposed to be peaceful. Why should we see guns during mediations? Why should police come during mediation? Mediation is supposed to be building trust between the two parties. When the police come in, it removes the trust of the people. This is what I wanted to add, that we need more sensitisation and I support the motion. Thank you.

6.54
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleagues for bringing this motion, which I support in part. This means that I agree with the principles and the complaints that have been raised. My only difference is that I would seek to amend that this should be a select committee of this Parliament.

This is because this is a matter where Parliament is carrying out its oversight function, among others, over government. The areas of investigations are even wider because, among others, we must look at the law. A portion of the law that we are seeking to implement is unconstitutional because it puts these bona fide and lawful occupants on land on a different scale with the landlords. 

Whereas the landlord can sell without getting consent of the bona fide or lawful occupant, the latter cannot and that offends Article 21 of our Constitution. 

Secondly, Article 26, the right to own and exercise property rights is also tilted to the undue disadvantage of those people. 

You will also appreciate, Madam Speaker, that lately by an administrative decision of the Commissioner for Land Registration, she directed the Commissioner for Lands and Surveys in Entebbe to submit all the records from Entebbe to Kampala. People who have lost land through fraud committed in Kampala have been resorting to the Entebbe office to get their records. Now, the same suspect office has directed another person at the same level to submit all the records from Entebbe.

Madam Speaker, you would also appreciate that we are looking at privately owned land and government owned land, which as the first seconder stated, is land belonging to the citizens of Uganda. You are also investigating the role of the police. Among other things, we are also looking at the performance of court. In all honesty, is this a case where the government can be called upon to audit itself? I submit and answer, it can only be in the negative.

Therefore, for those reasons and those advanced by my colleagues earlier, may I seek to amend that instead of having the government itself inquiring into this vice, we establish a select committee of this Parliament and we facilitate it with all the resources that we can afford. Let it traverse the country and come up with a comprehensive report, which we would share with government and agree on a way forward. I know it is expensive but it is absolutely necessary that we handle this with care, caution as well as determination. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: We shall talk about the select committee later.

6.57
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support hon. Seninde and thank her for this concern. I would like to say that the way I look at this problem is that the ministry also has limitations. The problem is enormous and when you look at the budget of the ministry, I think they cannot reach all these areas where we have these problems. 

One of the best options would have been massive sensitisation so that landlords, tenants and everybody know the law and also their rights. That would be the first option. 

However, on the other hand also, the ministry had to do a few things that were not done, for example, there is the use of busuulu that was talked about. In many areas, the bona fide tenants would wish to pay busuulu but to whom should they pay? The tenants are very smart on this but the landlords are not there. They appear when they have either sold the land or they want to evict you so that these tenants, whether they are bona fide or not, have nowhere to pay this money.

There was an idea that the ministry would have instructed sub-county chiefs to receive the busuulu from the tenants in the absence of the landlords, but this was not done. If it was - in our local government it is not there because I have mentioned it to them and they said they do not have that kind of instruction and have nowhere to put that money; that is one of the lacunas – (Interruption)

MR AYOO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development needs to do a lot to reorganise the system there.  This is because some of the staff there are so big and difficult and have become untouchable. For example, one of the commissioners called Sarah Kolata, even threatened all the ministers including  the honourable minister here to the extent of saying that if anything happens to her, she can go and contest against the minister. 

Therefore, the information that I am giving on land is - I want to give example of the land of the lame people (balema) in Wandegeya. The court has given order that the land should be given to the “balemas” in Wandegeya, but up to now, nothing has been done. Another one is Bob Alangat, former Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda; court made an order regarding Malcom X. Therefore, I think the ministry needs to pull up their shocks because that is where the problem is.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the other -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, you are not in my list of seconders. My list of seconders is already complete. I was just looking for others and you are among them.

7.02
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In appreciation to the motion, there is one thing I have always wondered about, and that is the land titles issued for gazetted wetlands. You would imagine that the most informed people about wetlands are the land officers in the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development. However, you get several cases across the country where land titles are issued for places where NEMA claims that it is a known gazetted wetland; and you find several people on the same piece of land with land titles –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank the member for giving way. Just yesterday -(Laughter)- I was arrested on suspicion that I was intending to demonstrate over the destruction of a wetland in my own village. This is land belonging to the Kabaka of Buganda where somebody was given a lease to do a fish ponding project. However, somebody else without any equitable claim came and started refilling and reclaiming it. The first occasion when they poured that soil, the people protested and the ministry stopped them. I do not know whether subsequently these people went and compromised NEMA or the ministry and the police were instead guarding the person destroying the wetland. 

I will make a substantive statement with your permission later, but the information I wanted to give the member is that in most of these cases, the government is involved.

MR KARUHANGA: I would implore this House that as we make our resolutions, we should critically address the issue of having gazetted wetlands and given land titles. And the officers who issue those titles, what happens to them? We have not heard of a single case where one officer was punished for issuing a land title for gazetted wetlands.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the corruption in land matter has become so gross. It is so huge that it is now more than institutionalised. If it is not in the ministry of lands, then it is in the Judiciary; it is everywhere.

Therefore, I think as we come to the recommendations or the resolutions of this House, we need to critically emphasise the corrupt deals in land matters through our committee. It is a very critical matter which has hurt so many people. People are crying all over the country over land. It is unbelievable and we need to address it. This is our cardinal role as Parliament.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, this is not a policy issue. That would mean everybody will have to contribute because everybody has land issues. All we are doing is contributing towards a proposal that government inquires - we all have problems, but let us concentrate on who does the investigation. Is it government? Hon. Sseggona talked about a select committee, but honourable members, the way it was done - this problem is country wide. I do not know whether we have the time and the resources to cover the whole country. I do not know when we can report - the Shadow Minister.

7.07
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gilbert Olanya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to second the motion. If we talk of evictions in Uganda, it is not only within one region, it is countrywide and if we investigate further, you will find that we have people who are so greedy for land. They are very few and they think that the occupants of the land are not worth to have the land.

Madam Speaker, if you move mostly to Northern Uganda, you will see everyone is salivating for land. Everyone who feels like grabbing land will first try his luck on the people of Northern Uganda. We need very serious investigations and this motion will help to solve so many problems concerning land evictions in our country. 

Therefore, I would like to support hon. Seninde, and I ask the government to hurry up. I have one fear that Parliament will come up with resolutions, but we may see the implementation taking years; they may not kick off. Therefore, we need implementation –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the member is that we do not need to be worried that the government will refuse to implement our resolutions. Part of the resolutions could be those that are implemented by this House itself: 

    1)  If we find that there is a problem with the existing legal regime, it is our mandate to change the law.
    2) Some of these departments are departments that we supervise directly, and we have powers over them.
    3) We have overriding powers including budgetary powers. We can deny them money for refusing to honour our resolutions. 

I am not worried about the caucus; I think as we move along, it will get on board and join us. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable member. Finally, we need to streamline the way land is given to the investors. You find that when someone needs to grab land, they go behind investors. 

In our area, we have invisible investors. The critical example is that we have the land that belongs to Madhvani for growing sugarcane in Amuru. We asked Madhvani to come and negotiate with the people of Amuru. Up to now, we have never seen him. Instead, what we are seeing on the ground are the Resident District Commissioners (RDCS), the office of the operatives, the military coming to intimidate people, and asking them to leave the land for Madhvani. We need to streamline, let the investor be clear; come and negotiate with the land owners. I beg to move. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I would like to give some information about this subject. Certainly I have no problem with the motion. Government would do as it has been doing to ensure that there is security in the country for all, and their property. 

We have been having this challenge. The government has been tackling it the way it comes. At one level, we have some disputes at the international boarder that government is handling such as issues with Kenya, Southern Sudan, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). With the neighbours, we have mechanisms we are using to settle those disputes.

We also have cases in districts - I know where he is coming from; I spent the whole day with him. There are wrangles within districts such as Adjumani and Amuru, Kapchorwa with Bulambuli, Kabarole and Ntoroko, and so many others.

Even below that one, we have sub-county versus sub-county wrangles. Then you have homes such as family members fighting one another over land. The situation is quite serious and we need to approach it very carefully as we find a lasting solution.

Then also since land became tradable, you have some speculators. They come around selling all sorts of things. Of recent, I think some foreigners are also getting involved in acquiring land here and there; there is also land grabbing.

Therefore all that government has been doing is trying to take violence out of a land wrangle by ensuring that if there is a dispute, then it is taken to courts of law. The government -(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much honourable minister. The information I wanted to give you is that I am worried about what we are discussing. According to the simple research I have done, when you go to the ministry of lands, you find that the top officials themselves have grabbed government land including some ministers. There is part of Mulago Hospital land, the land in Kololo and some other land which has been taken. The problem is very wide. We would first deal with them - if I am authorised, I will bring the names and we start with them; I do not have any problem with that. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The information I want to give to the honourable minister is that as much as he is advising that people can use courts of law, we have land conflict in my constituency and all over – but when cases are taken to court the poor owners of land have no chance of winning because corruption in the Judiciary is also vast. 

GEN NYAKAIRIMA: Some of the cases will be looked at one by one to establish the truth when the resolution is carried out. I think the most important thing is that the wrangles have been there, but government is not sitting around. They have been taking measures to ensure that we maintain stability and remove violence in this matter. The question of -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes for the minister to conclude.

GEN NYAKAIRIMA: Institutionally, they even have a unit which is in charge of land wrangles. They have been doing it to ensure that there is no violence, and destruction of property.

In case there are some individuals on their own acting in darkness, once we get information, we shall act. We have taken action on some individuals already and we will continue taking that action. It is not a government policy to get an institution of government to escort a land grabber against the bona fide owners. I think it would be taking it out of context of this good motion to say that the government is behind land grabbing in these circumstances. 

My colleagues will make a submission - government is moving, Cabinet has been discussing, and I have also been with him - and let us take politics out of this! There are no political points to be gained in this one. We want stability in this country and development. We do not want investors to be scared that this country is unstable when it comes to land. 

Therefore, it is the role of government to provide an enabling environment to ensure that there is stability and security of owners of land so that the country can develop. I thank you - I give hon. Ssempijja the Floor.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much. Government has indeed really shown the good will by the introduction of the Land Fund. I think its only problem is the management and the amount of money that has been put to that effect.

Madam Speaker, recently in my area we had a very serious problem where people were cutting each other but the landlord, Omumbejja, accepted to give this land to government; but where is the money? I think that is where we have an issue and should really put the emphasis. Thank you.
7.19
THE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Seninde for having raised the issue she has raised and the contributions that members have made in regard to the motion.

Land has continued to be a vexing matter, in the ministry and in the countryside. When we recently came out with the National Land Policy, we were trying to see how we can find clear solutions to some of the problems that we had been experiencing in regard to land management and administration in the country.

Madam Speaker, issues have been raised regarding legal matters that need to be addressed, in order to ensure harmony and operationalization of the land policy. Issues have also been raised in regard to the registry. 

In Cabinet, about three or four weeks ago, we were discussing the same issue. There was concern that these were turning out to be a problem. Cabinet decided to appoint a committee to look into these matters, study them and come up with a clear recommendation, in order to enable us to sustainably resolve some of the issues, and also to solve the issues of the lacuna in the law, among others. 

This cabinet sub-committee is headed by hon. Mwesige and has started doing its work. I would like to assure Parliament that your concerns are also the concerns of government, and intervention is being pursued to ensure that the concerns that have been expressed here and those expressed earlier in Cabinet, are attended to.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the Land Fund which has been raised by the members, is intended to help us with some of the historical problems that have been experienced over land yet were created by the colonial government, and injustices created thereafter.

Unfortunately, the Land Fund is yet to be adequately capitalised. This is due to the problem of limited resource envelop on the part of government. The Budget Committee has been discussing priorities the Cabinet should be working on.

We have been unfortunate in the land sector that when it comes to matters of land, the priority that has been exhibited this afternoon, in regard to the kind of attention that land matters should be receiving - in those discussions, all that disappears and we turn out to be casualties and candidates for reduced funding. That is the problem we have had. My request is that when we come to budget discussions, let us speak with one voice, that the Land Fund should adequately be capitalised, so that the problems we have had, and have surfaced persistently here on the Floor, can be attended to.

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR MIGEREKO: Hon. Mwiru, you know as neighbours, I would like you to help me, but the Speaker does not seem to appreciate –

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the honourable minister whether he is aware of the Solicitor-General’s opinion, that one cannot obtain a certificate of title in a wetland. Every title obtained in a wetland is null and void. Two, whether in his opinion, the insufficient fund is the ultimate cause of the problems in the land sector in the country?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, you had guided properly that I should not allow that information. This is because that matter is the one we are going to deal with - the wetlands.

We had cost the requirements for the Land Fund, and at that time, they stood at a figure of 1.76 trillion, in order to enable us sort out the issues of overlapping land rights on the same pieces of land.

This amount of money is yet to be secured. In the one of the prayers, I will need your support in order to be able to get that money. 

On the issue of the Uganda Commission Bill; this is ready for Cabinet consideration and should get here any time soon, because we dealt with it and forwarded it. What is remaining is appearing on the agenda and we discuss it, in order to be able to pass it and bring it here for consideration by the House. On the issue of the police in land evictions, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs has already responded to that. 

The issue of land evictions had earlier been dealt with by the Chief Justice, who also issued trust direction number one of 2007, which guides on issues of security of tenancy by occupancy on registered land, demarcation of lawful or bona fide occupancy, the need to visit locus in quo by the judges and magistrates, and orders relating to ownership of land and demolition or eviction.

This is important information because often time, court bailiffs may show up, and attempt to evict your constituents, when they do not even have a valid court order, or a court order that has been secured - without following the issued practice directed by the Chief Justice. It is important that when anybody comes to your area, you make sure that due process has been followed in obtaining the eviction order.

These are issues that we want tackled as government and to ensure that this is totally ruled out. It is true that in the National Land Policy, we had catered for the land tribunals as way of expeditiously attending to land matter and land dispute.

Unfortunately, due to budgetary constraints, the necessary funding was not provided and these have been put on hold. Nevertheless, we are in discussions with the Judiciary, so that it can recognise the fact that land cases need to be mainstreamed and dealt with expeditiously.

If this is not done, they have a great destabilizing effect in the country side. I am sure we shall continue engaging the Judiciary on this matter so that the way commercial cases are being treated, land cases can also be given the same amount of consideration and attention.

We have had problems of malpractices within the department of land. One of the interventions that we believe will help us sort out some of the malpractices and a fraudulent practice is the computerization of the land registry. This has been progressing well and in areas where the commitment exercises, that is to say verification of the information that has been scanned and entered into our computer system, has been completed the problems have been reduced. This has been done in Mbarara, Jinja and partly in Wakiso. We believe that once the commitment exercise has been fully undertaken, a number of these problems will be greatly curtailed and some of the problems that we are experiencing will reduce and possibly disappear.

MS NAMABIDDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. How does computerization of land titles solve the problem of ownership? The challenge we have is, if you have a piece of land where the landlord has the title and the tenant also is a bona fide occupant, the landlord simply sells the title; even if you computerize this, the challenge will still remain.

MR MIGEREKO: As I had pointed earlier, the issue of dual rights on land is a matter that we must attend to in the law. Nevertheless, the issue of giving multiple titles - computerization has greatly helped us deal with the matter of issuing multiple titles on the same piece of land which was highly prevalent in the past. For example, if you claim plot No.2 on Kyagwe Road and someone else argues that it has never been owned by anyone else, we all share the information on screen and we shall be able to know that there is an existing title and you cannot go out and issue another title of the same land.

There is issue of busuulu; this is a very serious matter because in many cases landlords are not prepared to accept the busuulu, which we gazetted. They think the consideration is too small. We have been discussing this in the government but until we have been able to guide otherwise, the rates that we have still hold. We had come up with an arrangement in the National Land Policy that in situations where the landlords are not prepared to go and collect the money, the money should be received at the gombolola or the sub county headquarters.

What we have not done is to move out in the country side and repeatedly deliver the message that this arrangement is in place and should be taken advantage of. As we move out on the sensation programme after you provide us with funds, this is one of the issues that we intend to concentrate on so that some of the problems arising out of this can be contained.

Furthermore, there is another issue about giving titles on wetlands? Government has issued an equivocal undertaking especially to those who are having land titles over wetlands that it will be cancelled. However, there is a process –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of the procedure?

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. The minister is telling us all the efforts that have tried. He is telling us that whatever they have tried has been failing. He has not told us how far you have gone with the Nantaba Committee which is a cabinet committee; the minister is just lamenting. Considering that it is approaching 8.00 p.m. and that some Christians are fasting, is it procedurally right for the minister to be lamenting and we also tolerate him?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude; we are fasting.
 
MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I did not know that I had created that kind of impression before my relative with whom we readily communicate fairly often.  

Regarding the issues of land titles issued over wetlands, the decision has been taken. The process of identifying the wetlands has been undertaken by the Ministry of Water and Environment. They are in the process of producing an atlas of wetlands which will be gazetted. 

We have sensitized those concerned - those that are affected. Therefore once this exercise is completed, we shall go out and announce the cancellation of these titles. Somewhere the titles were issued before the coming into place of the new Constitution of 1995. For those which were issued later, the position of government is very clear; if some of you colleagues happen to own land which is in a wetland area, we need to think ahead and find out what we can do for ourselves.

In addition to that, there is an issue of land for investment. We need investment in order to transform our economy and country. We need land in order to be in a position to undertake this investment. I would like to make an appeal to honourable members that you should actively participate in the planning processes of their districts. So that you do not run into any problems with the investors that are being sent. 

We need the support of hon. Olanya in regard to the sugar project in Amuru. I thought we had reached an understanding on way forward in regard to this matter.

Madam Speaker, my colleague hon. Okupa has raised issues of land given to an investor in Kasilo. I request that we sit down and try to understand the problem before I can be in position to say anything about it.

I appeal to members that for some of the issues being raised here, we can always sit down, get all the information, advice you, discuss and generate clear solutions because these problems affect all of us. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say something about this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am still wondering because no one is addressing what we should do about this motion. I do not know whether you support that we allow the government to investigate. You said that the cabinet sub-committee is there but how do you get back to us on that.

I am worried about the time and expense of a countrywide select committee, especially in this year even if I do not specify the reason. Who will have time to travel around the whole country on this issue? 

7.40
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have keenly followed the discussion and the proposals to set up a select committee of Parliament to investigate this matter.

Madam Speaker, the matter is not only on evictions but also about entry; there are some victims who encroach on land. If it is feasible within our laws, let us get a special audit firm with special skills, and pay them, so that what they come up with makes impact on our laws on land.

This is so big Parliament may not have all the time, and sufficient skills. Any committee including mine, which foresees land has a lot of mess; I think we may not measure up to it. Thank you.

7.42
MR ISABIRYE IDDI (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament has a committee responsible for physical infrastructure. When I looked at today’s programme, Items No. 12 and 13 were about petitions in Kasokoso and Ssembabule, and this Parliament would like to hear and embedded most of the recommendations in those reports in our laws. Let us allow these reports to be presented on the Floor of Parliament, some of the diseases would be cured. I am so disappointed with my chair for pushing his responsibility to a hired audit firm, yet there is a fully fledged Physical Infrastructure Committee responsible for these matters. Thank you.

7.43
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER & DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm that Cabinet has formed a committee on the issue of land, under Minister of Local Government and they were given one month to report.

The problem on the land issue is that government institutions are being reclaimed. There is a system in ministry of land to renter; re-entry means if you have been renting somebody’s land, for example, Nsambya Police Barracks is being claimed by the church. This land has been on rent for 99 years. They want their land. But the system in the ministry of lands provides for re-entry after fulfilling certain conditions. This affects the government and many government institutions sitting on rented land leased for many years. That committee is charged to establish how much land government owns throughout the country –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Deputy Prime Minister. It is on record that executives and particularly ministers have been involved in these land wrangles. In Kitgum District where the government hospital is placed, most of the land was taken over by the ministers we have in our area.

How can the ministers investigate themselves or how will you ensure that those who are embroiled in these wrangles are not part of the committee?

GEN. (Rtd) MOSES ALI: The ministers are in charge now until they are removed. Whether they are involved in land wrangles or not, that cannot stop them from being ministers -(Interjection)- I am answering her -(Laughter) The committee led by the Minister of Local Government is charged to ascertain government land throughout the country. 

If that hospital is on government land, to make work easier for the committee, you could send in a memo to help with information. But to cause confusion that the ministers should not handle this will bring government to a standstill; this cannot work!

Having taken lead on this matter, we would like Parliament to allow the Cabinet to handle and we promise to bring a report back here after one month. If it is not enough, you will give other instructions.  Otherwise, this will be double work. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on our Order Paper, we had planned to do another motion and then look at the Anti-Corruption Amendment Bill, but I have been told that the movers are harmonising on certain issues.

It will not be ready on Tuesday, I am proposing that the motion and the minister’s statement on Alidina should come on Tuesday and also the two reports from the Committee of on Physical Infrastructure so that we get an idea.

If there are some solutions, we can conclude this matter and take a decision. Let us allow Physical Infrastructure Committee to bring their items up so that we hear what they have been doing maybe we will get some brilliant solution.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for today’s work. The House is adjourned to Tuesday next week.

(The House rose at 7.49 p.m. and adjourned Until Tuesday, 3 March 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)



   
