

Tuesday, 18 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by thanking you very much for supporting the Ghetto Kids. You made a contribution to the purchase of their house and today, we handed over to them a cheque of Shs 114 million. I would really like to thank you because you have saved the young people of Uganda from problems. 

The second communication is to do with the implications of the Enguli (Manufacture and Licencing) Act. On 21 January, I came here and asked the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to tell us whether the Enguli (Manufacture and Licencing) Act is still in force and whether Ugandans still need to get a licence to manufacture jaggery. You know, the sugarcane industry is developing and a number of operators would like to manufacture jaggery. It is, however, against the law, at the moment, to manufacture jaggery unless you have a licence from the minister. We wanted to know from the minister whether that requirement is still there and whether Ugandans need licences to engage in their business, especially in this era of liberalisation. 

The Ministers of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives have not come; we had given them one week at that time. So, can we ask them to answer the question tomorrow, because the jaggery manufacturers are getting agitated that they are going to get arrested for manufacturing jaggery. Accordingly, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should come and clarify that issue. 

Honourable members, I would like to give a few Members the opportunity to raise issues of urgent public importance. I would like to remind Members that in principle, we have agreed that constituency issues should be handled through questions and those, which are really national, should be the ones to come here. This is because we have found that Members were using the opportunity to raise constituency issues, which are not of a national nature, and they were taking quite a bit of time.

As a result, I will allow hon. Abala - I think his is a national issue – and then I will allow hon. Jalia Bintu.

2.48
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from your communication, I have risen to commend you about the Members’ contribution to save the Ghetto Kids’ home. I accompanied you this morning to witness the handover of the money.

Honourable members, I met the children and they are very grateful to you. They asked me to put this on record. They are grateful for the Christmas gift you gave them. Each of you contributed Shs 250,000 and we raised Shs 114,250,000. Out of that money, the balance for the house - Shs 100 million - has been transferred to the owner of the property and he is going to transfer the title to the Triplets Ghetto Kids. The balance of Shs 14,250,000 will be handed over to them. 

These are children who are gifted in dancing and they have traversed the world. They have been to the USA and UK and they have also entertained national guests who have been hosted by this Parliament. Therefore, they are part of our assets in selling Uganda as a tourist destination. 

Therefore, your contribution has gone to support these kids in putting Uganda on the world map in as far as promoting tourism is concerned. I would like to thank you so much. Let us continue with these good hearts in our constituencies. 

2.50
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to raise a very important issue concerning the invasion of the desert locusts in my constituency and in different districts within Teso, northern Uganda and Karamoja. 

I remember this Parliament passed a budget and the soldiers have been doing a great job in some places. However, in my constituency, from Saturday when my district was invaded by the desert locusts, no intervention has taken place and yet every day, the locusts are laying eggs. 

As we know, each of them lays 300 eggs at a time. Within five days, they lay a second round of eggs. This implies that the entire constituency of Ngora is in trouble as we talk. If these eggs hatch in the next few days, I do not know what type of place Ngora and other places like Karamoja and Lango will be. 

Some people normally say there are no locusts in Uganda. I remember –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: State the problem. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, allow me, to show the whole world that locusts exist in Uganda. I would like to be informed whether I can lay them on the Table. (Laughter) Since the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is around, allow me lay the locusts on the Table. 

My prayers are: I would like to appeal to the Government of Uganda to involve the local community and build their capacity –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my colleague, I am aware that the Clerk has no capacity to keep living organisms. Two, it is not in dispute in this Parliament that locusts have invaded this country. I would actually wonder what the honourable member wants to prove because we have appropriated funds to fight locusts. Therefore, there is no dispute by Parliament that locusts have invaded this country. Also, Parliament has no capacity to keep locusts in this building.

My procedural point, therefore, is whether we are proceeding well when the Member is about to lay on the Table living organisms while defending what is not challenged in this Parliament. We are not challenging the fact that locusts have invaded this country. Are we proceeding rightly?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I tried to engage the Member but he said that despite us appropriating the money, nothing has happened in Ngora. That is his concern.

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. It is true that Shs 15 billion was –(Interjection)– I do not know what is happening; may I be protected from hon. Bernard Atiku?

Out of the Shs 15 billion, we had to pay $3 million, which is the equivalent of Shs 11 billion, to the desert locust body because we could not receive the support we wanted due to arrears. We regret that because this is supposed to be an annual fee. It was after we remitted that money that we secured aeroplanes to help us spray.

However, as I speak, Madam Speaker, there is sincerely a team on the ground. This may require the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or the Minister of Works and Transport to come - because it is a team - and brief Parliament. This is something, which Members should be tracking. Seeking information about the effort that we have put in is the right thing to do.

If hon. Lokeris has information, I request that he is given an opportunity to tell us the plans that we have to trace and track the desert locusts. Otherwise, it is not true that nothing has been done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you saying that the much money we appropriated did not go into the exercise but it went to pay arrears?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I have been on the ground in my constituency. Swarms of locusts came and no sooner had I reached there than the soldiers who are supposed to spray the locusts arrived. They sprayed the locusts and the medicine is effective. Many died and the rest flew to Teso where they were “arrested” from. Otherwise, they had spread everywhere; Namalu, in my constituency, was full of locusts. 

Therefore, to say that locusts are there is true. It is also right to say that the medicine was administered or is being administered and is killing some but others are flying away. We are hopeful that as the soldiers continue to spray, many locusts will die while others will disappear. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Do we have an assurance – Let us hear from the hon. Bright Rwamirama who has been on the ground.

2.58
MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL AND VETERINARY AFFAIRS) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is no longer a doubt that the locusts came. They have been here and we have taken necessary action. Two of my colleagues are on ground. 

Last week, I briefed Parliament on the way we were proceeding. We secured an aircraft from the Desert Locust Control Organisation. It is now based in Moroto. We have hired another one to boost that one. The army has provided a helicopter to survey and map out where the locusts land.

These yellow locusts, which have been laid on the Table by honourable colleague - We are lucky that the locusts, which entered Uganda, are yellow. (Laughter) When the locusts turn yellow, it means that they have reached maturity stage and are therefore less destructive. However, they lay eggs. 

We have flown in experts to train our extension workers. The locusts’ eggs will hatch in 14 days and the period for them to become hoppers is about 30 days. We have bought chemicals and engaged the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) and local communities by training them on how to deal with locusts when they hatch.

The statement that we are not doing anything is not true because we have teams on the ground and we are managing. Today, I addressed the press at the Uganda Media Centre about the actions we have taken. If it is in the interest of Parliament, we can present another update tomorrow in the afternoon.

Otherwise, things are happening and we are more equipped than we were then. The chemical for spray was not available but we have procured it. World Food Programme has given us transport from Nairobi to Soroti. We shall be operating two aircrafts; one will be based in Soroti and another in Moroto. The one in Moroto is from the Desert Locust Control Organisation; all we need is to provide chemicals because it is free as Uganda is a member.

Regarding the budget, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa has told you that from the money we received, much of it went to pay arrears. So, contrary to what people think, the money was not adequate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I propose that you give us a weekly update because they are moving. One day they might arrive in Kampala. Give us a weekly update.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: It is true, Madam Speaker. Actually, our biggest threat is Somalia and Oman. While we are working together with Ethiopia, Kenya, South Sudan and Sudan, in Somalia because of war situation, it is like a launch pad, where they landed first, and we believe they laid a lot of eggs. We have plan B to find them in Somalia.

The good news is that the wind is changing direction. Most likely, next month it will be blowing in a different direction and they will be deflected from Uganda. However, in any case, we shall brief Parliament regularly and also inform you on the threat of the locusts as it grows or as it diminishes. Thank you very much.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, from Saturday, Sunday, yesterday and today, there has been no intervention yet the locusts have been laying eggs. I would like to appeal to Government to intervene and go and spray those areas, so that we do away with the lava in that area. That is what I would like to say.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, name the villages and inform the minister concerned.

MR ABALA: Can I tell him now? I am going to give him the names of those villages now. Thank you.
 
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that the honourable member hands over the live desert locusts to the Sergeant-at-Arms for disposal, because Kampala can be invaded from these live insects. Let them be handed over to the Sergeant-at-Arms so that we know that they are dealt with.

The Speaker: Honourable member, can you hand them over to the Sergeant-at-Arms for safe custody? 

LT COL (RTD) rwamirama: Madam Speaker, I would like to warn Members and the general public. We are spraying but at the same time some people are catching these locusts. It is not wise to eat them because we are spraying. Sprayed locusts have chemicals. This is a serious matter and we need support from every person to overcome it. Fortunately, the chemical that is used is biodegradable. In seven days, it will be off wherever it is, whether in the soil or on the plants. However, before seven days elapse, if you eat locusts that have been sprayed, then you know you are taking locusts with chemicals –(Interruptions)

Mr Sebaggala: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honourable minister is warning Ugandans not to eat the locusts, saying that they are dangerous because of the spray. Two weeks ago, hon. Byabagambi is quoted to have said that one of the ways we are going to fight locusts is by eating them, so he advised Ugandans to start eating them. Is it in order for the minister to contradict a colleague who encouraged Ugandans to eat locusts? What is what?

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think let us be serious. The locusts have been sprayed and are therefore dangerous. What the minister is saying now is what the Ugandans should follow.

3.06
Ms jalia bintu: (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national and public importance. 

Last week, a herd of elephants invaded the villages of Nyakarongo, Kitengule, Ipedi in Kiruli Parish, Pakanyi Subcounty in Masindi District, destroying crops and properties of the community. The herd uses a diversionary method. Two animals remain behind to confuse the human beings while the bigger herd goes out to graze and collect the maize. When these ones are chased, the other ones come and replace the two. It has defeated the community.

We reported to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) but they are also scared. When they come, they retrieve and go away and leave the community in the hands of the elephants. 

My prayer is that Government should intervene and push back the elephants to the national park. Secondly, as a long-term remedy, Government should electrify the fence from Masindi running up to Kiryandongo – Karuma. If we do not put the electrical fence, the elephants will one time emerge in the towns of Masindi and Kiryandongo.
  
The third prayer is that Government should provide relief food for these villages, which have lost all their maize. The elephants collect maize, heap them together and they sit and start eating like human beings.

This is my prayer to the Government.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we amended the law and I thought we made an Act that would facilitate co-existence between the animals and the people. I do not know whether it is under implementation. 

Can the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities come and update us on the implementation of that new law, which we made, and plans they have for co-existence? It is all over the country. I saw the people from the other side of the national park also standing up.  The minister can come in a week.

3.09
Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, specifically about the working conditions in many factories in Mukono and Kira. 

I have raised the issue of mistreatment of Ugandans to the minister in charge of Investment. We have a number of investors who have built factories in our areas. Many of these people, working in their hundreds, have no contracts, protective gear and in case of accidents, they are not treated. They pay them – I do not even know how I can describe it.

As a result, we have had a number of strikes and as usual, Government is going to respond with teargas. That is what we have gone through in the last two days in Kireka where about 300 people working for a factory on Namugongo Road are on strike. The other day, we had problems with Azam in Bweyogerere. From the information I gather, almost all Ugandans working for investors and factories are treated the same way.

My prayer is for the Government, first of all, to interest itself in the conditions under which Ugandans are working in these various factories; but specifically, the issue of Ugandans who have been arrested and brutalised while protesting the way they are treated at this particular factory on Namugongo Road.

The Speaker: Help the Government to find out where exactly this problem is.

Mr atiku: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there is mistreatment. There are workers of a factory I know in Namugongo, as you go down to Seeta, – the new road – who got a work hazard. What the factory did was to terminate all of them. I have those documents with me. They are not even willing to negotiate or talk to these people. When the casual labourers get an accident, they instead terminate them.

What the honourable member is saying is something that should be handled by Government. That is the information that I wanted to add.

Mr ssemujju: This is the situation at almost all the factories. When I spoke to hon. Anite, the Minister of State for Investment, she told me that we need to balance the need to attract investors and jobs. I told her that the matter is urgent.

When you go to Azam, they employ more than 600 people and they give them numbers; so you just mention your number and you enter. They have no contracts. Today, they will pay you Shs 11,000, tomorrow Shs 8,000 and Shs 6,000 on another day. Yes, we want the investors and the jobs but Government must protect Ugandans who are working in these factories.

The Speaker: That is an issue for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because the labour inspectors are there. We hope that the minister can take an interest in those factories.

One of the things that bother me is statements from Government officials that Uganda is a good destination because there is cheap labour, yet people sometimes work in conditions of slavery. What is the selling point?

What are the names of the factories where you want the minister to take action?

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, the specific factory where we now have a problem is called Cascade on Namugongo Road in Kireka. For two days, police has been firing teargas at workers who are saying that the contract they were given was for Shs 220,000 a month but they are being paid Shs 110,000 every two weeks; so they are now being paid Shs 60,000. They have colleagues who got injured when they were working here. They terminated them but they did not treat them. They are asking “Can you address these issues?” but the response has always been teargas. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development should examine that situation and then come and report to us in a week from now. That will be Tuesday next week. 

Finally, hon. Angura has an emergency.

3.14
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Over the weekend, the people of Mella Subcounty, specifically Mella Parish, woke up to a very heavy storm with heavy winds that completely swept down homes of over 21 families to the ground. As I speak now, 11 members of those families are hospitalised and the roof of a mosque was swept down. The people are Papai Mailuk, Sunday Kapel, Opapala Oswan, among others. 

My prayer is that emergency relief supplies be given to these families to at least enable them have where to put their heads in form of tents, food items, mosquito nets and iron sheets to take them to the positions they were in before the storm. I beg to pray. 

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness is required to go and address the situation in that county. I would also like to ask you, Members, to help your people plant trees. The winds are blowing all those things because there are no trees. I think you should help your people to plant trees, as the Government addresses their situation.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I heed to your guidance, especially on the matter of urgent national importance raised by our colleague. 

However, the procedural matter I am raising on is that it has become monotonous; when all of us face such calamities in our constituencies, we come to the Floor of the House and alert the nation that something has gone wrong and we urgently need humanitarian assistance for recovery. However, every time this has been raised on the Floor of the House, it has remained for the record. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) or the department of disaster preparedness hardly responds to any of the issues we raise in this House on the Floor. We come, talk and lament. The hope is built because you direct, as the Rt Hon. Speaker, but over time, seldom have they acted. 

In my own constituency, at one time I informed this House that one of our hills, Sinda Hill, was breaking apart and giving way. I was so surprised that nobody from the OPM or the disaster preparedness ministry reported to our district or to our county to even look at the hill itself and get to know if what we were saying was right. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right that we continue to raise these issues in the House, which we have faith in that action can be taken, but the relevant ministry never takes any action at all? Thank you. 

3.17
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, disaster is not for any particular people. When it comes, it is for everybody. However, it is also common knowledge that when disaster strikes, many people react without anybody knowing who is reacting. Members of Parliament, for example, may even not know what the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness is doing. When you come here and say the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness is not reacting, how would you know?

Let me just say that the information I am giving her may help her – if she lets me finish. I will help her to clarify that every district, especially the disaster prone districts, has a district disaster committee. They are there; whether the Member of Parliament knows it or not, it does not matter. The committee is there and they must have reacted by now -(Interjections)- Yes, I am telling you the truth. They must have reacted by now, by visiting the site. 

The chairman of the committee is the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). All technical people in the district must go to where the disaster happened, make a report which includes what is required and how urgent it is.  

What I expect from colleagues is to initially get in touch with the CAO and that committee and find out how far they have gone. They should work jointly. However, if you complain here because of disasters, the people in your constituency will hear that you have complained but that is not enough. You just coordinate and we see. Thank you, Madam. 

3.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, disaster started long time ago and for us, as Members of Parliament, we told our people that we are supposed to magnify their voices here when they are suffering. 

The institution is not working. The structures are not there. It is just by word of mouth that you are telling us that there are district disaster management committees, but they are not working. We are even supposed to have subcounty disaster management committees but all those are not working. When are you going to allow these structures to work so that we do not bring things here one by one – (Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I just wanted to inform you and the House that the Parliamentary Commission has set up a very strong directorate in the office of the Leader of the Opposition’s and the Government Whip. These offices are well equipped with technical personnel and well trained staff. 

It is expected that when we discuss any matter of national importance, they are supposed to capture the information and relay it to the Office of the Government Whip and Leader of Government Business. It is the office of the Leader of Government Business that is supposed to inform or request information from the district to find out whether the information we received in Parliament has got any evidence on the ground. 

May we now know, through the information you are sharing with the House, whether the office of the Government Chief Whip and the Leader of Government Business has become useless, so that maybe the Parliamentary Commission can take steps to close it. They are supposed to carry our voice and make sure that those staff are active in whatever they are doing. That is the information I would like to give. 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. We want to see a day when these structures start to work – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what you are debating now. 

MS BETTY AOL: It is the disaster, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, please conclude. 

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, I just thought it is fair to put the record right. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has ably talked about the disaster management committees. I would like the House to know, by the time we raise some of these issues on the Floor of the House, we are really stuck and we have failed. 

When a calamity befalls any place or any area, the subcounty chief goes in with a team to gather the data in exactness. They put together a report that is signed by the CAO and it is sent to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The point we are making is that the CAO sends the report to the Office of the Prime Minister and there is no response. This is on record. If there is a response, I need to be corrected. When we raised the disasters that have occurred in Kitagwenda five times, there has been any response. There has not been any response at all. That is on one side.

As a Member of Parliament, we use the other arm to reach the Floor of the House, the Speaker directs but there is no response. We need to own this up and make it better. That is why we are raising it.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, we want to see a time that the Office of the Prime Minister takes this issue of disasters more seriously. We cannot just be doing it individually. Most of the time, we have to do this individually. The Members of Parliament are completely over-burdened. You should respond by also supporting those people who are in dire need. There is no proper response by your structures. Please, let your structures work. Let there be proper policies for us to follow. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Members, I just wanted to remind the Government that you are expected, under the Constitution, to establish a disaster preparedness commission. This has never been done. 

Maybe if you did that, perhaps the Members would not have to run back and forth between the district and the central Government. You are supposed to have brought a Bill for an Act here, from the Seventh Parliament; so, it is up to you. Honourable members, let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CONTINUED ROLLOUT OF THE LOWER SECONDARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM CONTRARY TO THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF TUESDAY 4 FEBRUARY 2020 THAT HALTED ITS REVIEW AND ROLLOUT PENDING FURTHER CONSULTATION AND PREPARATION OF KEY STAKEHOLDERS

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform you that on Friday we received communication from the Clerk that as the Ministry of Education and Sports, we are supposed to be here on Thursday to respond to an issue that Members raised on the 4th of February.

Madam Speaker, we are ready to present. I request this august House to bear with us that on Thursday, we be put on the Order Paper. We shall be in position to respond and we shall be in a position to give the Members details of the issues that they raised on the 4th –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The minister representing the ministry was here. She presented a statement, but she was also here on the day when this House directed that she must come here and explain. Now she is saying that she is responding to a letter from the Clerk yet the decision was made here in the House, in your presence.

In any case, you are supposed to be here under our rules; attending Parliament is not optional. Therefore, is the minister in order to seek refuge in a letter written by the Clerk, yet under our rules they are supposed to attend Parliament, and Madam Speaker, you invited them to come here on Tuesday? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the resolution to require an explanation from the Government was made here. Whether the Clerk wrote or not, we had already taken a decision here. I think they were just communicating to you, reminding you to come. Therefore, we still expect answers to the questions raised.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, with due respect, I request that you allow us present on Thursday because I believe this august House would like to get comprehensive and detailed responses.

I request this august House to bear with us. On Thursday, we are going to give responses to questions that you raised on the 4th. In addition, I know that you may want to raise more supplementary questions, which we shall be ready to answer on Thursday. I beg, Madam Speaker.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raise this point of procedure with pain. Schools opened and senior 1 students are in class. We are accountable. They are asking us questions but we do not have answers.

The minister who is on the Floor was here the whole of last week. It has become a practice. I think last month we asked the same ministry to come and give us accountability about seed schools but they have not reported anything. Now they are postponing their responses to Thursday. Thursday will come and they will give us another day. We have no explanations, Madam Speaker. 

I think it is high time we took a clear direction. Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether we are proceeding well when a state minister comes today and says, “Give us time” and then we take another decision and she says, “Give us time”. Madam Speaker, I need to seek your guidance on how we should proceed on this matter. 

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Education and Sports must answer those questions this week and Thursday is the very last day. If you do not, we shall take you where you know.

MS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall be presenting on Thursday. I would like to assure this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the other issue concerns the seed schools. We had asked you to give us an update on the entire seed school programme in the country. I was shocked on Saturday when I was talking to my CAO and she told me that the company constructing four seed schools in Kamuli is the same one constructing in Buyende, Luuka, Iganga and Tororo. This is one company in six districts; really! The contracts are issued here in Kampala. No wonder in some places, there is only a foundation. We also want that answer – the school, contractor and date of completion. It is very serious.

MR MATHIAS MPUUGA: Thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker. I would like to believe that the minister is asking for time for a good cause. 

If the ministry is not ready with the statement, I am wondering whether it is ready with the curriculum. A statement is actually a basic explanation of what she is already doing. My worry, Madam Speaker, is that as Parliament, we are being invited into an arena of contempt by the minister. This is because while we debated passionately about this subject, of course across the aisle, we did agree and Parliament resolved that the curriculum is stayed until particular issues are clarified, and this was without any iota of partisanship.

Madam Speaker, we raised questions that required urgent answers before we would know what the ministry was doing. We are reading media statements to the effect that Parliament has no powers to stop whatever – to leave the curriculum alone. We are not trying to implement the curriculum as Parliament, but we are raising legitimate questions as people who represent our communities.

Madam Speaker, for example, there is a simple question that was raised by a Member on the Floor when we debated this subject. He asked what the fate is of teachers whose subjects are being phased out. This is a simple question. These are Ugandans who are employed and then suddenly, they are told to pack up and go home. The minister says she needs time to explain –(Interruption) 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Mathias Mpuuga for the points that he is making. However, you have just ruled that the Minister of Education and Sports comes here not later than Thursday. Thursday is just 48 hours from now. Is it in order for the Member to continue taking us back to the debate when you have already ruled and the minister is ready to come on Thursday? We have a heavy agenda on the Order Paper that we are looking forward to debating. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the questions were asked and I believe the minister recorded them. We shall require answers on all those things on Thursday without fail. 

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, I had wanted to raise the antennas of the ministry because they seem to be pointing low on this subject. If they think we have no record of the issues raised, they need to be aware that something is not right in our schools. You cannot force a curriculum down the throats of Ugandans when they are not ready. 

I hope the ministry will come and express readiness, not mere statements. We shall come with evidence of your lack of readiness. Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like you to join me in welcoming a delegation of Matongo Lost Land Recovery Families. They are from Bwamba in Bundibugyo District, represented by hon. Gafabusa and hon. Josephine Bebona. You are welcome (Applause)

PETITION OF MATONGO LOST LAND RECOVERY FAMILIES ORGANISATION

3.36
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I rise under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure to present a petition by Matongo Lost Land Recovery Families Organisation composed of 2,618 households from Bwamba County in Bundibugyo District. 

Madam Speaker, the humble petition of this organisation - Matongo Lost Land Recovery Families Organisation – is presented on their behalf by me. The subject matter of the petition regards the forceful eviction of communities in Bundibugyo District by the Government of Uganda. 

These families, under their organisation, from the Bamba and Babwisi communities of Bundibugyo in western Uganda, originally from 30 villages listed here - For purposes of time, I will not read the names of the villages. The petition is on our iPads, you can read the names of the villages. 

Your humble petitioners, through their clans and that of their grandparents and parents, occupied this land. It was gazetted as a forest reserve in 1920, as a national park. 

They were first evicted by the British Government in 1920, allegedly that time due to an outbreak of an epidemic of sleeping sickness that infested the area. 

Later on in 1983, they were evicted again by the Government of Uganda but there was no reason disclosed to them. Some of them went as far as the Democratic Republic of Congo and stayed there. They are scattered and are living on handouts. Nobody seems to be bothered to resettle them because they were not compensated. 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers? 

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, the petitioners have two prayers to make:
    1. That Government, and specifically this Parliament, carries out a thorough investigation into this matter so as to effect reasonable and adequate compensation to all the affected families and households. 
    2. That Government either de-gazettes part of this gazetted national park to re-settle them or Government finds alternative arable land for proper resettlement of all these claimants. 

Your humble petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto have appended their signatures. 

About 1,100 of them have signed this petition. I beg to lay a copy of this petition with their signatures. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for expeditious perusal and report back. Thank you. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 67/03/01 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

3.41
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): “In 2007, the Police Council, the governing body of the Uganda Police Force, resolved to form a SACCO with a view to pull resources from the police staff for investment, in order to reduce poverty among its members. Exodus SACCO was accordingly registered under Registration No. 8404/RCS. By May 2012, the SACCO had registered a membership of over 16,314 and was worth Shs 2 billion. 

Several complaints have been registered against the operations of the SACCO by police officers who allege that they are mandatorily required to join the membership of Exodus SACCO right from the training wing where cadet officer trainees are made to pay Shs 100,000 monthly while other ranks are made to pay Shs 50,000 as monthly contribution towards their membership in the SACCO.

They further complain that they are not allowed to withdraw any of their savings from the SACCO and if they are to withdraw, stringent conditions are set for the withdrawal.

    i) Why do the police authorities force police officers to join and save with the Exodus SACCO?
    ii) Why does the management of Exodus SACCO deny the savers to withdraw their savings when need arises and if any is allowed to withdraw, why do they set stringent conditions for the withdrawal?”

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, this question was asked for an oral answer by the honourable MP for Kasambya County. 

One part was asking why police authorities force police officers to join and save with the Exodus SACCO. As we all know, the Exodus SACCO is a SACCO formed by the police institution to support police officers in their endeavours, and it was formed in 2007. 

The main purpose of forming that SACCO is investment in property like houses for individuals and also in business, in case they have proposals, so that the policemen are secured from other money lenders who would be charging high interest rates. Therefore, it is savings, not mainly for consumptive purposes.

Nobody is forced to join. The police officers are only encouraged to join because however small the salaries they get, they have to learn the saving culture. At the time of withdrawal of the funds, their proposals are ordinarily looked at to see whether they satisfy the criteria set. These criteria strictly focus on the purposes that I have talked about; first, investment in businesses and possibly –(Interjection)– yes, however small the business may be - housing, like buying iron sheets. That is the purpose of the Exodus SACCO. 

Last year, when I made a statement in this House, this SACCO had been mismanaged to a great extent. So, the current leadership sat down and called people from all over the country to reconstitute the management and appoint a new board of directors. They also appointed a new supervisory committee, which undertook a forensic audit and other activities. Some loans and withdrawals from the SACCO have been carried out, as the reorganisation continues. 

Therefore, there is no forcing anybody but there are restrictions whenever one would like to know whether that fulfils the conditions that they had at the time of joining.

Another thing that is being done by this new management committee is sensitisation of the police officers in the whole country about the SACCO. This will help the officers to join the SACCO while knowing the conditions under which it operates. There is no forcing. In case conditions on withdrawals are satisfied, the person is allowed to withdraw. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any supplementary questions?  

3.46
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, thank you very much for attempting to answer my question. 

It is a pity that we do not have Members of Parliament representing police and prisons here. That is why they are suffering outside there while the minister who is supposed to protect their rights is here massaging the thuggery that is happening in their SACCO.

The police officers are forced to save; they are not doing it voluntarily. An officer below the cadet rank is charged Shs 50,000 and from cadet rank, it is Shs 100,000 yet there is no law that compels them to save with that SACCO. Above all, accessing the money is a problem.

THE SPEAKER: This is not a matter for debate.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Madam Speaker, this is my prayer. If we are to save Uganda Police Force, how I wish we could institute a committee to go and interact with these police officers. Even here in Parliament, as I came in very many of them said, “Please Mbwatekamwa, help us and talk.” The minister is not helping them and we are not helping them either. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, make your prayer quickly.  
 
MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much. Since they do not have a representative here, my prayer is: can we have a select committee to go down and investigate and/or interact with these police officers to understand their problems? They are suffering and their children have not yet gone back to school, yet the minister is here deceiving us. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we require a select committee because we have a sector committee here. I think that committee should undertake this exercise and quickly come to tell us their findings. Therefore, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, please carry out some inquiries on this matter and update us. Let us go to the next item.

QUESTION 66/03/01 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.49
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, BULAMOGI COUNTY, KALIRO): “According to the Bank of Uganda Act, 75 per cent of the profits made by Bank of Uganda (BOU) form part of the consolidated funds available for Government expenditure. 

i) 	How much profits or losses has BOU made annually for the last fifteen years? 
ii) 	When was the last time BOU made profits and how much was transferred to the Consolidated Fund?”

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are kindly requesting that we present the answers tomorrow because the questions require us to look at the audited accounts for the last 15 years. We will be ready tomorrow to answer these questions together with the audited accounts of Bank of Uganda, so that the House is informed and given the right information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, these are very old questions; they have been with your ministry for over a year.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we just saw this question a few days ago. It is our fault and we apologise but we just saw the question a few days ago.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, question is deferred to tomorrow. 

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recollect that we received the report from the committee and Members had requested for time to go and internalise it before the debate can commence. We agreed to debate it today. So, let us commence the debate.

3.51
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Administration of the Judiciary Bill is a very critical Bill. When I went to my constituency, people asked me very many questions. The consultation that was done was almost at regional level, yet villagers have several questions on this Bill that need answers. 

I would like to beg that while this Bill may not very critical, especially to members from Butaleja, we can defer it maybe to next month as we consult. I do not know what the view of other Members is, but we can stay it for some two or three weeks until we get –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this Bill came up for consideration last week. There are colleagues who said that they needed to go and internalise both the report and the Bill so they can debate from a point of knowledge. I warned them because my experience here is that sometimes you have different MPs and sometimes you may have one who is not even aware that the matter was brought and it is now at a different stage.

Is the honourable member in order – instead of seeking to debate the Bill – to tell us that he wants his villagers to be the ones to debate, yet they elected him to come to Parliament and legislate?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. First of all, honourable members, we agreed last week that you wanted the weekend to go and study the report. I would like to remind you that this report was presented in February 2019. The Government said they were still thinking about it but our report was ready in February 2019. Therefore, it has been with you for over a year. You should have talked to those villagers over this issue last year. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I invite my colleague, hon. Waluswaka, who does not seem to be interested in debating this motion to consider the provision of Rule 129(3), which is in mandatory terms. If the members are not willing to debate, I will move a motion that the Bill be read for the second time and we go to the committee stage.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, you have rightly guided. When this Bill came up last week, the position of members was not about consultation. We need not only to be honest with ourselves but also with this House, where many people have come and gone before us. To say that this Bill is not critical would be to deny the fact that it is a constitutional mandate that we should make the third arm of Government to have a law that governs and administers it. The decision to postpone debate was purely because members had not adequately addressed themselves to the Bill, which was justifiable.

I nearly got shocked when I heard that –(Laughter)- By the way, our voters might dwell in the villages but they are not necessarily villagers. I believe that the right time for us to show discomfort or approval for this Bill is now – during the debate. Those who are for and against it should debate now. Let me accept information from the coffee board –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Oboth, the Chairperson Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs who is also my brother from the cotton-growing area. Madam Speaker, on that day, I am sure Eng. Waluswaka was not in the House. Therefore, he never knew what took place. What he would have done is to have consulted us who were in and we would have advised him. The agreement was that we come on Tuesday, debate and see where we end with the law. Therefore, if you were with the villagers, they were not following very well. Now, since you are here, tell them that it is now time to debate. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I have to acknowledge, for the first time, that his information is very useful. (Laughter) I have no other useful information to add in that regard. I seek your indulgence and guidance that we proceed to debate –[Mr Katuntu: “More information before you concede the Floor.”]- Yes, he is a member of the committee and he is entitled to refresh my memory, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, before this House degenerates into peasantry talk -(Laughter)– we have a responsibility and that responsibility is governed by our rules of procedure. This Bill has been in this House since 2018. What reasonable – I am trying to be as simple as possible. What reason can any reasonable person give that a national Parliament can stay with a Bill for two or three years without resolving the issues in the Bill?

What yardsticks -[Mr Guma: “Order!”]- I wish you would seek clarification other than “order” because I would give it –(Interruption)

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA: Madam Speaker, I am Maj. Guma Gumisiriza. Hon. Katuntu, I have all the respects for you but it not for you to guide me on whether I should seek clarification or raise a point of order. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Katuntu, from Idudi –(Laughter)- When he says that, “Before this House degenerates into peasantry talk”, in essence, he is saying we are discussing peasantry –(Interjection)- Is it in order for hon. Katuntu to say we are discussing peasantry talk? Hon. Katuntu said “any reasonable MP…” Why make all those insinuations? Is it in order for a member to make such insinuations against a colleague?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member was seeking to go back and consult the villagers and that is what is on the record, so, he is in order.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is true that I am from Idudi like, my friend there is from Ishongororo –(Laughter) – Something like that.
 
I have no intention, and I speak this from the bottom of my heart, to ridicule anyone. I am only making a point that this Bill has been in our committee for too long. The problem is that the inefficiency is going to be vested not only on the committee but also on the entire House. 

We do not want to be a subject of public discussion that builds anger in Parliament for years, yet the Bills have been processed. Hon. Waluswaka, this is the first Bill I know in the history of this House, which has stayed for around three years. We have to resolve it one way or the other. I pray that we go to the merits and resolve this issue. Why do we fear the debate? 

Lastly, the stakeholders are affected by this Bill. They have made their input and appeared before the committee. We are actually ready to proceed. Can I have any reason from anyone who thinks we should not proceed with this Bill? Please convince us. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, we are ready with this Bill and we want to proceed with it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I would like to remind you that this is the only House that makes laws in this country and so, we have an obligation to legislate for the whole country not when we like and don’t like. 

I would like to remind you that we have been indicted by the Constitutional Court in the case of Constitution Petition No.30 of 2017 Krispus Ayena Odongo vs the Attorney-General and Parliamentary Commission, where the court said we have failed to enact this law. We have already been indicted. Please, do not joke with the national responsibility to legislate for this country.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have clearly reminded us about our obligations and it has already been said that the report from the committee was presented last year. Members then requested for time to go and internalise; but it is over eight months since this report was presented. I would like to know: what are we internalising? If members are not ready to debate, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to move to committee stage so that we consider the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to give an opportunity to someone; we agreed that when we return this Tuesday, we shall debate. The Floor is open - members of the committee, no way our rules do not permit you to debate your own report.   

4.07
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not raising on a point of procedure, but to debate this report. 

First, I would like to apologise to the public for having delayed this law. Since we have apologised, we are now going to make it a law. However, there are some issues that I would like to make clear and therefore, I request the chairperson of the committee to help me understand.

The first issue is about the Judiciary. The reason why members are not happy with the Judiciary is because the Judiciary is one of those institutions that are delaying justice. This is why we should make this law, especially for them so that we can see how they can continue to delay justice.

Madam Speaker, the Judiciary comes here and we give them money so that they can go and do work. However, the results are never seen. All reports of institutions of government are submitted here, but the Judiciary has never submitted any performance report. This is therefore an opportunity for us to make a law so that they are able to submit their performance reports here.

If you went to the court, most of these judicial officers are not there. If they are present, they are good at postponing cases. They say “come next week”. There are cases, which have taken years yet these gentlemen and ladies always sit there and are being paid a salary. Maybe they have been doing it because they wanted a law and so, I think it is time we give them the law.

One of the things that I am not agreeing to is that the money we are going to appropriate for them should come from public resource; but they want to make this law look as if – I would like to tell the chair that this law should follow the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Otherwise, the way it is, I think we are trying to make a law that we will show that they will be outside, such that no one can attack them. Look at sections that say they will have their funds, open their accounts and manage them among others.  

In addition, some sections indicate that the Chief Justice is free to give people leave, where someone can go to another country and work for five years and come back. Madam Speaker, in the civil service, if you go for leave for more days than what you are entitled to, you are supposed to be replaced so that other people can work. This business of judges going to other countries for five or six years, when they are on our payroll should not be accepted. If someone has gone, he or she should be replaced so that we can have the Judiciary functional. I do not agree with this business of having many judges and presiding officer who are not working. I have personally experienced this.

The other point is the advisory committee. I think we should copy what the Parliamentary Commission does. The moment we make the advisory committee very big - the chairman of the Law Council – those are practicing lawyers and so, why should they come here. The Judiciary should be given and this will help them in planning and resource management. 

Madam Speaker, I propose that they should replicate the Parliamentary Commission, where the Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice and four judges - like our Backbench Commissioners; the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Secretary to the Judiciary. That is all.

Madam Speaker, the moment we make it huge – In Bugisu, they say too many rats cannot take millet. I am sure even in your places it is the same. So, I would like to urge members to oppose the Judiciary Advisory Committee. It should only be for people of Judiciary but not to bring people from outside. We will need the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for purpose of resources and the Solicitor-General since they work together.

The other point –(Interjections)- do not panic. You will have your own time. Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, I would suggest that this Bill should first stay. The minister responsible for the Judiciary should give us the programme and how he is going to improve on the performance of the Judiciary.

Madam Speaker, I am a Member of Parliament and I have been to these magistrate courts and the High Court, but I have seen how people are suffering in these courts. The local people suffer in these courts. The judge has a case for over five years; he tells somebody to come back and after two months the judge is nowhere to be seen. There is another officer I am forgetting the title – he is not also in the office. I have been wondering –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR MAJEGERE: Doesn’t the Judiciary have a supervisor? Why should judges and magistrates behave the way they do and make prisoners suffer? If I give you an example –(Interruption)

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give my honourable colleague is that, the judicial officers have been complaining of backlog because they are few. So it again comes back to the way we appropriate resources to enable them have the requisite number. As we debate, the honourable colleague has to put that into consideration.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, there is a registrar; when the judge is not there, he will give the registrar the authority to take a decision. But even that one will not be in the office.

When somebody is convicted at the High Court, he is supposed to make an appeal – the lawyers can bear witness. But for this person to make an appeal, there are some documents he requires. 
It is the court to facilitate this prisoner but he is not there.

Before we proceed with this Bill, let the minister first come to the Floor of Parliament and tell us how he is going to improve what he is doing to improve the services in the Judicial Commission. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, every year we have the budget session where we review all the ministries and the performances. Why haven’t you raised these matters during that time? You are a member of the committee; I hope what you are going to say – 

MR MUGOYA: I am merely raising a procedural point.

THE SPEAKER: Under which rule?

MR MUGOYA: There is Rule 7 where a Speaker is vested with general authority; so in the exercise of your powers as contained under this rule, I would like to raise a procedural matter which can be a basis to guide the direction of this debate.

THE SPEAKER: No. I think you find a rule where you can raise your point and then I can use my rule 7; find a rule where you fit. 

MR MUGOYA: The procedural matter I am raising under our Rules of Procedure – and particularly I cited for you rule seven – is that in 2018, a report was presented by our committee and it had different views.

The attendant proposals for the amendment have got unique – not only that but the proposals have gone into a metamorphosis in that the initial –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a member of that committee? Have you been attending meetings?

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, give me room to present my case.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable member you cannot – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have high respect for my brother, hon. Mugoya, since he is a former chief magistrate of these courts of ours. My brother was even a vice chairperson of the committee; I do not know if he is still because these things change.

Our brother knows all the laws – that if you have a dissenting view, you raise a minority report and it is on that basis that you come and speak in the House and you are heard.

Now he is a member of the committee, he has worked in Judiciary and I am sure in 2021 he is most likely going back to Judiciary; you know what will happen.

Is hon. Mugoya in order to come and disrupt the debate on the Administration of Judiciary Bill yet he is a member of the committee and never raised his issues in a minority report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will not allow any member to smuggle a minority report casually on this Floor; the rules are clear. If you disagree, you notify the chairperson and the committee that you have a minority report, produce it and attach it to the report and when the chairperson is presenting he will say, “I have the main report but there is also a minority report.” Please do not abuse the Rules of Procedure; no smuggling.

4.21
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for processing this report and I must say that it did a commendable work.

Our Constitution, in Article 128, talks about the independence of the Judiciary and it has been a subject of litigation in cases before; one of the cases I recall is the case of Musenene v. the Attorney-General.

This matter was discussed extensively on how our Judiciary can be made independent and this would be the right time for us to make pronouncements over this matter.

However, I would like to speak as the Shadow Minister for Public Service; this Bill particularly introduces something that is very alien – probably in Uganda. I do not know in the entire world where officers that retire from Government service will be entitled to be paid for life.

As a Shadow Minister for Public Service, this is an area that I would like to invite this House to look at critically. We have the responsibility, as a House, to make pronouncements on how our retired judicial officers can leave, to discuss their retirement benefits – which is in order for us to decide and provide for.

However, I would like to invite the attention of the House to proceed on that particular area very carefully because we are going to open a can of worms. I know that there have been these arguments that judicial officers are restricted in their work and do not have time to do any other work. For example, doctors can be in the Government hospital and yet also have private hospitals; teachers can teach in the Government facilities but also have their private schools. That has been the argument by the judicial officers. 

However, when I ask you if you are a Member of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I would like to conclude that the argument should not be how difficult it is for a judicial officer to find employment after retirement. Rather, we should discuss how best we can make them work comfortably, have better salaries and facilities, so that they have funding to execute their work other than looking at that personal matter.

Madam Speaker, lastly on the issue of administration, I would like to mention that there are unique situations happening in the Judiciary. A judicial official is appointed, for example, to be the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission. He is still under the administration of the Chief Justice but also the appointing authority for Electoral Commission is different. These matters must be resolved. You either belong to one arm of Government - But you cannot be hanging there when you are a judge and are also chairing the other institution.

Therefore, this would be the best opportunity for us to resolve this matter. I invite colleagues not to fear. We can deal with this Bill once and for all and make the Judiciary self-accounting. Thank you.

4.24
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I have the following observations.

This Bill seeks to establish an advisory committee to advise the Chief Justice. The chairperson of this committee will be the Chief Justice. The vice chairperson of the committee will be the Deputy Chief Justice. 

This is what we are running away from in Bank of Uganda, where the Governor becomes the chairperson of the Board when he is at the same time the Chief Executive of the Board. There is likelihood that if whoever chairs this committee – if he is a staff of the institution - will manipulate the proceedings of the meeting.

Therefore, I would implore members that when the inclusion of setting up an advisory committee comes, we should be able to make an amendment to the effect that this committee is not set up and the Chief Justice does not become the chairperson.

Madam Speaker, there are three layers of authority in the Judiciary. There is the Supreme Court, which is headed by the Chief Justice with administrative structures. The Court of Appeal is headed by the Deputy Chief Justice with administrative structures. The High Court is headed by the Principal Judge with administrative structures. 

When you add all these administrative structures, together with the Judicial Service Commission, I believe those institutions are good enough to advise the Chief Justice in whatever he wants to do –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, we are discussing an area of a specialty where majority of us in this House are not authorities – (Interjection) – Well, I am talking about the Judiciary. Madam Speaker is a lawyer and a dozen of us here in the House are lawyers. 

This is the point I am making –(Interjection)- Hon. Ssemujju, do not heckle me. You will have the opportunity to come here and speak. You and I are not lawyers so what are you saying? 

Being a judge takes some bit of time like being a General over there. It is not like being a Member of Parliament where someone jumps out of these mushrooming universities and goes to their local constituency. (Laughter) It is not. Being a judge is not like being an MP –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the hon. Guma Gumisiriza is one of the few lucky people who, as soon as he joined the army, was facilitated to go and train at the prestigious Royal Military College, Sandhurst, which a few soldiers will ever attend.

However, the point of order I am raising is that there are constitutional and statutory qualifications in the Parliamentary Elections Act for one to become a Member of Parliament. In the Constitution, the requirement is A-level. 

Is hon. Guma, first of all, in order to suggest that the qualifications that are constitutional are too low and therefore, people can simply jump from anywhere and become MPs?

Two, hon. Guma says this Parliament is not an authority on legislation. Is he in order to seek to relate, by his submission, the Constitution, saying this Parliament is not an authority on legislation but also for ridiculing colleagues; that they simply jump from mushrooming universities and become Member of Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what hon. Guma is saying is that you can enter Parliament straight from school. However, to become a judge, you must go to the university, you must go to Judicial College, you must go for a Diploma. There are additional qualifications you need and that is a fact. Therefore, he is in order. (Laughter)

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA: Madam Speaker, it is not only the law school and LDC. You must also have a minimum number of years of legal practice. This is common knowledge out there.

Madam Speaker, I would like to invite colleagues here that we discuss this report on the Judiciary with the necessary sobriety; not to be carried away by a few emotions here and there. What hon. Katuntu said is very true – was it hon. Katuntu or someone else – that the Judiciary is understaffed. It is understaffed and underfunded. 

My brother, hon. Waira - I always call him Majegere out there but now I learnt his new name from Mayuge – said that judicial officers become absent. I would like to invite colleagues here that we really should debate this Bill that concerns our Judiciary with utmost sobriety.

Who raised the point that they have restrictions? They are allowed but I think the law restricts them from doing this kind of business downtown and all over the place. They may do so by proxy but I can tell you that these people have a specialised field. 

I would like to invite your total attention and sobriety so that we really look at this Bill more critically for our judges, magistrates and other staff according to their scales. However, it is a specialised area. I can tell you, Madam Speaker - I would like to thank you for your ruling - to become a judge is not like becoming a Member of Parliament. Thank you. 

4.32
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was wondering as to why this Bill has taken very long yet the Judiciary is one of the most sensitive and important arms of Government of this country. When it comes to Judiciary matters especially when we are talking about the administrative requirements to have an efficient judicial system, it must be supported by a good law that should create an enabling environment for the judges to play their duties without fear or favour. 

We have been talking about a lot of corruption in the Judiciary. Part of the reasons has been that judicial officers feel a lot of the economic pressure out there, which their jobs cannot provide for adequately. So, here is an opportunity with their thoughts requesting Parliament to consider their plight.

Therefore, it would be useful for us - because I looked at one of the sections that have been deleted talking about benefits. I have been talking to my old boys who are judges and their argument is that they cannot even take a picture with me because when it is seen, they will be in trouble. They are living a very secluded lifestyle with their families. 

To me, instead of rejecting the issue of their benefits, we would rather think deeply about it. I strongly believe that when I put myself in the shoes of those judges, I feel – I have been meeting the retired judges and I see their frustration. You know they have been out of circulation. They have no networks that are business-oriented and so, they live on their own only as opinion leaders in the villages. And an opinion leader without an economic muscle, to whom many people go to seek advice and support, where they know this is – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for yielding the Floor.  You see, the sort of the job the judges do – sometimes, they are involved in criminal prosecutions. They have convicted criminals. So, even when they retire, their lives certainly are at risk. Consequently, they cannot live the ordinary public life. That is why they even restrict themselves to staying indoors; they cannot go to public places. The fear is that they might meet one of the people they once convicted or relatives of such persons. Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much for that useful information. Anyhow, I am empathic and I try as much as possible to put myself in the shoes of another person. So, for us to compare these jobs with other jobs out there is very unfair.

I am of the view that, yes, if you are unhappy with the benefits of these judges, then you reduce them by a certain percentage. Otherwise, it is unfair to completely do away with it; we will be very unreasonable. I would really urge this Parliament to consider these judicial officers such that they are not compromised when they are serving their nation. I beg to move.

4.37
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to stand to second the committee’s report not because I am an impending beneficiary. I say so because some people are saying that those who support the report are beneficiaries or they intend to retire to the Judiciary. In terms of protocol, I do not think I am one of those people who can benefit from this particular legislation. 

I just would like to remind us that Article 128 of the Constitution says that the Judiciary is supposed to operate as an independent body; independent from any authority or institution. Also, we are required, in clause (3) of the Constitution, under the same Article, to ensure we give them the necessary support so they are effective.

We are aware of the challenges that the Judiciary has and the way they operate. Of course, this independence depends on this kind of circumstance. The lack of resources to operate – get these judges running around – you know the things which happen in the Judiciary; waiting for the handouts and bailouts from different entities yet as you know, this job is supposed to be a dignified one. 

The Judiciary sits in a place of God because they dispense justice. As hon. Katuntu noted earlier, when they retire, the life they live or the work they do does not permit them even to engage, later on, with the society that they retire to.

Madam Speaker, of course, in Article 126 of the Constitution, this power that they dispense is derived from the people. Members of Parliament are the voices of those people and their work is to legislate and ensure that –(Interjections)– I think my minutes are very few.
 
I would like to implore Members of Parliament not to fear to legislate on this matter. We can apportion according to what we feel – well, not according to what we feel but what is fair to these people to dispense the work in a reasonable manner. 

We also should use this opportunity to remind the Judiciary that they are not operating in isolation. There are certain things that happen where the Judiciary operates as if they are totally in another world and Parliament does not have a say in what they do. That is the reason you see these kinds of things going back and forth.

I would like to remind Members of Parliament not to use this privilege to disadvantage the Judiciary. Let us legislate in the interest of the people, which is also the interest of the Judiciary. Thank you.

4.40
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for guiding this House properly to debate this Bill. The Judiciary is a very important Arm of Government. As we have been in this country for a bit of time, we have to appreciate that there has been a fair rule of law and order in this country compared to the previous times and so, it is very important to appreciate the role of the Judiciary.
 
True, there is an issue of workload but people who go to courts take a lot of lies to the judicial officers. The judge or chief magistrate has to scrutinise and sieve out the correct information from the lies. So, the judge should not carry out this work overnight. 

Consequently, we need to appreciate the work of the Judiciary. If the benefits are more, like hon. Amoding has said, we can see how to address them fairly but not to put the Judiciary out of place. 

Lastly, in this debate, I would like to pay a special tribute to the female judicial officers; they are really fair somehow - that is a fair comment.

Tomorrow, some of our children will get services and employment in the Judiciary. Therefore, by the time they get there, we would like to be part of the improvement of their welfare. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One of the issues is on the establishment and appointment of the inspectorate of judiciary to receive complaints and process the external and internal complaints against judicial officers.

Madam Speaker, members were complaining about the delays in the courts of justice. In the establishment of the inspectorate, we hope to see improvement in the services because the role of the inspectorate here will be to instil discipline in the judicial officers who are not handling cases on time and maybe who are also engaging in corruption.

Therefore, I would support the coming into force of this law so that the inspectorate is strengthened and it is independent of the judicial system. This can also help us to bring hope to the Judiciary because some Ugandans think that judicial system is corrupt. Therefore, the inspectorate element would help us.

Secondly, the establishment of Performance Management Systems and establishment of Judicial Training Institute; I believe with the coming forth of this institute, it will help to refresh the judicial officers, especially now that the world is going global. Maybe we want to get to a time where our cases that are taken to these courts are digitised. Like you do not have to go to Nakawa and they tell you that the file has disappeared and we are looking for it.

Therefore, with the Judicial Training Institute, we hope that the judicial officers will also be technologically updated and we shall see them embrace ICT. Cases of files disappearing will be minimised.

About the retirement benefits of the judicial officers, colleagues noted that it is true the judges go through different levels from magistrates to judges. It is true for some –(Member timed out)

4.45
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I would like to thank my colleagues, in support of the Judiciary. Apart from talking about rule of law, we should look into what used to happen. In the past, they used to have places like officers’ mess where these big men and women could sit in the evenings but you can compare that they are confined in a life style.

In Mukono alone, I happen to be in a privileged area with over seven magistrates and five judges residing in one village. However, they cannot even go to some of our bars. They have to find someone’s place to enjoy life. Because of all that suffering, they need to be supported with some good benefits.

Secondly, they have relatives and these connected families, when you become a judge, your relatives start depending on you like people depend on us. There is no change and therefore, our support is genuine. When it comes to benefits, we can think of what to do but even think about making sure that those officers’ mess where officers used to meet can be reconstructed again; instead of now leaving these big men and women struggling with some of us who are already biased with them in the same places. That is not very fair.

Therefore, we should support our judges and the Judiciary as an institution because we are the three arms of government in this country. Fairness should be –(Member timed out)
 
4.47
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope the coming of this Bill is coming to solve the so many problems persons with disabilities have been facing while trying to access justice. Persons with physical disabilities have been finding it difficult to access courts, court premises, docks, those with sight and hearing impairment cannot get communication in courts and those with mental disabilities have been classified as not having legal capacity.

Madam Speaker, even the qualified persons with disabilities who can serve in the Judiciary and those who have been appointed to serve in the Judiciary, have failed to take up those appointments because of those problems. In 2016 when Uganda was being reviewed by the Treaty Body of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, there was a recommendation for Uganda to ensure that persons with disabilities can be supported to access justice.

Therefore, I would like to see provisions in this Bill, like under article 4 on the advisory board. It would have been good to at least get one representative of persons with disabilities and who is a qualified lawyer to represent us on this board.

Secondly, the training of the judicial officers should cater for - thank you, Madam Speaker. The training of the judicial officers must take into consideration access to justice by persons with disabilities. Article 6 which talks about the functions of the committees to ensure gender equality, should expand to gender and equity consideration. Just to take into account the issues I have raised. I thank you.

4.50
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to the colleagues’ that we thank the committee. Some of us particularly me, I am one of the persons that would be ready to support anything that would go to that sector and would improve the lives of the judges.

My only concern which I wish to put forward to those that normally relate with them, like the chairperson of the committee and others, is that originally courts had the total faith of people but it has gone on dwindling, reducing and declining. That is why we have the other musician who sang the song that “a poor person cannot win the case” simply because of some of these other instances that happen. 

We saw some of these things during the last court cases where we even had a judge - it is good he retired- he had become a businessman. It was too much. Therefore, we only pray that as we improve the lives of these judges because we are ready to give them whatever they want - we hope it will not be the same story that everybody will be crying and wondering whether he is going to get justice. We expect these courts and judges to dispense justice. 

Therefore, we pray that as we are here fighting to improve their lives, they also do in return what we expect out of them. Otherwise –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, our rules do not require us to talk about a person whose name is not mentioned. For the purpose of our record, it would be generalising and the judges may think we are against them. 

Is it in order for the member holding the Floor to say there was a judge who was doing more business than the work but he does not mention that specific judge so that we know him or her? Good enough, the judge has retired but we do not know them because it may not be good for some of us. Is it in order for him to hide the identity of the judge from us for the purpose of record?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, sitting judges need not to worry because the honourable member narrowed down to someone who has left so it is okay. (Laughter)

Mr kibalya: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Lastly, in the field of legal services, we have what they call “pro bono” services.  We would expect to have such services in Uganda extended to some of these poor people who cannot afford the fees of lawyers and these other people, so that we expand and let even the lowest person experience and get justice through the “pro bono” services. That could be established in the sector as we fight to improve and make the lives of judges better.

4.54
Mr Anthony okello (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will try to deal explicitly with clause 3 as reported by the committee. The clause deals with the administration of the Judiciary by the Chief Justice and empowers him in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission to create, classify, change and abolish offices within the judicial service.

The committee reports that the powers that clause 3 proposes to give to the Chief Justice might be challenged. They say that if passed, it would infringe on Articles 145, 174, 148 and 171 of the Constitution and that the Chief Justice has no mandate to create, classify, change or abolish offices without amending the Constitution. This provision in the Bill is therefore unconstitutional.

The committee has made very strong observations against clause 3 of the Bill that it is unconstitutional. However, what defeats my understanding is that in the recommendation of the committee, they have gone ahead to say that clause 3 should stand part of the Bill. I find the recommendation contradictory to the observations. Instead of deleting the clause, they are saying it – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

Mr Anthony okello: They are saying that it should stand part of the Bill. Even when they go ahead to say that clause 3 could be amended by dividing two standalone clauses, the Clause (a) they are talking about, about powers to classify and abolish, they are already a creation of the Constitution because it is given in Articles 145, 147, 148 and 148 and 171 of the Constitution. Therefore, we do not need a repeat of these in the Act that is coming.

I would like to put the committee on notice that when we reach committee stage, unless otherwise, I intend to move that clause 3 be deleted. It is my humble appeal that the chairperson should think about conceding on this matter when I rise to move it. Thank you. 

4.57
Mr james acidri (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill, in my opinion, is long overdue.  When we took our chairperson of National Resistance Movement (NRM) to court because the Central Executive Committee (CEC) had decided that he should run as a sole candidate, the Judiciary reminded us of this Bill. They told us that they may not be able to handle our case expressly because they lack the capacity. 

Now that the Bill is here, we will wish to debate it. When I heard colleagues trying to stampede the debate, I realised they were not being fair. Any institution would aspire for efficiency and effectiveness. This Bill seeks exactly to achieve that. 

When we look at independence of the Judiciary, we would like to grant this independence bearing in mind that they will be working with the other two arms of Government. In that respect, the coordination and implementation mechanisms for some of the proposed units to deliver services should be clearly streamlined. A case in point is how the Inspectorate of Judiciary will be working with the Inspectorate of Government. My understanding of the Inspectorate of Government is that it also covers the Judiciary.

Therefore, when we eventually establish an Inspectorate of the Judiciary, how will they work with that of Government? Are we going to change the name, “Inspectorate of Government”?  Government is comprised of three arms including the Judiciary.

On the capacity building and training components, we are introducing the Judicial Training Institute. This is in line with the other arms of Government. The other day we debated the Parliamentary Service Training Institute. We have the Public Service Training Institute and in addition the Uganda Management Institute. All these are meant to do capacity building within Government. How do we rationalise to ensure that with the little resources we have in this country, we are able to share within all these arms?

Finally, on retirement, I will suggest that we should have an effective pension instead of a pension for life. This should be similar to what is happening with public service. Right now in the public service, you need to produce a life certificate for you to continue to enjoy the benefits. The argument that judges do not necessarily do other work could be addressed by improving their current remuneration so that their pay is equivalent to the work they do especially during their productive time of life.

On the benefits, I suggest that the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice should enjoy similar benefits even after retirement like the President, the Vice President, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, because they are all heads of the Arms of Government. These are suggestions that I think we should take seriously so that our Judiciary cannot be intimidated –(Member timed out.)

5.01
Ms violet akurut (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like also to add my voice to say that this Bill is indeed long overdue. We need to ask ourselves, “What is this Bill trying to cure”? Allow me to read it verbatim: 

“There is no law that comprehensively provides for the retirement benefits for judicial officers as in the case for the other two arms of Government, that is, the Executive and Legislature. The President, Vice-President and the Prime Minister’s retirement benefits are provided for by the Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice-President and Prime Minister Act, 2010 while the Speaker and Deputy Speaker retirement benefits are provided for by the Parliamentary Pensions Act, 2007.” 

Honestly, I think it would be unfair if we do not provide the law for the judicial officers – yes, they are saying that there is a provision in the Constitution – which I think is Chapter 8 – that provides for the retirement of the judicial officers and their benefits and emoluments. However, this has not been operational because it does not have an Act of Parliament. Therefore, it calls upon us, as legislators, to legislate upon this to be able to ensure that we provide the law for the judicial officers.

It is true that our Judiciary has been marred with a lot of issues - a lot of corruption cases, name it. I would like to believe that maybe because this is lacking, they resort to other ways of sorting out issues. I would like to call upon my colleagues that it is incumbent upon us - probably what has been proposed is not what we can offer as a country or as a Government. However, we can offer something that is affordable by the people of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.03
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to what my colleagues have said. I have one issue on the lifetime salary. My suggestion is that instead of giving them a life salary, let it be improved now so that at the time of computing their gratuity and pension, it is bigger and carries more meaning. 

I have one big problem; that when we give them and their relatives that life salary and they die before retirement, other arms of Government professionals will also come up to demand for the same and we may find it very contentious here. Everyone is listening to this and putting their eyes here; they will also want that salary benefit. 

We have been giving executive directors of parastatals good packages of salary and it has not been coming through Parliament. They have been getting benefits and at the end of it all, they get the good take-home package and it has not been contentious. However, if this is made a precedent, it will cause us problems for other professionals, who do equally risky and meaningful work in our society. Thank you. 

5.05
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My interest is to do with Schedule 2, which talks about benefits payable to the retired Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice.

Madam Speaker, I think it would be unfair to pay a retired Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice the same salary when they are not in active service. One may hold that position for even less than two years and then you pay them as if they have been in active service for very many more years. 

Honourable members –(Interjection)– she is intervening but let me hope I am protected. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It might not be easy to be there, just like it is not even easy to be here, where I am standing. Hence, it is a two-way traffic. 

However, we cannot pay them lifetime salary and allowances when even the doctors are complaining. Are they not important? Are teachers not important to this country? Who is not important? Even the Generals are here complaining. 

Madam Speaker, I will agree with the rest of the proposals but this lifetime salary is equivalent to “Togikwatako”. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

5.07
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report of the committee is premised on Article 144 of the Constitution, which talks about the retirement agency for the judicial officers and also Article 138 of our Constitution, which defines where the monies for these judicial officers should be costed. 

I have two questions; have we, as Parliament, also considered the journey that the judicial officers go through before they even become judicial officers? Before someone becomes a lawyer, he or she goes through many hands. One of the critical hands is the teachers who teach this lawyer right from nursery school up to university.

I can see that we have teachers who are teaching law students but are not necessarily judges. They have, therefore, actually contributed significantly to the building of the sector of the Judiciary. 

We have someone retiring at the age of either 65 or 70. By this age, they have educated most of their children and done most of the basic minimum. What would be the relevance of giving this money to someone who is actually in the evening of his days on earth? 

Madam Speaker, my view is that instead of extending these allowances, salaries and privileges to these people in their late ages, I agree with hon. Stella Kiiza that we enhance their salaries, while they are still in active service so that they can utilise their money. They can educate their children, build houses where they will retire and establish businesses so that this money becomes more useful to them, rather than giving it to them when they have retired and are very weak. 

Look at a neurosurgeon, for example, in Mulago, who is earning less than Shs 10 million but these are the people who actually reconstruct human beings, including the judicial officers. Why do we want to put ourselves in a tricky situation that other citizens will be more privileged than the others, yet all of us are Ugandan citizens? 

I think we must strike a balance between the judicial officers, the doctors, the engineers – (Member timed out.) 

5.11
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I welcome this Bill with two hands. This Bill is helping us to simply amplify the commands, which are established under Chapter 8 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. We need to observe that what my brother, who has just submitted said, is totally true. We cannot be a Parliament that will stand here to perpetuate injustice for life. 

I do not think it will be in order for us to say that somebody who is not working in an office and has retired is going to earn a salary equivalent to the one earned by the one who is sitting in the chair. This is so unjust, unacceptable, uncouth, unwelcome and totally rejected by me. Madam Speaker, I would propose that we rather think of giving 40 per cent to such a person who has retired. 

Who are the cadres who are working on a daily basis to dispense justice in the Judiciary? We have forgotten about the magistrates. How do we get money to increase their numbers? We are talking about timely provision of justice. How do we do it without having money to recruit more people? We are centering money in the hands of the few. What shall we be doing, as Parliament?

We must think and plan well. I see people talking about the commissioner advising and reviewing salaries but what are we doing under this?

Madam Speaker, there are people who are career and non-career working in the Judiciary; those who join for one year and climb to higher positions in the judicial service. Should they get that kind of salary for life? What are we doing?

Madam Speaker, this is not acceptable. The doctors are watching, the MPs are watching, the accountants are watching, everybody is watching. How can we be so unjust to the rest of the nation? (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I just thought it would enhance our debate to know what the current legal regime is for somebody retiring from Government. They actually get 50 per cent of their salary. Therefore, when debating, we should keep that in mind. Whether a teacher or whoever, when you retire, you get 50 per cent of your salary, as long as you are 60 years. I thought I would offer that information.

MR AOGON: That is minor information but I am happy with it. Madam Speaker, I would like to touch the issue of the Advisory Committee. It would be better to have somebody who has retired to advise that person who is sitting but not a person who is working to advise himself. How do you change your mind from A to B and you become the advisor and the one how is taking the advice? It is impossible.

I really think it is time for Parliament to support the Judiciary to do the correct thing. Across the board, we know the problems in the Judiciary. We need to enhance the payment of judicial officers but in a fair manner. It should be fair in the eyes of the people and not only this Parliament because we represent Ugandans.

5.15
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Madam Speaker, clause 4 of the Bill establishes the Judicial Advisory Committee. In my interpretation, I view this as a duplication of work. Establishing the Judicial Advisory Committee when we have the Judicial Service Commission is duplication of the Judicial Service Commission roles.

Madam Speaker, the establishment of the Judicial Advisory Committee can even be challenged as being unconstitutional on grounds that it infringes on Articles 147 and 133 of the Constitution.

Again, clause 5 prescribes the functions of this committee and among the functions, (ii) is to advise the Chief Justice on the ethics and integrity within the Judiciary. The Chief justice heads this committee; so, how can the Chief Justice advise himself yet he is the head of this committee? Again, what would you advise the Chief Justice anyway? If somebody is the Chief Justice, what do you advise him?

Madam Speaker, I view this as a duplication of duties of the Judicial Service Commission and it can be challenged in court as being unconstitutional.

Lastly, on the issue of a lifetime salary, it is very unfair. If we are looking at protecting judges because they handle high profile cases, what about the CIDs that investigate these cases? They actually form the skeleton and the body of these cases in court.

The CIDs are actually the ones who do all this donkey work of investigating and prosecuting. What about the witnesses? How do you protect all these because they all impact on the outcomes of the case in court –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I would like to give my colleague is that if that matter can be taken to court, it could be a constitutional matter and the Chief Justice sits in that court; so, can he rule against himself or herself?

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the establishment of the Judicial Advisory Committee is uncalled for and it is a duplication of the duties of the Judicial Service Commission. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the report of the committee. If you look at the objective of this Bill, it majorly provides for two things: one, to improve performance in the Judiciary and secondly, to enhance retirement packages for the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice.

Madam Speaker, this last provision is skewed in favour of a few judicial officers. If you are talking about performance, we must talk about the whole institution holistically. The Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice do not dispense justice on their own without the help of the other staff. In the judicial system, we have the Magistrates Grade One and Magistrates Grade Two still in existence. We also have the Chief Magistrates and the Registrar. All those are there to enhance performance of the whole judicial system.

Therefore, for you to single out the two top most positions in terms of enhancement of their retirement package is something, which has to be considered. You should lift up the entire system so that everybody feels motivated to work for speedy deliverance of service.

Madam Speaker, even when talking about judicial service, there are times when poor people are charged before courts of law, especially for capital offences and State Briefs are given to lawyers in private practice and these lawyers are not well facilitated at all. In addition, many a time, they neglect their duties. They do not put effort in defence of the client that has been given to them.

Therefore, while we are looking at the judicial system, I think it also proper that we have consideration for those in private practice who receive instructions to represent those who cannot represent themselves when it comes to issues of capital nature.

Madam Speaker, I come from a family where one of my elders –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will give you one more minute for information. 

MR WADRI: The conditions under which judges work tantamount to self-imprisonment to the extent that even in their own homes, they cannot get access to their relatives, especially in the evening hours when they have to concentrate on writing judgments.

The relatives will find themselves at table alone because the judge in the home has locked themselves in the library reviewing cases passed before in order to write judgments. It is a solitary life; a life where one cannot come out to go and associate with people. 

I think it is only fair that when looking at their terms and conditions of service, we look at giving them enabling facilities right from the time they are in service. Otherwise, it would be useless for us to only think about them when they are 70 or 75 years. Of what use will that money be to them? I think it is only proper – like it is done here where we get our pension as Members of Parliament - that it is something contributed and people get it when they are still active and still need it. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker. 

5.23
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu North County, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the report and I thank the committee for presenting the report. 

When you see the judges sitting and working the whole day without getting off their desks, you really sympathise with them. We need to do something for their living. It is wrong for us to start talking about a life salary. What we should do is to enhance their salaries. Of what benefit will it be for one still in service to earn the same salary with someone who has retired? 

People will just make this a refugee area. They will strive to join the Judiciary for say only two years because they are sure about earning a salary until they pass on. I think the issue of a life salary should be struck out completely. Let us think of enhancing their salaries so that they can get an adequate pension when they retire. 
 
However, as we do this, we have to think of enhancing their performance. It is very frustrating when everybody is in court but the judge says he has only five days to hear your case. The judge and the lawyer will keep talking about how they won’t be around; they will keep arguing about that till they find a suitable date. How can we move like this? There must be a way of checking performance. In the villages, magistrates come when they are drunk -(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, it is proper for us here to criticise public servants. However, is it in order for the honourable colleague to make a blanket accusation that judges come to court when drunk?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you substantiate?

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, maybe I used the wrong word but I have seen one - go to the courts in the villages and you will see a magistrate come to court drunk. He just comes and says – (Interjections) - not every magistrate, of course; it cannot be every magistrate.

THE SPEAKER: Can you then withdraw the comment about the judges?

MR BYANDALA: I withdraw the statement about judges. (Laughter) I am a stranger in that field. To me, a judge and a magistrate are strangers. I think it wrong for my friend, hon. Katuntu, to hide a fact. 

5.27
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to address myself to the principles of this Bill. 

I would like to support the objective of the Bill, which is to strengthen the independence of the Judiciary. 

I am aware that all the three arms of Government need to work independently. I am also aware that one way of compromising is when somebody controls your stomach. When somebody controls your stomach, that person can easily take you to any direction he/she wants. Therefore, I strongly support the objective of this Bill, which seeks to ensure that the Judiciary remains independent. 

However, we need to note that we work in an environment of checks and balances. Whereas I support the Judiciary being independent, there must also be a window of some checks. Despite it being good, we need to realise that too much power can also corrupt. We need to provide a situation where the other arms of Government can also check the Judiciary just as we appreciate the way the Judiciary checks the other arms of Government. 

Sometimes, even in Parliament, they correct us and we appreciate that. However, we need a provision in this Bill for us to retain a window through which we can also put some checks on the Judiciary. 

Madam Speaker, I said that one of the ways of controlling someone is by controlling their stomach. I appreciate the provisions but looking at how we have been suffering with the Judiciary, where we cannot even appoint judges - and one of the reasons is that we do not have money. The backlog in court cases is at –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point of clarification I need from hon. Othieno is on the control of the stomach. In this country, there are a number of people who are dying from non-communicable diseases because of big stomachs yet he is telling us that one of the best ways of controlling a person is to control the stomach. Can he clarify to us what he means by controlling the stomach so that we are at par?

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, my brother. The stomach I am referring to is the financial subsistence needs of the judges. Once the judges are very needy, their integrity can be compromised. That is what I was referring to but not the other stomach of the kwashiorkor –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My brother, I would like you to help me understand: there are those with big stomachs but they never get satisfied. You know it and Prof. Kamuntu knows them. They have high affinity for money. How will you control those presiding officers who have high affinity for money? 

MR OTHIENO: My senior here has helped us. Those are greedy people. You should not stop giving out food because there is a child who is so greedy and will never get satisfied.

That aside, I am looking  at the provisions we have made for the funeral arrangements for the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice but this House has been grappling with these things. Wouldn’t it be fair that we come up with a holistic arrangement that can enumerate all other categories? Currently, we seem to be solving one problem; that the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice will be accorded a state funeral, the body will be brought to Parliament for members of Parliament to pay tribute but what about the others? The challenge still remains.

This House has been grappling with that issue here that we do not know who exactly qualifies. Yes, we have now been assisted in this particular case but wouldn’t it have been better for Government to come up with a holistic arrangement whereby all categories that are entitled to this kind of treatment are enumerated instead of just making it a piecemeal arrangement? 

Today, you are dealing with the Judiciary but what about other categories? We need to get this thing addressed once and for all so that we stop operating in suspense. We may feel somebody deserves this kind of arrangement but there is no enabling law providing whether such a person should be accorded this kind of respect.

Madam Speaker, whereas I support this, I urge and strongly recommend that Government, other than just providing for the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think that I will also touch that point when we come to the committee stage.   

5.33
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I am happy that today, we are debating this Bill because many of us have always watched news and also got some of the comments of the Judiciary.

It seemed that there was some kind of friction between Parliament and the Judiciary, from some of their comments. I think it will not be a very good thing to have a bad relationship between one arm of Government and others because all of us need each other to perform the work of Government.

I would like to address myself to the objectives of the Bill. Objective 1 it is to provide for the efficiency and effectiveness of the Judiciary and on that, everybody expects efficiency and effectiveness.

The second objective is to establish the Judiciary Advisory Committee to advice the Chief Justice on the administration of justice and courts. I think that this particular area could be addressed by the Judiciary Service Commission because that body is established to handle issues to do with performance of the Judiciary and where advice is needed, they could provide that advice.

Madam Speaker, the second issue is to strengthen the independence of the Judiciary. All of us know that the independence of the Judiciary is very important. However, many of the issues which have been advanced here in the committee report seem contradictory, particularly the issues of management. I hope these will be handled at the committee stage and I will bring them forward.

On the issue of retirement, like many Members have said, when we looked at salary enhancement for other civil servants, the Judiciary was left out. The issue which was raised by the Public Service Commission was that this was supposed to be handled by this Bill. Therefore, my prayer is that as we look at enhancement of salaries for other civil servants as contained in the salary enhancement report by the Ministry of Public Service, this argument by the Judiciary that the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice should earn their salaries even after they have retired - Salary is payment to compensate you for the work you do and once you retire, you are not doing any other job. So, earning salary when you have retired may not be in order.

However, like other Members have said, we can think of raising the salary of the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice and other judicial officials to ensure that when they retire, their retirement package can at least go to a level that can help them. However, to say that the two should continue to earn their salaries as others will be left behind, will be segregation. That is my submission, Madam Speaker.

5.37
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report by the committee most especially concerning the clauses, which didn’t appear so much relevant and they have recommended that they get deleted. 

However, there is one issue which was not considered in this report, which is early retirement. We know that there is a provision for early retirement in Uganda and it appears that now retirement will be so much admirable than service. Therefore, the committee should have considered early retirement and this Bill should really consider the same.

Some people will seek early retirement so that they go out and start enjoying this money because lifetime salary is actually being looked at by the members of the Judiciary as something, which will make them happy when they are out of service.

I would like to remind the House that when the time for us to consider this Bill comes, we need to think about early retirement such that it is either restricted or it is done away with such that people do not take advantage of this chance of lifetime salary to ask for early retirement. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think that the retirement age of the Judiciary is in the Constitution.

5.39
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My interest is on schedule 2(a) and (b). I wonder; what if we had 100 chief justices retiring, where will Government get money to pay all these people? I imagine a situation where have 100 of them retired and we have to pay them these full salaries. I wonder where Government will get such money.

Secondly, I am of the view that in order to check our finances, the retirement age of the judges should be raised, as it was formally proposed, to 75 or even 80 years. I have heard that this is what is happening in other countries. It would also help you to have these people in service so that you do not pay them money when they have retired. Raise the retirement age to 80 years, keep them in the service and pay them the money instead of retiring them at 70 years. But retiring and you still pay them the same salary would really be unrealistic.

I have a feeling that the gist of this independence of the Judiciary is actually in schedule 2, where they talk of salaries. When I read the rest of this Bill, I did not find much except the money. It is actually money that is being talked about. (Laughter) It is my hope that with the passing of this Bill, many young men will strive to become the Chief Justice because we are giving them a lot of money. 

It is also my hope that people will stop criticising Members of Parliament that they earn a lot of money. I cannot imagine a Member of Parliament being paid his full salary after leaving Parliament. This is what we would come to if we are to pay the retired Chief Justice his full salary in retirement. Why don’t you also pay a Member of Parliament his full salary when he leaves Parliament? (Laughter) This is how I am looking at it.

Madam Speaker, it is my hope that with such benefits, many young men and women will strive to become judges because when I was –(Member timed out.)

5.42
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM Ngora County, Ngora): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also thank the committee for a job well done.

I support the report that this Bill should be passed. However, I have some few comments. First, in handling human resource management, salaries are paid to the active employees while pensions are paid to people who have retired. I read here, where the committee talks about somebody getting a salary up to when he or she dies. I do not understand this properly; that is basically what will happen.

I would like to put the committee on notice that that provision should be deleted such that the right words are used. Salary is for the people who are working and pension is for those who have retired. If we go along those lines, we are going to cause anarchy within the Judiciary. Some people will not be happy because others will be getting this benefit while others will not.

Secondly, I need clarification on this matter. When we talk about capacity building, there is talk about the Judiciary Training Institute here at Nakawa. I now wonder what institute we are talking about. Are they talking about that institute or starting another one –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. Actually, the institute is already in place and it is the one in Nakawa. However, it was not formed under any law. What the Bill now seeks is to have that institute governed by law.

MR ABALA: I needed to be helped to understand. Let me leave it at that.
	
Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we have been talking about efficiency and effectiveness of the Judiciary. Let me hope this law will cure many challenges that we normally read in the newspapers – the element of corruption. I hope everybody is going to be satisfied with this law. Wherever we pass, they say – I remember one time a magistrate told me, “You, members of Parliament, are concerned about yourselves only. You are greedy. Why don’t you pass our law?” 

We should pass this law. However, what we should be mindful about is enhancing their salaries; but we should not pay the other two people salaries until they die and that when they die, their children can take over –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this is my immediate neighbour – Ngora neighbours Kumi. The information I would like to give is that if we say that when somebody retires, they will still earn a similar salary and allowance, it means that when a sitting officer is on a flight going for duty abroad, the retired officer will also prepare his bag to fly.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that this law is a necessity. There is no way we are going to shy away from it. We must actually pass it, with a series of amendments that Members have identified here today. Thank you.

5.47
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having read the report and also consulted my people in Bunyole West, the information and directive I have from the people of Bunyole West is about the issue of lifetime payment.

Let us make laws for the good of the country. When they say – I heard them say that the Speaker is paid a salary after leaving office. Madam Speaker, when you come to Butaleja, people will ask for money from you. Which villager can reach the Chief Justice? (Laughter) When the Speaker goes to Kumi, people will surround her. 

Even right now, Madam Speaker, 90 per cent of your salary goes to voters. If, as hon. Mbwatekamwa says that they were perhaps promised during the age limit debate, that promise is null and void. We should not come here on those so called promises they were talking about –(Interjection)- yes, hon. Mbwatekamwa mentioned here that maybe they were promised during the age limit debate. 

Honourable members, we have moved together – this is the only Bill where I see the Opposition and Government moving together. The main issue in this law is money and that is why somebody was calling it a money Bill. I know the people who fronted it will even want it to be discussed in the next Parliament. However, since we are handling it now, let people be with the same salary and other benefits like others. Otherwise, we shall be stampeded by the teachers, doctors, community development officers and engineers.

Madam Speaker, the gist of the matter is money. The other issues like the Judicial Training Institute are just coming up. It is like when you are taking a rowdy bull, you take it through a kraal because when you take it alone, people will know and it will be rowdy. They only wanted this money. They are just bringing other issues to cover up this money – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, my brother for yielding the Floor. Actually, clauses 2, 3, 4 and 5 are the gist of this debate. They should be dropped.

MR WALUSWAKA: Finally, Madam Speaker, I remember you were in newspapers during the age limit debate trying to clear your name. Your name had already been painted bad and you cleared your name. Hon. Oboth-Oboth, if it comes to that lifetime salary, just concede and clear your name in public. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I would like to establish whether we are proceeding well to permit hon. Waluswaka to make very serious statements about how my name is already bad –(Laughter)– not knowing that the name “Oboth” is the only Japadhola name that appears three times in the book of Numbers Chapter 21. 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well when the Member is alleging that my name was bad during the age limit debate and that this is an opportunity for me to clear my name without stating clearly – Otherwise, it should be known for everyone. 

I am a humble chairperson just like you are a humble Speaker of Parliament. Whatever Parliament decides, it is not the person of Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga; it is about the institution. The opinion I am presenting, which I presented during the age limit, was not hon. Oboth’s position and neither is this my position.  Therefore, is hon. Waluswaka proceeding well to drag my name, which is a rather holy name, in matters that are – Madam Speaker, help me.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waluswaka, when we take decisions here, we take them as the House. When a committee presents a report, it is the report of the committee, not the report of the chairperson. It is, therefore, unfair for you to intimidate and blackmail the chairperson. Please withdraw and apologise.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I withdraw and apologise to my uncle; we are immediate neighbours. Actually, we are just one kilometre away from one another. However, that is the truth that has been on the ground. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Waluswaka, I thought you had listened to my ruling to withdraw unconditionally and not to further justify. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry and I withdraw. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.55
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report before the House and I stand to support the report with the exception of a few areas.

Madam Speaker, we should appreciate where they said creating an advisory committee would be duplicating roles and responsibilities. In a situation where you are putting the advisory committee to advise the Chief Justice, who is also the chair of the advisory committee, I think that would not be good. And so, the advisory committee will not be independent.

Like colleagues have said regarding the issue of payments of benefits to the retired Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice, I feel it will be demotivating to the sitting Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. You cannot give an equivalent to someone who has retired the same amount with the sitting officer. This is not acceptable and it will demotivate them.

Madam Speaker, in a situation, where someone is going to be paid first-class travel allowance on official business abroad and internal trips – what will a retired Chief Justice go to do officially aboard, when there is a sitting Chief Justice. I think this should not be accepted.

Madam Speaker, I have two suggestions that I would like to bring to the attention of the House. One is that I feel we should raise their salaries so that their benefits like pension and gratuity will be a little higher in order to sustain them.

Two, Madam Speaker, what they are recommending is above what retired Presidents, Vice Presidents and Prime Ministers earn.  They are paid some benefits after every five years but these Chief Justices want every year. This is not acceptable. Why don’t we include the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice in the categories of the retired Presidents, Vice Presidents and Prime Ministers so that we rule out paying them for life? This is my proposal. Thank you.

5.57
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I would like to say that I met the judicial officers in my office and I asked them – I hope the minister and the chairperson of the committee will clarify the issue of retirement benefits.

The judicial officers explained to me that the retirement benefits entail going with salaries and not allowances. If someone was earning Shs 10 million, when they retire, they earn Shs 10 million, not allowances. I accepted this 100 per cent because judicial officers are not allowed to mix with other people anyhow; they are not even supposed to do business. Then, why can’t we be a little kinder to them and listen to their plea, if it is clarified?

Madam Speaker, I do not agree with the proposal that they should be paid allowances as if they are in the office. However, I think they should continue to get their salaries.
Besides, these people retire when they are old. Madam Speaker, when you are old, you have a lot of health issues. Due to the nature of their work, which is a little different from – I am a teacher and I interact with a lot of people. However, these judges do not interact with other people. So, why don’t we consider these retirement benefits?

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to Members to reconsider this. These people do not engage in other businesses –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. I would like to seek clarification from you. Do you mean to say that we should give them that money because they are always confined within their premises? We could call it “indoor allowances” or something like that since they will be sitting inside and not interacting with the rest of the public. Is that the spirit of the whole matter?

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I would like to clarify that when these officers are doing their work, it is about justice. They are involved in criminal matters. They are a bit confined and they are professionals. Their profession does not allow them to do business – unless I got it wrong from them. If it is right, let us treat them properly. Otherwise, the demand for their work is very different; it is a secluded kind of life, which you can also get some stress from and which can cause high blood pressure. Why don’t we do that? 

Our judicial system is not working well now. If this Bill goes to cure the problems that we have and give us better service - because right now, the judicial service has a lot of issues. 

I have seen the advisory committee - I am totally for that. I am also totally for the chief inspector of courts. I have not heard about it before but I have seen it in the Bill and I think we should embrace it. (Interruption)

MR NOAH MUTEBI: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that judges and their families conduct businesses. Many of them have very good farms with a number of cattle; they have milk cooling businesses and shops. 

It is not healthy to give false information to this House that judges are not doing business. When we investigate, they are doing businesses. Thank you.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. The information I would like to give is that our professions are built differently. Professors grow within teaching and even when they retire, the university will keep them around and they can teach, research and produce many PhDs, engineers, lawyers and others.

However, judges are specifically involved in passing judgement all the time and not everybody is professional in understanding and appreciating a judgment passed by a judge. It can be fair but of the two sides, one interprets it as fair and another as unfair. People are taken to prison.

This judge is protected by the State during the time they are serving. After their service, they are left in the community. They cannot mingle freely with people because they are not used to them and there is the risk of finding those against whom you passed judgment and those who may be looking for you.

The plea being made by the Leader of the Opposition is, can we give them a good settlement so that they do not have to hanker around looking for survival? Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you. The honourable member has ably responded to what you pointed out. That was exactly what the lawyers and judges told me; theirs is a little bit different from us the teachers and engineers. (Interjections) He explained it; if you have not heard it, let us not go back.

Probably, the chairperson of the committee will explain it better but that is how I understood it. They even gave examples of judges who died soon after retirement because of the kind of work they do. Members, let us consider the committee’s recommendation –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, we all agree that the nature of the work that judges do is a bit unique. During the debate, Members suggested that instead of letting them continue earning the same salary as if they are in active service, we should enhance their pay so that when they retire, it translates into a reasonable retirement package. Do you have any problem with that, Leader of the Opposition?

MS BETTY AOL: Personally, I would go for the first option; that they go with their salary but if it is a decision of the majority here that we enhance their salary while still in service just like it is for the other sectors, then so be it. 

However, personally, I think we should give them their salary. They should in turn do quality work for our people. Right now, we are not happy with them. For example in Gulu, if a child is defiled but you receive something from behind to drop the defilement case - that is child sacrifice.

Let us try to motivate our judges and it should go across the board; we should move down to the magistrates and not look at only the judges. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard several contributions on this issue so I would like to put the question that the question be put. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I would like the Attorney-General to respond to some of the issues. Particularly, I want to know what plans you have for the surviving Chief Justices; Justice Wambuzi, Justice Masika and Justice Odoki. Suppose something happened to one of them tomorrow, where would you take them? 

6.08
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, permit me to thank the committee of hon. Oboth who educated me that it is in the Bible - we are about to find out about that. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for helping us and guiding this debate.

I am honestly very humbled because all the points that were raised in this debate were pertinent to all the issues at hand. I had been misled to believe that there was a huge bias against the Judiciary.

All those who have been participating in what was going on in the society were under the impression that there was a huge bias, which I am pleasantly surprised to find, was not the case because the debate was balanced.

The issues that were criticised were worthy of criticism, never mind that there might be an answer but I was very humbled. Of course there was hon. Waluswaka and one can permit a difference of opinion. 

Having said that, I would like to make one point about the judges and the Judiciary and I am very pleased that the last speaker, prior to this, was the Leader of the Opposition, who gave us her interaction with the Judiciary and she gave us her honest opinion.

She even said at the end when somebody asked her which of the two she would take - an increment in salary or a retirement benefit - she said what she preferred but then said that she would abide by the decision of the majority. That shows that we are really on the right track and some of these criticisms are not well based –(Interjections)– I will answer that one at the end.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say something about the judges. Please, hon. Waluswaka and all of us –(Interjections)– because you impressed me this evening. Judges dispense a huge duty to our society. We must accept they maintain tranquillity. They sometimes work under oppressive circumstances because of our budgets; that is what I know. They are underpaid yet, overworked. There are many files but there are very few judicial officers.

Then, the Judiciary is an arm of Government; that is a constitutional fact. There is a lot of talk about corruption in the Judiciary. If we are going to be fair - in every institution, there may be cases of corruption. There may be the proverbial ones or just two rotten apples, in Cabinet and in Parliament. (Interjections) This is factual. In most institutions, there might be one or two who may be accused.

Judges help us to maintain the moral balance of our society. They make life-changing decisions. Somebody reminded us that they sit almost in that capacity because sometimes, they dispense death. Not all of us do that. (Interjections) Doctors do not send you to die; doctors save you. A judge can send you to die; a doctor cannot. When a judge makes a decision and imposes a death penalty, he has sent somebody to die.

As I said, Judges make life-changing decisions and so, in arriving at their decisions, they can make one person rich and another poor. In arriving at certain decisions, they can bring families together or split them in the divorce court. They make –(Interjections)– if they can allow me to talk, as we allowed them.

I am simply trying to emphasise the last point that was made by the honourable member from Kitagwenda. The judges, in order to make judgements, have to listen to two sides, each of which would like to win by giving the most persuasive argument. Judges then have to go back – and I mean all the judges - I am not talking about the Chief Justice and the deputy; I mean the whole Judiciary – analyse each argument and arrive at a conclusion, which is life changing to one party. In that context, it is our view that they deserve some benefits over and above.

When we talked about what type of benefits, I agree. When Members said that it would be unfair for a judicial officer to take his whole salary as it was when he was working, I agree that needs some scrutiny. As well when a member argues that of what motivation would it be to the remaining judge if the other man takes 100 per cent, is an argument that certainly deserves scrutiny. 

When somebody said that the benefit should be 50 per cent of the salary, hon. Oboth reminded the House that that is what all the people take right now, yet, they are looking at enhancement. We are looking at bettering this person’s position from what it was before, for the reasons that we have exactly given. 

So, we are saying that we are happy to go to the committee and revise this. On that aspect, clearly, there is a strong case to be made for a person who stays and a person who goes to retain the same amount. Although I respectfully request our members that 50 per cent is what is already there, it should be something better.

On the basis of that, I thought that maybe I could answer a couple of the questions. For example, a colleague keeps saying, “What about teachers? The teachers are going to come and bombard us.” Another group may come. Somebody even argued that the teachers have taught us from primary school.

It is true that the teachers have taught us from primary school. They have also taught the Speaker but do not get the same salary as the Speaker. They have taught the neurosurgeons. All we are saying is that we want to give pay that is commensurate. We must also recognise that part of the problem – and I hope this is one of the legitimate parts of the problem – is the size of the purse. We would, of course, like to improve people’s salaries, as you all know – and this has been argued very many times before – but we cannot improve everybody’s salary at ago. 

Why have we come here with the Administration of the Judiciary Bill? It is because the Constitution commands us to operationalise it, just as we did with Parliament. That is all we are saying. Because it is the third arm of Government, they are simply asking us to do the same for them. We are not saying they want to get something extraordinary but we are simply saying that we should do the same for them. That is why I said that for the salary, we shall improve but perhaps, step away from the 100 per cent but move away from the 50 per cent kindly. 

Madam Speaker, allow me respond to some of the issues that were brought up. First of all, I would like to thank all the contributors because they – as I have already said – there was hon. Nandala-Mafabi who spoke about the Judiciary being subject to the Public Finance Management Act. There was hon. Basalirwa who I think emphasised on the backlog.

There was the Shadow Minister of Public Service, who said that Government cannot pay them for life. I agree. Hon. Katuntu helped us to explain the different categories and why we need to look at the Judiciary. Hon. Guma said it is a good idea that we discuss this with sobriety. 

Hon. Alex Ruhunda talked about the seclusion of their life. I think this has been explained. Somebody already explained that after they have dispensed justice, especially in criminal matters, when they go back to the villages, they cannot live an ordinary life like all of us.

Regarding the honourable member who talked about the committee having one member representing Persons with Disabilities, I agree with her that the board should have a person who represents Persons with Disabilities. Hon. Kibalya talked about pro bono services. We are very eager to revive the pro bono services. 

There was a point about a clash between the inspectorate within the Judiciary and the IGG. I would like to say that these are completely separate. The IGG investigates everything across the country, in terms of corruption. Institutions have their own internal mechanisms for taking care of wayward.

On the Advisory Committee, I think somebody wondered how the Chief Justice can be the Chairperson and advises himself as well. I am saying that is a valid point, which we shall reassess at the committee. 

Hon. Nzoghu said they do not deserve anything. I was looking for him because I wanted to disagree with him. (Laughter) 

Hon. Timuzigu made a good point on early retirement. He asked if you maintain the same salary and whether it would not entice the servicing judicial officers to go for early retirement in order to try to benefit. Madam Speaker, I think you were the one who answered that there is a timeframe and so forth. 

A Member whispered to me that somebody can feign illness and retire early. There is always one who will slip through the net but if somebody feigns illness in order to go for early retirement, I then have my sympathy for him because he will have to live with the lie even in his home. He will have to say he is sick every day. He will have to tell his children who are going to school that he is sick whereas he is not. I think that is enough punishment for him.

Madam Speaker, I think hon. Katuntu ably answered the other issue raised by hon. Abala about the institute, whether it is in Nakawa or not. 

Generally, I have taken note of those points that require tweaking. They include those I have listed and maybe 100 per cent is not fair. We intend to propose that the chairmanship of the committee – we think that is something we can look at. 

I hope that after we have tweaked this, what we will be doing is the right thing as all of you have already pointed out. It has been here for too long. They are an Arm of Government, whether we like it or not. Truth be told, they are quite supportive. They are supportive in the context that they try to do what they can with what they have.

Madam Speaker, to your pertinent point of the judges who have currently retired including Justice Wambuzi, Justice Odoki and Justice Japheth Masika, Justice Ogola - was the Chairman of the Judicial Service Commission – I respectfully ask that I provide that answer tomorrow because it is a big question, which requires some further consultation. I request that you allow that we come back tomorrow and provide that answer. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think as the Attorney General comes back tomorrow with the answer, we do not have to be looking at only the retired Chief Justices. Let us look at the number of all Justices of the Supreme Court and the High Court and see whether – if we have to provide a remedy, it should be across the board. We do not have to look at only the retired Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice. Let us look at all the retired Justices of the Supreme Court, Justices of the Court of Appeal and Justices of the High Court. (Interjections) We can. You see, it is the law. If I may try to clarify to hon. Ruth Nankabirwa – the law can act retrospectively. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to Bills Committee Stage. Honourable chairperson, do you want to speak? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, it should be in this record, now that we have opened up the matter, that one of the former Principal Judges, Justice Herbert Ntabgoba, is actually very sick. The information I have is that his family could not afford the air ticket and he is mortgaging his house to go to India. The truth is that his wife went to the Judiciary, the Chief Justice and the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Judiciary and they got them some Shs 3 million. 

That tells us how urgent this law is needed. When he is coming back, we need something about the Principal Judge and the others.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the Committee Stage. You can speak there. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think the Attorney-General has appreciated the views expressed by the Members. He has agreed to go back to do consultations and come back to us tomorrow. Procedurally, I was of the view that maybe you could guide us so that the Attorney-General comes back tomorrow with some answers and then, we can go to the Committee Stage. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the issue he has to answer concerns the retired Chief Justices and treatment of the other Justices when they die. We can move. If we get to an area where we are stuck, we will wait for him, please. 

Honourable members, we must do this Bill this week and the Political Parties and Organisations Bill. And do not forget about the cities. (Applause)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, there are one or two issues of constitutional nature, which I wanted the Attorney- General to also answer on Article 33, which allows the Chief Justice to abolish some offices and so on. Maybe, the Attorney- General should come tomorrow with an answer on Article 33.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That matter has been – Do you mean Article 33 of the Constitution? 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: It is Articles 145 to 147 of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go clause by clause. If we get to an area where we need explanation, the Attorney General will come in. the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is also here.

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 1 is interpretation and we normally do it at the end. So, we will stand over it and go to clause 2.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose that we stay clause 1 because we could get more interpretations ahead, which -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I have said. We have deferred clause 1 because we normally do it at the end.

Clause 2

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing in paragraph (c) to substitute for the words “Judiciary Advisory Committee” with the words “Judiciary Council.” The justification is consequential amendment arising from the proposed amendment of clause 4 which is ahead.

In clause 4, we are proposing to the heading “Judiciary Advisory Committee” we thought in the wisdom of the committee, that should be council and not just a committee.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the procedure should be that we have to pass clause 4 and then, this one becomes a consequential amendment. You cannot pass a consequential amendment, then it does not make sense. Therefore, we go to clause 4 and after we pass it, then this one is automatic.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can defer clause 2 and we will come back to it.

MR OBOTH: I think that is what hon. Katuntu was saying, in many words, that we defer clause 2 and we come to it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Judiciary is free to make many committees. It can make a thousand of them. My proposal is that with the Judiciary, we do not have to create only one committee like we have a finance committee and many more. My proposal would be that (c) -

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Which clause are you addressing hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sub-clause (c)

THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, we have deferred that because we need to amend clause 4 before we can come back to clause 2.

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 3(1) be deleted. And in clause 3(2) to delete the words “other than Judges” appearing in second line of paragraph (e). Is that (e)?

THE CHAIRPERSON:  2(a)

MR OBOTH: 2(a), yes mine is faint. The justification is that the power proposed to be granted to the Chief Justice in sub-clause (1) being the power to create, classify, change and abolish offices-(Interjections) are all quite broad. Therefore, it should be shared responsibility exercised between the President, the Judicial Service Commission and the Chief Justice as variously provided in the Constitution and other laws.

Secondly, to ensure that the power bestowed on the Chief Justice in sub clause 2(a) can be exercised in relation to judges as well.

MS NAUWAT: Clause 3(2) where the committee has made amendments - Madam Chairperson, that subclause is not gender sensitive. If I could read it “the Chief Justice may in exercise of his administrative and supervisory authority ….”

I do not know whether that explains the reason why right now, the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice are all men. I propose an amendment to that sentence immediately after “his” we insert “’or her’ administrative and supervisory authority.” I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable chairperson, I would like you to reconcile your proposal with the definition; the issue in the interpretation sections. You are removing the judges but the way you defined “a judicial officer” is the Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Principal Judge, Supreme Court Justices, and Judges of the High court. The definition does not rhyme - you stop at judicial officers.

MR BYARUHAGA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I would like the chairperson of the committee to assist me to understand what the effect would be if the entire clause is deleted. What would be the effect on the two you are proposing to retain as an amendment?

Initially, you remember during debate, my intention was to have the entire clause 3 deleted. However, you could assist me to understand better.

MR NIWAGABA: When you look at Article 133 of the Constitution, it provides for specific powers of the Chief Justice and there is no enabling law to operationalise that article. And clause 3(2) in particular is envisaged to be the enabling law to give the Chief Justice the powers and see how he can administer those powers. 

Therefore, that is the essence of clause 3(2). The chairperson can add.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like hon. Niwagaba to assist me again. Why is the Deputy Chief Justice missing here? Why is it only the Chief Justice? I would like you to also help me to understand. They are only taking of Chief Justice; where shall we get the Deputy Chief Justice?

MR BYARUHANGA: Because as the Member said we are looking at Article 133 of the Constitution. It only speaks about the Chief Justice. (Interjections) Sorry. We are operationalising Article 133, which defines the Leader of the Judiciary to be Chief Justice. That is what we are operationalising.

MR NIWAGABA: Let me help you. If you read Article 133 in its entirety, it talks about the administrative functions of the Chief Justice. However, sub article (2) of that article provides for the role of the Deputy Chief Justice where the office of the Chief Justice is vacant or where the Chief Justice is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his or her office.

Therefore, he is covered under Article 133 as a matter of law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, therefore, clause 3 is amended by the deletion of sub-clause  (1) and an addition to sub-clause 3(2), which now becomes (1) and deletion of the last part of clause 3(2)(a), which becomes clause 3(1)(a). 

I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that we replace clause 4 as follows:

“Clause 4: Establishment of the Judiciary Advisory Committee
    1. There is established within the Judiciary a Judiciary Council consisting of;
(a) 	the Chief Justice;
(b) 	the Deputy Chief Justice; 
(c) 	the Principal Judge;
(d) 	the Attorney-General;
(e) 	the Director of Public Prosecutions;
(f) 	one Justice representing the superior courts;
(g) 	one judicial officer representing the lower bench;
(h) 	the Solicitor-General;
(i) 	the Chief Registrar; 
(j) 	the Secretary to the Judiciary;
(k) 	the Secretary to the Treasury:
(l) 	a representative of the Justice, Law and Order Sector institutions, other than the ministry responsible for justice; 
(m) 	the President of the Uganda Law Society;
(n) 	the Chairperson of the Law Council; and
(o) 	two members of the public - male and female - of high moral character, proven integrity and competence, nominated by the Chief Justice.

(2) 	The Chief Justice shall be the chairperson of the Council and shall preside at the meetings of the Council and in his or her absence, the Deputy Chief Justice shall preside.
(3) 	The Chief Justice or the Council may invite any person or representative of any organisation or department of Government to attend the meetings of the Council.
(4) 	The Council shall meet at least once in every three months at a place and time determined by the Chief Justice.
(5) 	Subject to this Act, the Council shall determine its own procedure or any other matter relating to the meetings of the Council
(6) 	The Chief Registrar shall be the secretary to the Council."

Justification:

    i) To reflect the true nature of the established body since it will perform many other functions other than advising the Chief Justice as prescribed in clause 5.
    ii) To be consistent with international best practices as far as the establishment of similar bodies in countries like Zambia, Kenya and many other Commonwealth countries.

Mr otHieno: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification from the chairperson of the committee, The report we have is different from what he is reading. I do not know whether he can guide us on where to get it from so that we are able to follow. It is a new import. Do they have two reports or one report? We need to know and be guided.

The Chairperson: Do you have a copy of the amendments? They should be around the report. 

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, the reason this matter has taken long was that there was a lot of consultation and harmonisation. Honourable members should pay attention to the fact that to make progress on this Bill, we had to try to harmonise the position so that we minimise push and pull here. That is exactly what we did. 

The committee report is uploaded and what I am reading is what is harmonised. If anybody has a problem with that, it is a matter that we can resolve. Hon. Gaster Mugoya is a member of that committee. If he has a different one, he did not even sign this one we have. He might have cooked up his own. (Laughter)

Mr otHieno: Madam Chairperson, it is difficult for us to follow this report. For instance, in what we have, they recommend merging two clauses; Clauses 6 and 5. I would propose that the committee chairperson guides Members or circulates the harmonised copy so that Members can follow because we are not at par.

Ms Cecilia ogwal: Madam Chairperson, the Bill here states, “The Chief Justice shall constitute a Judiciary Advisory Committee consisting of (1) the Chief Justice…” – that is appointing himself – “The Deputy Chief Justice…” and so on. 

The one he has read escaped that. It did not come out. Is that an amendment, therefore? You did not spell it out. If we are to take it the way it is put here, then I think that in terms of corporate governance, which minister Ephraim Kamuntu understands very well - and he is sitting next to you, it cannot be that “The Chief Justice shall constitute a Judicial Advisory Committee” consisting of himself, his deputy, the principal and so on. He is the same Chief Justice that will chair – there is something, which needs to be clarified.

Mr oboth: The reason you are not seeing it as it is in the Bill is that it is the amendment, which we are making. The Bill is what you are referring to. Why would we replace it if we are stating the same thing?

Mr niwagaba: For Members who are a bit confused, when the report was uploaded on our iPads, the report and the amendments were not together. You look at the report and the next document is the proposed amendments, which the chairperson is reading. Look at your iPads; you will see the amendments separate from the report.

Mr mugoya: Madam Chairperson, why at the commencement of this report I wanted to say something, is to minimise procrastinations here over the same subject matter. I have a set of proposals for the amendment, which is available and it can also be laid on the Table. The source is the committee. I got it from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

When hon. Eragu Bichetero was about to present this report in the absence of the substantive chairperson, I was able to get a copy here. I actually got a copy of that draft.

At the same time, I also got, still from the committee, another set of proposals. It is also here. It is over the same subject matter. For example, if you look at clause 1, it is on interpretation. If you also look at this set of proposals, it is on interpretation -

The Chairperson: Honourable member, I ruled earlier that you cannot present a minority report now. 

Mr mugoya: I am not presenting a minority report. In fact, what I wanted was to harmonise and we agree on which one we are presenting as a committee. Therefore, is it in order for the committee chairperson to openly tell this august House that I prepared or authored one of his reports, when I got them from the committee itself? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee. The honourable member should be aware that in preparation of a report, there will be supporting documents. Therefore, if you went to the Secretariat and carried everything they used to prepare a report – we have one report of the committee that is before the House. However, you went and picked all the supporting documents we were using. 

Is the member in order to bring drafts and all the unsigned documents we were using and present them as another set of the report? Is he in order? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I said earlier that if you had a minority position, you should have put it in writing, you should have informed the chairperson and the committee, it should have been attached to the report and presented at the same time. I am not going to allow your small issues in the committee to come to the Floor. Let us proceed. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On clause 4, as per the chairperson’s proposed amendment, I have three comments: one, what are you trying to cure with clause 4? Secondly, the Attorney-General, in his submission, had requested that he would go and consult and come back to us tomorrow, in respect to this clause. Three, we are saying that the Chief Justice cannot appoint himself to chair a committee. When he is not there, the Deputy Chief Justice becomes the chairperson. On top of that, he even has an option of appointing two people, specifically to come to this committee. 

In essence, the committee is his. In the principle of corporate governance, this cannot work. This is what we were running away from in regard to the Bank of Uganda. Therefore, I request the chairperson to clarify these issues or else we delete clause 4. I thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MR OBOTH: I wish we could refer to clause 4, as proposed in the amendment. The original clause 4 reads, “Establishment of the Judiciary Advisory Committee.” It states: 

“The Chief Justice shall constitute a judiciary advisory committee consisting of the Chief Justice…”

In our proposed amendment, we discussed all these challenges and we appreciated that the Chief Justice cannot constitute a committee. That is why we are saying here, “replace clause 4 as follows…” The heading is, “Establishment of the judiciary council.” It is no longer advisory. First of all and the first phrase there reads: 

“There is established within the judiciary, a Judiciary Council consisting of…”

It is no longer “the Chief Justice shall constitute a Judiciary Advisory…” it is no longer advisory. It is a council where a Chief Justice also sits for purposes of –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, chairperson, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, these are two scenarios. The first scenario is that the Bill had said that the Chief Justice shall constitute the committee. 

What we are proposing is, Parliament should constitute the committee and define its membership. The Chief Justice has nothing at all to do with the constitution of the committee because this committee is being constituted by the law and even the membership is defined. 

The only sub-clause about membership is the last one where they say: 
“Two members of the public, male and female, of high moral character, proven integrity and competence nominated by the Chief Justice…”

Otherwise, the Chief Justice does not constitute any committee. It is Parliament constituting the committee.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson has not answered my questions. What are they trying to cure with this –(Member timed out.) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, allow colleagues to ask their questions. 

MS NALULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My amendment is on clause 4 (m) to read, “Two members of the public, male and female, one of whom is a person with a disability, of high moral integrity …” 

MR KATUNTU: Can I help hon. Mawanda? Hon. Mawanda, the lawyers call it, mischief. What mischief is intended to be cured by the establishment of this committee? I hope I got your question correct. Then, you go to the functions of the committee. That is the mischief. Why? 

In the Judiciary currently, they have a problem where these sub-clauses from (a) to (d) are not clearly defined and any organ of the Judiciary to undertake this – For example, this committee is now responsible for advising the Chief Justice on the policies of planning and development of the Judiciary. 

Ethics and integrity within the Judiciary is a pertinent point, which colleagues have been raising during this debate, over and over again. It is no longer administrative because what has been happening is, they have been having ad hoc structures within the Judiciary but now, it is a requirement of the law. That is the mischief, hon. Mawanda.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Katuntu, I want you to collaborate what you have read with the functions of the Chief Justice. He has all the powers to do whatever he wants in the institution. 

Secondly, the Judiciary has a planning department that is responsible for that. Three, there is also the Judicial Service Commission that does planning for the Judiciary. 

MR KATUNTU: No, the Judicial Service Commission’s functions are constitutional. They are not, in any way, related to these ones. The planning department within the Judiciary has been administrative and now, we are legislating on it. Is that too difficult to appreciate?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us not mix the Judicial Service Commission with the – Please, honourable members, the Judiciary Service Commission’s work is to appoint, recruit, promote and discipline. It does not manage the Judiciary. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, my submission is brief. If you look at the proposal, except for changing the names to Judicial Council instead of advisory committee, there is nothing that changes.

The argument is, you are preventing the Chief Justice from formulating a committee and it is now Parliament. You have put it in the law that the Chief Justice will constitute the committee and you name them. This means you have taken away the power from him – (Interjection) - yes, that is what it means. The moment you have named it here, even if you remove it and go by what – It is the same thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all the people named here are there by virtue of office - the Solicitor-General, Registrar, Principal Judge. The only people the Chief Justice can appoint are two.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. They are just changing and removing but the intent - we had a similar matter with the Bank of Uganda. You cannot supervise yourself. This is the very rot we are introducing into the Judiciary.

I do not have any problem with any of this but can we put - we have, for example, retired Chief Justices. They can chair this council. Otherwise, we cannot let them supervise themselves. Please, let us be honest to ourselves, honourable members.

I would like to propose, in the view of the committee, these ones are paramount but I would think that in (a), we should say that there would be someone, at the level of either a retired Chief Justice or Deputy Chief Justice to chair this committee. Some three or four members –(Interjections)– no, whether it is Kavuma or others – the Chairperson talked about former Chief Justices who are there with knowledge. Otherwise, you cannot supervise yourself here. 

Therefore, I propose that we get a retired either Chief Justice or Deputy or that person at a higher rank who has retired to keep a check on these people. They should be a minimum of three. Otherwise, you cannot sit and judge yourself. Let us not introduce the problems that affected Bank of Uganda where they have been supervising themselves.

MR OBOTH: I think we are mixing issues with –(Interjections) I just want to give information. I am quite privileged that I have a lot of information on this matter. I can understand the difficulty that Members are debating with.

We had the same questions, why this? If we can understand that now what the committee is proposing to Parliament is that Parliament enacts a law that establishes, just like the same - we would not call it a Parliamentary Commission but in the Parliament Commission administration, we have the Speaker as the chairperson. Would you bring a retired Speaker to chair a Parliamentary Commission? (Laughter)

When you read through the functions, you will appreciate that this is a council and as a committee, we had all the consideration that we put in there.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I wanted the chairperson of the committee to clarify this. In their proposal, they say that there will be established and you say, “one judicial officer” but the committee does not tell us who will nominate that judicial officer. The Bill says the Chief Justice would constitute meaning that the Chief Justice will have the power to pick amongst the judicial officers. The problem is that you are bringing a proposal but leaving it hanging. Will they sit as judicial officer and nominate one person –(Interjections)– because that is what you are saying now. I find the original proposal for the Chief Justice –(Interruption)

MR ABBAS AGABA: Thank you very much. Madam Chairperson, the chairperson of the committee has asked me to make this clarification. Members are not comfortable with the direct statement that the Chief Justice shall constitute the council, meaning the law gives the Chief Justice the power to constitute it.

The committee has avoided the direct statement that the Chief Justice shall constitute and left the Constitution statutory; it is by law, the way our Commission is constituted by law. In the Administration of Parliament, it is said that the Parliamentary Commission shall be composed of the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, a representative of the Opposition, a representative from Government, the finance minister, the Prime Minister, etcetera.

Therefore, positions are mentioned in the law. Therefore, they are being composed by the law. When they are composed, officers are nominated by the law and when they sit, this is where we are mentioning that the Chief Justice, being the most senior amongst them, shall be the chair but has no role in nominating those who are coming. They are being nominated by the law we are making now and this is corporate governance and when they sit, the Chief Justice becomes the chair.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I do not disagree with removing the clause that reads, “…the Chief Justice shall constitute.” I totally agree with amendment. However, my departure is where the Chief Justice, who is going to chair this council, is the one who is going to nominate the two persons and all the nominations in your amendments –(Interjections)– it is there in the amendments. I have the amendments in my hands.

He is the same person going to chair and is the same council, which is going to advise the chair. This does not anchor well with corporate governance.

Madam Chairperson, you remember when we discussed the COSASE report, one of the things, which we criticised, was the way Bank of Uganda structure was made and we asked the question: who supervises the Governor? It is that question, which has remained unanswered and we still point at that question as being the cause of all the problems in that bank. We were not able to find mechanisms of supervising the Governor and to whom he reports. We only came to realise that the Governor is independent of any supervision.

We know the Chief Justice is also independent. We are creating the same Bank of Uganda scenario. Please, do not confuse it with the Parliamentary Commission. The Parliamentary Commission only allows the Speaker to be the chair. The Speaker has no control at all over the composition of the Commission. I think let us get that very clear. The Speaker does not nominate anyone. The Speaker only chairs the Commission and by the way, there is nowhere in the Act that says the Commission advises the Speaker. We did not use that language.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, the Commission composition is set by an Act of Parliament - it is set by law. However, let me hear from the Minister of Public Service. I think we may benefit from him.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Since the work of the council is advisory especially to the Chief Justice - and we also have issues of recruitment - I would like to seek clarification from the chair why the Commission has been eliminated. At least, they should have included the Chairperson of the Judicial Service Commission since he really has a lot in terms of advisory to the Chief Justice or to the council. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I think we are misconstruing the functions of the council and the disciplinary powers which hon. Waluswaka is referring to as checking the Chief Justice. When it comes to checking all Justices including the Chief Justice, that is a disciplinary control, which is a preserve of the Judicial Service Commission under Article 148 of the Constitution. 

This council we are seeking to establish is only to operationalise the provisions of Article 126 up to 133 of the Constitution and have nothing to do with disciplinary control over the Chief Justice or any Justice of the court or any judicial officer. 

If we look at that clear distinction, then there is no reason any member would raise an issue that if the Chief Justice has nominated two of the 10 people, that there is nothing to check him. This council is not about checking the Chief Justice. It has nothing to do with disciplinary control.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this law is very exciting and also unique. I would like to propose that we stop here for now and Members go and study the proposals further and we reconvene tomorrow. 

I would like to invite the minister to move the motion for the House to resume. I have noted that hon. Nalule had made a proposal to have one person with disability here on the council. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.10
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I move that the House resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report there too.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report there too. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” and passed clause 3 and stood over clauses 1, 2 and 4. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we indicated, we shall reconvene tomorrow to continue consideration of this Bill. As soon as we complete it, we will also go to the other Bills, which we had agreed to handle. 

House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 19 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
