

Wednesday, 5 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to inform you about a sad event that occurred in the neighbourhood. Yesterday, we lost a former President of Kenya, Daniel Arap Moi. He was the second President of Kenya and he was instrumental in the new community we have today. 
So, we will observe a moment of silence 

Hon. Gerald Karuhanga, our MP from Ntungamo Municipality lost his mother, Mrs Kafureka, in Germany. They will be informing us about the burial details. I request that we rise for a moment of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: There were some matters of national importance; I will allow just three. 

3.00
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Friday, 17 January 2020 at around 6.30 p.m., Cheptapoyo Health Centre in Losidok Parish, Amudat District was burnt. 

The Out Patient Department where a number of activities took place including immunisation dispensing and screening of TB and HIV/AIDS patients was burnt. The maternity and food store were also burnt. 

In the same week, the facility had received medical supplies and food for malnourished children from the World Food Programme. Five solar panels, two big batteries and an inverter, a power regulator, records and equipment for the maternity were all destroyed. 

According to the information that I got, the fire was caused by a fire extinguisher explosion. The cylinder had a leakage. The gas cylinder was supplied by Mogas Oil Company, which was contracted by the National Medical Stores. Other facilities in Amudat District like Loroo and Lokares have also complained about those gas cylinders and have disconnected them for fear of explosion. This has exposed the medical supplies to un-recommended conditions. 

I am told that this complaint was presented to the Ministry of Health in December but no action was taken until we had an explosion in one of the health facilities. 

As we talk, the facility has closed because all drugs and equipment were destroyed. Children have missed their immunisation schedules, Pregnant women have also missed their antenatal schedules. Some women have now turned to Traditional Birth Attendants to help them deliver. 

My prayers are that;

    1. As a matter of urgency, Government should provide some temporary shelter where the patients can be attended.
    2. The Ministry of Health should provide medical supplies and equipment.
    3. Government construct a new structure for this health facility because it is the only health facility in Losidok parish. 
    4. Government investigates Mogas Oil Company to ascertain why there are leakages in the gas cylinders that they supply to our health facilities.

I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Health here but the issues raised are important. The Minister of Health should give us feedback by Wednesday next week. 

3.04
MR WAIRA MAJEGERERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

About three months ago, I reported here when I survived an armed ambush. I identified three suspects; one was given a one-year sentence, another released on police bond and I was told by the police that the other - who was an army officer - had been handed over to the army. 

However, this army officer was not handed over to the army. He is back in the village. He usually comes back at night and the community is living in fear. We have not managed to recover the gun. 

This soldier has even had the temerity to go on social media and threaten my life and the life of my LC III Chairman. He is praying to God to give him one of us so that he can finish us. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer was that the Minister of Security takes over the investigations and correlates the communication of these three people so that they can be charged on one sheet. It is now three months and the Minister of Security has never appeared here to give a statement on the matter. He has never even bothered to investigate. 

Therefore, my prayer is that the Minister of Security takes my life seriously and investigates this case and brings these people to book. The fact that this soldier can go on social media and threaten me, means that it is real. The soldier is Andrew Hitatamba. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised is serious; it concerns the life of a colleague. As you remember, in the case of our late colleague, hon. Abiriga, there was an internet message that he would be dead within a week. We did not take it seriously but it had been on the internet.

Minister for Internal Affairs, I know that this is not your work, but can we ask you to assist and facilitate this investigation?

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, could I seek clarification first? I thought the Member was clear that he was asking for protection from the Minister of Security and investigations by the Minister of Security. 

In the Government of Uganda, there is a Minister of Security and a Minister of Internal Affairs. I seek your guidance as to which one he is asking for.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I said I do not see the Minister of Security and I asked whether you could facilitate that investigation. It concerns threats to his life via the internet.

MR OBIGA KANIA: For his security, obviously, we can provide what we can with our forces in the police. My problem is that he is talking about the Minister of Security and I am not the Minister of Security.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are calling upon you, in your capacity as Minister of State for Internal Affairs, to assist in a matter that has not been handled.

MR KANIA: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. I will definitely assist in the matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by our colleague relating to the security of his personal life is a matter of one of the privileges of a Member of this House. Assigning the matter to the Minister of Internal Affairs – where a Member has complained that the police has abdicated its responsibility and allegedly handed over the matter to the army, which army has also not done anything – and we do not get a specific timeframe within which either the Minister of Security or the Minister of Internal Affairs will come back and report on the actions taken in respect of the issue raised, is a matter that needs to be addressed.

Madam Speaker, I request that you give the Minister of Internal Affairs a timeframe within which he should report back on action taken by Government on this particular UPDF soldier.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you come back with an answer next week, Thursday?

MR KANIA: Madam Speaker, we will do what we can to make sure that next Thursday, we are able to give a progress report on what we will have done. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in the meantime, wouldn’t it be proper that the minister provides security to the honourable member? We cannot wait for Thursday. If the Member’s life is threatened, the Ministry of Internal Affairs should provide security to the Member.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Member is insecure. Apart from the internet messages, there are threats in his village.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Madam Speaker, the Member has just reported the current continued threats after about three months. However, immediately after here, I will move with him and we see what protection we can give him. Thank you.

3.11
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of national importance I am raising is very dear and it touches the hearts of the West Nile people. 

The Government of Uganda borrowed US$10 million for extending power to West Nile to connect it to the national grid. We have heard from reliable sources information to the effect that there are some officials at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development who are trying to tamper with this project. Instead of transmitting 132KVA power to supply the West Nile region and connect it to the national grid, they are planning to install power supply of a lower capacity of 66 KVA.

Madam Speaker, we call upon the Government to make sure that the power that was intended - the 132 KVA, is what is installed to supply West Nile. Otherwise, as a region, we have suffered grossly due to lack of power. Lack of power is affecting industrialisation in the region. There are industries that have been established there and West Nile is a business hub. 

South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo are our neighbours and so, the market there is very fertile. However, many industries that had initially targeted the region have had to pull back because of lack of power supply.

Madam Speaker, the minister in charge of energy should come and assure the people of West Nile that the Government will install the intended 132 KVA power line and nothing less –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of power in West Nile has been on this Floor many times and I think it is a national scandal that we have not supplied power. Even when we are going to, there is a threat of supplying less than what was requested. I do not know whether the minister would like to say something about this issue.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, I have been in this House and I have listened to these complaints regarding the lack of power and power shortages, not only in West Nile but also in northern Uganda. 

We have a statement that we are supposed to bring and I request that we bring this response together with the statement on the issue that was raised by hon. Muyanja, regarding the Rural Electrification Agency, maybe next Tuesday.

However, it is very unfortunate that we are actually producing enough power yet very few people are accessing it. We are actually utilising less than 50 per cent of the power that we are producing. Allow us to come with this response next Tuesday.

3.15
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In Kigezi, particularly in my constituency, we have a mine where we mine Tungsten. The company, which is mining is called K13R Minerals Ltd and employs more than 2,000 artisan miners. On a daily basis, it pays out Shs 30 million. However, the owners closed the mine on Monday because they lack money for operations simply because the Government has denied them export permits to sell the accumulated Tungsten, which is worth Shs 5.5 billion.

Madam Speaker, the current heavy rains have destroyed all crops and the surrounding community is only looking at this mine as a source of livelihood. In August, Parliament passed a motion urging Government to remove impediments that are making Ugandans poor. In this particular case, a resolution was passed that export permits should be given to these companies, which is mining and processing Tungsten.

I, therefore, pray that the minister comes to the House to explain the actions taken on the resolutions of Parliament in accordance with Rule 217 and failure whereof, she should be found to be in contempt of Parliament and therefore, referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline as has happened to the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs. I pray. 

THE SPEAKER: Is there any update from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague should know that I am just less than a month in this office. However, allow me to inform the House that I have personally taken up that matter. I actually received a complaint from the CEO requesting us to lift the ban because it is affecting his business and the livelihood of the people in this area.

It is true there was a ban on the exportation of tin, tungsten and another mineral. That ban on the three minerals has not been lifted.

I am aware that Parliament passed a resolution urging Government to actually lift the ban but also asking the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to handle this matter. 

Madam Speaker, I have looked at the file. The minister then wrote to the Attorney General on 16 November 2019 asking for advice. I have seen the letter and I have just talked to the Attorney General this morning after seeing his response to the minister’s letter.

The letter was received at the ministry about a week ago. The Attorney General was asking us to – of course this was a resolution of Parliament – also note that while there was a ban, it was to stop people who are exporting ore or tungsten without carrying out value addition. This particular company that is being talked about is actually adding value and not exporting the raw product. 

Madam Speaker, since the ban was issued by His Excellency the President in writing, allow us to handle this matter in a week’s time. We should be able to come to the House. I have also written to that company informing them to be patient with us. Maybe in a week’s time, we should be able to get back to them considering that they are fulfilling the requirements of adding value to our ore. I think they meet the basic minimum and they should be allowed to proceed with the export. 

However, we need to harmonise with other relevant stakeholders. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to say something. 

3.21
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a policy of value addition for whatever is produced in this country including minerals. If you who have been here long enough, you will recall that a Chinese company wanted to export our copper in raw form and we declined. So, it is in that line that tungsten should not be exported in raw form. 

My advice to that business is that they should make arrangements with the sector ministry to add value and the products will be exported. 

I thought I should inform this House that there is a Government policy where we are discouraging, as much as possible, the exportation of minerals in raw form, particularly minerals of high value. We do not want to export the value of our products and jobs. We want to export things that are already processed so that we can get the highest value for this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. However, Minister of Finance, I would like to again remind Government about Article 40 of the Constitution. In closing those mines, you are disempowering many employees who depend on those mines for a living in Uganda. Nobody thinks about the ordinary people. As you are closing the mines, remember the ordinary people who earn their livelihood from there.

The minister, however, said she is coming to address this issue in a week’s time. Thank you. 

3.23
MR GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two months ago, I reported here that boulders had descended from the mountain and were threatening Bukwambe Primary School. To date, nothing has happened but the rains continue to fall. 

The subcounties of Tsekululu, Mukoto, Bupoto, Bumbo and Bukoho are all threatened. The crack is now wider and about five primary schools are threatened. On Saturday, we buried a young boy who was killed by a boulder and the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has not come to help.

My brother, hon. Masika, is not here because he is mobilising to remove people from the mountains to take them to the primary schools that are already threatened. I would like to request the Government of Uganda to come to our rescue before what happened in Bududa happens to us because it will happen anytime. 

We have always requested that the Government, instead of constructing houses, compensates the people so that they quickly move because it is cheaper and faster. I pray, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is not here but that problem is real. Can we direct the minister to proceed urgently to Namisindwa and ensure that the communities are handled and report back next week on Thursday?

3.25
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last year, UNRA gave a contract to a company called Wanaik Construction Company to do major works on two of our roads, that is Isingiro-Rugaga-Ntantamukyi Road and Kityaza-Bugango-Tanzania Border Road. 

UNRA ordered this company to do some gravel work and then they would be given some money. However, UNRA has failed to pay these two companies. The companies demand a lot of money from UNRA. When we tried to contact UNRA officials, they told us that they even have a lot of debts amounting to Shs 92 billion from those companies. 

As a result, the companies have put their tools down. Of recent, we received heavy rains and all roads were washed away. My people are now stuck. All trucks of matooke are stuck. Goods from Tanzania and Uganda cannot cross the two borders; they are all stuck. As I talk, my people are in danger. 

Madam Speaker, the other day when I came here and complained, you gave some good instructions to the minister. By then, the minister was hon. Bagiire. He came here with a very good statement but up to now, they have not yet come on the ground and we have no solution.

We have two prayers, Madam Speaker that you instruct the ministry to quickly mobilise resources, come on the ground and fix the roads so that my people can move freely and transact their businesses.

Madam Speaker, we pray that the line ministry should give us a statement on whether those two contractors are going to be paid. 

Secondly, whether UNRA still has the capacity to attend to those emergencies since they claim not to have any money to move a machine from one point to another or station to another.

They claim that they have failed to get any money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We would love to hear from the minister in charge so that we can be given a statement that will give hope to our people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is directed to come and update the House on the availability of emergency funds to do work in Bukanga and also the outstanding pledge on the roads. You can come back to us on Tuesday next week.

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, Madam speaker. Last week, we had a debate in this House where hon. Katusabe was arrested in Kasese and the Minister of Internal Affairs had promised to bring a comprehensive statement here on his safety in relation to the same matter that hon. Waira Majegere has raised.

My sister, hon. Sarah Opendi, who is a very close and dear friend - the wife to hon. Katusabe - is in a depressed state and we would like to know what is happening to his situation. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: What has the relationship got to do with the issue?

MR ANGURA: Madam Speaker, when this issue was raised here, a concern was put up by hon. Sarah Opendi on a very serious note where she gave us more information than what had been presented by hon. Katusabe. Therefore, she is equally depressed and all of us here would want to know how far this matter has gone, in order –(Interjection)– it is.

Therefore, the minister had promised to bring a statement on this Floor of Parliament today but he has not said anything, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, once a matter is raised here, it becomes a matter of this House. It should not be tagged to individuals. In your own right, you can ask what has happened. The minister is directed to come and give us a response tomorrow on hon. Katusabe’s issue. 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, last week I reported on that matter, as you had directed in the earlier debate of last week but one. The issue was reconciling our position with hon. Katusabe’s; whether he made a statement or not. And I repeat here that last week, I corrected myself and said that hon. Katusabe made a statement at Kibuli on 20 January 2020. There was no statement in Bwera and Kasese.

As a result, the Speaker asked me last week that I should reduce that into writing and present it to this House. It was not a comprehensive statement as my colleague is trying to say.

Having said that, I also would like to put it on record here; I said that last week, we had to send a team of CID to Kasese to investigate the matter because there are three elements to be investigated. One is the issue of an illegal rally, the second is the theft of $91,257 cash of hon. Katusabe, which was stolen from him. That is an equivalent of Shs 333 million. The last issue which was investigated was the attempted assassination in the process; whether that was an attempted assassination or not.

On Thursday, we sent a team of CIDs who went to Kasese and they came and made a written report that they gave me. The summary of that report is that they are now handing over the file to the DPP for further management on how to proceed with the criminal elements in that aspect.

Therefore, I agree that I will make a statement tomorrow but since this an investigation of criminal matter; I will only record what I have already stated here. I cannot go into details of that investigation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the other matter will be handled tomorrow.

STATEMENT ON WORLD WETLANDS DAY - 7 FEBRUARY 2020

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Atim): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving us this opportunity to make a statement on the World Wetlands Day. The World Wetlands Day is commemorated on 2 February; it marks the coming into force of the Convention on Wetlands. 
	
Uganda will commemorate the day on Friday, 7 February 2020, at Bumbaire Sub County Headquarters, Bushenyi District Local Government. The venue was selected to draw the attention of the local people and general public on the increasing threats to the wetland biodiversity in the region due to on-going degradation activities in the area.

Madam Speaker, this update preparation is being collaboratively done by a National Organising Committee Central Government level and at local organisational committee at district level. What follows are:
1. The venue has been secured and will accommodate about 2000 invited guests. The District Organising Committee has confirmed that all matters to do with venue preparation for hosting the function is already in place.

We expect the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, to be the chief guest though we are awaiting his confirmation. We have had preparation for talk shows which are scheduled on 4th and 6th February on BFM Radio Station in Bushenyi.

The minister’s statement, which was earlier recorded on 29th January 2020, will also be replayed on 6th February on Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) Television.

Newspaper supplements will also feature during the week. There will be live streaming of the event on social media and NBS Television.

Two field sites have already been identified; one will be at Nyaruzinga Wetland, Nyakabirizi Division where we have a project, which is running for alternative livelihood for the surrounding communities. A section of the degraded wetland will be planted with wetland vegetation. 

The second one is at the National Water and Sewerage Corporation intake point. All these sites demonstrate the theme and its relevance to Ugandans.

Apart from speeches from invited guests, we have also organised a youth dialogue, where the youth will be able to discuss the theme of the day and then present a Declaration to the Guest of Honour.

We shall also have traditional songs, which feature the wetland. There will be the wetland run, cycling, tug-of-war for those who are able and a painting competition among school-going children so that the participants will all be brought on board on that day, as we celebrate.

In collaboration with Nature Uganda, there will be a Public Talk on Wetland Day; 6 February 2020 at the Uganda Museum. It is expected to draw participants from different fields and scientific papers shall be presented.

We have invited about 2000 participants from Government agencies, Embassies, institutions, schools and the civil society. In a special way, we are also inviting members of Parliament to be part of this day. We expect the participants to be drawn from across the societal setup.

The regional de-concentrated structures of the Ministry of Water and Environment in south-western Uganda based in Mbarara, Kabale and Fort Portal shall be mobilising for this day.

We shall have the national event but events countrywide are also encouraged. Those that have already prepared are encouraged to go on. They will be technically supported by the Regional Wetland Offices in their regions.

We hope to get confirmation of our chief guest soon. Otherwise, the preparation is already in high gear. We shall hold the last organising committee meeting today. We shall have a joint site meeting with Bushenyi District Local Government on Wednesday, 5 February 2020 and that is today. Another team is already ahead.

We shall finalise with production of awareness materials, which are going to be distributed. The commemoration day in Bushenyi is already set.

The purpose of this information paper is to:

    1. Update you on the status of the preparations for the World Wetlands Day, 2020; and 
    2. Request the honourable members to join us and commemorate this day in Bushenyi since it is a key turning point of how we are going to showcase our wetland protection.

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. God bless you.

The Speaker: Honourable minister, thank you for the information. I think Members have heard. Let us have a few comments but I would like to draw the attention of the minister to the fact that a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) called WWD will support the districts in this activity and not the Government of Uganda. That means that we have left it to the NGOs. Where are we, as Government?

3.43
Mr Michael TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for the statement.

I would like to inform this House and the whole nation that according to the United Nations (UN) Development Report, 2019, Uganda loses 2 per cent of its wetlands every year. It is now 10 years since Uganda ratified the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands. Since then, we have been losing 2 per cent of the wetlands in Uganda.

Many efforts have been made to ensure that people leave wetlands, including cancellation of land titles. However, in so many places in Uganda, people still encroach on wetlands. It is the big people who have got money and are in business in Government who encroach on the wetlands. The rich are not bothered by the concerned people – the National Environment Management Organisation (NEMA) and environment officers at the districts.

Honourable minister, we would like to know whether you have a different plan to make sure that Uganda stops losing 2 per cent of its wetlands and it starts gaining more than 2 per cent of the same such that we can save our environment against a desert in Uganda. Thank you.

3.45
Mr james acidri (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement regarding the celebration of Wetland Day.

What I expected from the minister’s statement was a real call for action. I have heard the honourable minister talk about activities, which cannot necessarily translate into practical action.

We all know that one of the natural resources that have suffered under the National Resistance Movement (NRM) administration is the wetlands. Over 4,000 factories that hon. Bahati prides in are all located in wetlands. We have chased away frogs. Investors have decided to occupy places where they are not supposed to be. The President had pronounced himself in the kisanja Hakuna Mchezo that we shall recover our wetlands. 

I expected the honourable minister to outline how they will revoke titles, execute evictions and notify those staying in wetlands but I only heard her talk about activities like drama and songs. This is mockery of the highest order. 

I advise the honourable minister to withdraw this statement and prepare a better one. Otherwise, I do not accept her invitation. I thank you. 

3.48
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally wish to join the colleagues in thanking the minister for preparing a statement and informing us of the World Wetlands Day.

Madam Speaker, if Government is set to save the wetlands, by now, the whole country would know that we shall be celebrating World Wetlands Day. However, I am sure if we took a census, even in this Parliament, you could find less than 10 per cent of Members aware of that day. Colleagues are saying none. 

If the Government is going to waste money that would be geared towards saving wetlands to celebrate - we should have a massive campaign countrywide promoting the interests, teaching and explaining to people the value of saving wetlands but here we are, people are going to Bushenyi to dance and do a tug-of-war and whatever they will be doing. 

At least, the minister would have been courteous enough to tell us that there are themes that have been prepared in schools. This is because normally when we have some of these programmes, we prepare drama inclined to a given theme so that by the time students are preparing and doing whatever they are doing, they know that whatever they are doing is saving wetlands. 

The minister has said that districts have been encouraged. Which facilitation has been put for districts to also do the same? Facilitation has been put for the team that will be going to Bushenyi. Is Kamuli District also ready to sensitise the public? Does it have facilitation to do the same so that we save wetlands?   

3.50
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now with the appointment of the honourable minister, commonly known as “Mama Mabira”, maybe she will now be called “Mama Wetlands.” (Laughter) The country has a lot of hope.

On a serious note, wetlands have been degraded –(Interruption)

MR OKIN OJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find it very uncouth to put my colleague, hon. Yaguma, to order. The Minister for Environment has been baptised a Christian. She has a known name. Is the honourable member in order to baptise her again by a different name, “Mama Wetland?” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe hon. Yaguma was acknowledging the role hon. Beatrice Anywar played in saving Mabira Forest. Consequently, he expects her to save the wetland; so, he is in order. 

MR YAGUMA: On a serious note, when you travel along Kampala – Masaka Road, especially the area around Lwera near Lukaya, the Chinese are busy cultivating wetlands using tractors. Remember these wetlands and swamps surround Lake Victoria - 

Honourable minister, recently, the President made a pronouncement that all those people who have invaded the wetlands should leave. Unfortunately, they have not. I am sure even the President travels along this road; the Chinese have even planted bananas. They are even selling Matooke along the road. 

Therefore, I request the honourable minister to restore the hopes of Ugandans and make the Chinese pack. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.53
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement, especially at such a time when we are looking at Sustainable Development Goal No. 13 on climate change and impact. 

When we look at the wetlands, they play a vital role in climate change. Today, we saw a reduction of the wetland area from 15.6 per cent in 1994 to 10.9 per cent in 2017. 

When the minister gave us the statement, I feel she had to, first of all, give us the theme of the day because each year we celebrate at a global level. We must have a theme and also at a national level. What are our targets? Where are we moving towards wetland restoration? Even here in the urban areas, we are affected because of wetland destruction. 

For instance, there is flooding in Kampala but what are the targets? In the rural communities - I come from Bududa and we have suffered climate change effects. Therefore, I expected to hear about the theme; and it should have been key. 

Honourable minister, it is good you said that you are going to get school children on board. We need to have the young people on board especially in the area of tree planting and the restoration bit. How do we again balance development? 

My colleague talked about the Chinese who are planting Matooke in wetlands. The question I would like to pose to the minister is, how do we balance development vis-à-vis the environment, like the wetlands? How do we live sustainably? How shall we coexist at the same time using the environment for development but also mitigating the effects of climate change? Thank you very much. 

3.55
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for this statement on the International Wetlands Day. The Uganda wetlands atlas unequivocally states that Uganda is losing about Shs 2 billion annually in wetland ecosystem restoration because wetlands have not helped, when it comes to contamination of water. The ecosystem is degenerating every other day, just because of pollution. 

Therefore, I expected that the focus for this huge budget which is going to accommodate so many guests - she mentioned over 2000 and there are a number of activities that would be funded -  would be concentrated on restoration of the ecosystem that has suffered degradation. 

However, we do not even see a theme. She mentions that there will be a symposium; I do not know what kind of scientific papers will be presented in this celebration of the International Wetlands Day.

Madam Speaker, I have been yearning also from the same ministry to celebrate the International Highlands Day because I happen to hail from the highlands. It is part of the environment, Madam Speaker. The highlands have also suffered degradation   -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Is there a convention on the highlands?

3.58
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chwa West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of State for Water and Environment for bringing this statement for the commemoration of the World Wetlands Day.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank her for her new assignment and role; I had not had the opportunity. Thank you mama wetlands because you have now been baptised mama wetland. Congratulations upon being appointed.

Madam Speaker, my concern has been almost similar to the other Members. It has been about the theme for this day. You know, when commemorating a world day, there is always a world theme and this theme is normally domesticated to the national theme.

When you look at this document, it is actually lacking. Therefore, the focus of the day will not be realised because the theme guides the objectives, the operations and the activities - it is supposed to be identified and then put in context within this paper. 

I think that is why Members are raising a lot of questions because the paper seems not to be guided by a theme for the day. If the Minister should clarify on that.

4.00
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the honourable minister on the statement and also congratulate her on her appointment as Minister of State for Water and Environment.

We are aware that hon. Beatrice Anywar is a very strong promoter of the environment. You are actually a champion at national and international level. So we want to congratulate you and probably, it is what the Head of State based on to put you in this docket for purposes of saving the environment of this country.

However, honourable minister, we would like to know the policies and at the same time the achievements that the Department of Wetlands has achieved in this period. In addition, share with us the challenges. If I can highlight a few challenges, which we encountered when we visited Kibuku District:

First, the Department evicted people whose livelihood survived on only the wetland for so many years but along the way, the Department evicted them and just extends them two turkeys and a boda boda in compensation –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are now going into areas which may be difficult. We are supposed to talk about the celebrations but now you are talking about issues that happened before the Minister went there.

You know, if the Minister had brought an action plan, then we would discuss it but she does not have an action plan. It is just information so that you can go to Bushenyi. That is all she is saying. Let us hear from the host only.

4.03
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the honourable minister for the statement she has put on the Floor of Parliament. I would like to assure you that as Bushenyi, we are very ready and we are very happy that you have chosen Bushenyi because I think we are one of the biggest culprits in this country in as far wetland degradation is concerned.

However, whenever we are trying to make use of the wetlands or to move people away from wetlands, we have a challenge. The big culprits are untouched. We want your support to make sure that those who degraded our wetlands can move out because the “small fish” are refusing and they continue to degrade our wetlands because the “big fish” are still using the wetlands the way they want. They reclaimed them long time ago and some of them have land titles.

Therefore, can we compensate them so that they get out of those wetlands because they got their land titles before 1995? I think that is where we need to move and see whether we can get them out.

Otherwise, as Bushenyi, we are very prepared. Right now, a press conference is going on at the district headquarters. I am in touch with the district chairperson and we are very ready to host you on 7th of this month. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister, your closing remarks!

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Environment) (Ms Beatrice Atim Anywar):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. Thank you for your concerns. I appreciate. Actually, it shows that we are alert and set to protect the environment.

Your concerns are valued and I have taken note of them. However, I would like to inform you that this paper was actually to inform and invite Parliament to participate in an international celebration, which is being held here in Uganda.

We cannot conclude all the concerns, which my colleagues have raised. The theme was one of the issues raised. In my statement, I mentioned that the theme of this celebration is “The Wetland and Biodiversity.”

We had highlighted activities trying to bring everybody on board. On matters of achievements, challenges of the wetlands and issues to do with those illegally occupying wetlands - we have a plan to ensure that they leave the wetlands. There are two categories; there are those who have titles before the 1995 Constitution and those who are just coming.

Madam Speaker, all these details, I have recorded. I would like colleagues to bear with me so that we go for the celebrations on Friday and then give me time to bring a detailed status quo of the wetlands in this country so that we all have an input. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you. However, come with a national action plan. That is what we want to hear from you. 

PERSONAL EXPLANATION

4.07
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. My people and I take it very seriously. This statement is written and I will read it verbatim. 

Personal statement by hon. Odonga Otto, MP, Aruu County, on the altercation of 30 January 2020

Background

Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, Amuru Sugar Works Limited is targeting 40,000 acres of land - 63 square miles of Acholi land in Amuru. It is a subject of controversy in greater Acholi and in Uganda. 

Government and Madhvani have so far attempted to acquire 10,000 acres in the areas of Kololo, Bana, Omee, Lujoro, Obito and Pailyec amidst controversies and irregularities. This has caused unrest, violence and protests in parts of Acholi. 

You may recall on 11 August 2017, nude women protested in front of the Minister of Lands – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the statement you are reading is not what you showed me yesterday; it is different. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: If you would bear with me, Madam Speaker; it is just a background. 

THE SPEAKER: No, there are rules governing personal statements. There are contents here which may call for debate. That is my problem. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Given your guidance, Madam Speaker, let me leave that background.

On 27 January 2020, at the invitation of the area MP, hon. Gilbert Olanya, I travelled to Amuru District, in the area of Lakang - the disputed area of the proposed sugar works. While I was there, I had time to visit the halted bridge project. I beg to lay these, for your attention; this is where Government of Uganda has put in Shs 1.8 billion for the construction of a bridge in that area but the project has been halted by Uganda Wildlife Authority. I seek your indulgence as I lay these pictures on the Table. Materials are already on site but the work has stalled because of conflict between Government agencies. I beg to lay.  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there are still people living in Internally Displaced Camps (IDPs) in Amuru because their lands have been forcefully removed and illegally sold by political leaders and some business entrepreneurs. 

On the fateful day of the assault, probably this is what is of interest to the country – (Laughter) - It was 30 January 2020. I was seated in the parliamentary lobby in the company of hon. Abbot, hon. Mawanda, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki and others. Hon. Anthony Akol, MP, Kilak County, Amuru District, approached me and stated that he had an issue to finish with me. The previous day, he had met me at Queens Chambers in the presence of my children and told me he had an issue to sort out with me. I accepted the meeting at the lobby, hoping we could talk about his concerns. 

While in the lobby, hon. Akol asked me why I was in his constituency de-campaigning him over the weekend.  I told him I was in Kilak County in the company of hon. Gilbert Olanya and that was not his constituency. I further told him that it is true that while in the district, I raised the issue of him, hon. Anthony Akol, and the Chairman LCV having received Shs 300 million for Madhvani land compensation for sugar growing. I told him that I told the people of Amuru to put their elected leaders to task, when they go there, to explain why they picked the money. 

Hon. Akol replied that it is true he sold his land and got the money and that if it was his land, how does it become my problem. I told him it becomes my problem because as a parliamentary group, we agreed that investors should lease land as opposed to outright sale. 

I realised hon. Akol was raising his voice, so I called hon. Lyandro Komakech who was passing by to come and help mediate. Hon. Lyandro made things worse. He joined me and asked hon. Anthony Akol further questions. He asked him when he bought the land. Hon. Akol replied, 2012. Before hon. Lyandro could finish, hon. Akol shouted on top of his voice, “We have to resolve these issues the local way.” (Laughter) He immediately rose up, punched me in the face and picked a chair. In utter disbelief, I saw him charging further at me as hon. Lyandro held him. I lifted a chair to restrain him in self-defence. The security detail of the Speaker that was getting into plenary prevailed and calmed the situation. Hon. Anthony Akol fled to the House immediately. 

Madam Speaker, I did not fight back, neither did I kick him, as alleged. The video footage, which I am privy to, cannot lie. The statement being issued by hon. Akol on social media is a blatant lie. We were all seated and between us was hon. Lyandro Komakech, so there is no way I could have kicked him. I was later restrained from entering the plenary by the Sergeant-at-Arms. I was driven to Nakasero Hospital where the doctor said that I sustained slight injuries. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I beg to be protected from the Members who are laughing. I wonder why they are laughing. I have recorded a statement at the Parliamentary Police and had a medical examination done at Nsambya Police facility.

I have suffered profound anguish, ridicule – as you see some of the Members laughing – and pain. However, allow me to say, as I make prayers – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, first, I said you have included in this statement matters you did not show me yesterday. Secondly, the matter is actually controversial. You cannot make prayers on personal statements. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I sit down, I seek your indulgence that this matter be taken to the parliamentary disciplinary committee and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament do apply in relation to what happened to me. 

My people are very bitter but we do not want to take the law in our hands. We believe this institution can help to mitigate these issues. Thank you very much and most obliged.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I laud your kindness in allowing hon. Otto to make a statement under rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Rule 54(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament says, “A Member may explain a matter of personal nature but no controversial matter may be brought in the explanation nor may debate arise upon it.”

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance. Yes, the matter that hon. Otto mentions involves two Members of Parliament both of whom I presume can choose to take advantage of Rule 54(1) of the Rules of Procedure and with your kindness, they may both be allowed to. However, would this be the right way? It has been flowing all over and it is true that it has been embarrassing. We have seen each of them making different statements. Hon. Otto has made a statement and maybe hon. Akol will also make a statement. 

Madam Speaker, would we be proceeding rightly by giving them the chance to make statements on the Floor? This is because at the end of the day, it will be a rebuttal. Yes, hon. Otto has made a statement and it is good we have heard it. However, hon. Akol may also make a statement if he goes through the procedure. Where does it end? Could there be a better procedural way to deal with this matter? It concerns them as individuals but it can help us as Parliament. At the end of the day, we are all embarrassed by the issue. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rightly put, the rule under which the honourable member rose demands that he needs not make a controversial matter that needs response. The first two paragraphs were issues raised in relation to the matter of acquisition of land by Government, which was done through a committee and the budget was passed after the scrutiny of the list. Rightly put, hon. Akol is one of those who sold land. 

However, when you look at the statement, the honourable member has talked about people whose land was fraudulently got by Government, without facts. Can I seek guidance as to whether that paragraph related to acquisition of land by Government can be expunged from the record or what would be the better way of handling it, considering that that particular provision would not allow for the raising of such a matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, hon. Otto came to me yesterday and showed me a statement about what happened in the lobby. On the basis of that, I allowed him to come and present it. However, what he has brought here is about Madhvani, Amuru Sugar Works, landless people, a halted bridge, roadblocks, charcoal trade - these cannot be a personal explanation. (Applause)

Honourable member, I am sorry; this does not qualify under rule 54. It will be expunged from the record. (Applause)

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A STANDING COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157(2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Who is designating? Hon. Aja is not here.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS ON THE PREVALENCE OF UNGAZETTED DETENTION CENTRES IN LWAMAYUBA, KALANGALA DISTRICT AND KYENGERA IN WAKISO DISTRICT

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Janepher Egunyu): Madam Speaker, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Human Rights on the alleged torture in un-gazetted detention centres in the country. However, before I present it, I beg to lay the original copy of the report and the committee minutes on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee’s meetings. I also beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Human Rights on the alleged torture in un-gazetted detention centres in the country. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, the work that was given to us was done and concluded in November but due to many factors, it was not presented in time. I am happy that you have given us this opportunity.

Introduction

During the House sitting of Thursday, 15 August 2019, hon. Abdulatif Ssebagala and hon. Kassiano Wadri raised the issue of the existence of illegal detention centres commonly referred to as “safe houses” in Lwamayuba-Kalangala and Kyengera which were allegedly used by security agencies to torture citizens. Subsequently, the Rt Hon Speaker directed the Committee on Human Rights to investigate this matter and report back to the House. 

The committee notes that illegal detention is against fundamental human rights as enshrined in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Sustainable Development Goal 16, which says, “Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels”

Background

Torture is one of the most serious human rights violations as it constitutes a direct attack on the personality and dignity of a human being. The prohibition of torture is an absolute right hence not subject to derogation under any circumstances. The prohibition of torture is codified in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the 1949 Geneva Conventions, and the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, which instruments Uganda is party to. 

In regards to prevention of torture, Uganda assented to the United Nations Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 1987. Uganda’s obligation under the convention includes taking effective legislation, administrative and judicial measures to prevent acts of torture - this is in Article 2; criminalising all acts of torture, according to Article 4, among others.

Further, freedom from torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment has been recognised by Uganda's Constitution as a fundamental right. According to Article 44 (a), this right is non-derogable and therefore, the state cannot, under any circumstances, invoke torture.

Legislation on Torture

The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012

On 27 July 2012, Parliament passed the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012. The law affirms the absolute prohibition of torture under the Uganda Constitution and domesticates Uganda's obligation under international human rights conventions. In particular, it reflects Uganda's commitment to the United Nations Convention against Torture.

The Act specifically addresses the following:

    1. Defines and criminalises torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment, hence punishes the offence of torture with 15 years’ imprisonment.
    2. No circumstances, however exceptional, such as a state of war or political instability, can be invoked to justify torture neither can orders from the higher authority.
    3. Expounds the definition of torture perpetrators to include private individuals. The international definition is limited to official and state actors.
    4. Emphasises individual responsibility for perpetrators of the offence.
    5. Makes all information obtained through torture inadmissible in court.
    6. Provides for compensation to victims of torture.
    7. It also places responsibility for rehabilitation services on the state.
    8. Places jurisdiction of the offence of torture in the Chief Magistrates Courts for wider court coverage.

Government Intervention

Government has made commitments under the United Nations Convention against Torture, the national Constitution and the enactment of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012 as mentioned above.

Government has also put in place an institutional framework for the protection and promotion of human rights through the establishment of the Uganda Human Rights Commission and human rights’ desks in different ministries, departments and security agencies. Parliament also established the Standing Committee on Human Rights in 2012.

Despite the above interventions, the Uganda Human Rights Commission has continuously reported cases of torture, especially through the use of brutal methods against suspects in police custody, prisons or other forms of state custody, and detention and torture of suspects in un-gazetted detention places.

Terms of Reference

The committee developed and adopted the following terms of reference:

    1. To establish the existence of safe houses in Uganda;
    2. To establish the involvement of security and other agencies in the alleged torture;
    3. To establish from the victims whether they were subjected to torture in safe houses;
    4. To establish the conditions of the safe houses.

Under the methodology, the committee met the following people:

THE SPEAKER: The Members can read that. Go to the findings. 

MS EGUNYU: The committee’s findings are as follows: 

The Existence of Safe Houses in Uganda

The first person that we met was the Minister of Security, Gen. Elly Tumwine. The honourable minister admitted before the committee the existence of safe houses noting that –

    1. Safe houses were in different locations where operations deem them fit to fulfil their purpose and functions as provided in the Security Organisations Act, Cap 305 of 1987, Section 3(a).

    2. He further stated that-
    a) Safe houses are there to coordinate clandestine intelligence information, noting that intelligence is gathered secretly.
    b) They are for briefing and de-briefing intelligence assets.
    c) They are also meant to secure and protect witnesses in danger, especially criminals who have turned into witnesses.
    d) They are also to observe and carry out surveillance around hard-core criminals, some of who have completed prison sentences but remain a threat to the public.

He further provided justification for their existence by stating the following: 

    1. Legal Basis For the Establishment of Safe Houses

He noted that there is no specific law under which safe houses operate. However, neither is there a law which bars them. He said that there are many safe houses in Uganda depending on the need.

He noted the relevance of the following provisions in the law: 

    a) Article 27 of the Constitution on the right to privacy of person, home and other property. 
    b) Under the functions of security organisations, the Security Organisations Act, Cap 305, Section 3(1), which is on collection, receipt and processing of internal and external intelligence data on the security of Uganda. 

However, the committee observes that in Section 4(2) of the same law, no officer or employer of either organisation shall have the power to arrest, detain or confine any person by virtue only of being an officer or employee of the organisation.

    2. Procedure to Get in and out of Safe Houses

Entry into or exit from safe houses is after authorisation by the Director General of the Internal Security Organisation or by any officer authorised by him. Entering depends on the operation for which the safe houses were created.

Further, the minister noted that all the security officers and employees are obliged not to disclose what they see or hear in the safe houses.

Testimonies of Witnesses

Madam Speaker, we got testimonies from witnesses including hon. Kassiano Wadri, Mr Bright Gabula Africa, Mr Isa Mukungu, Mr Alex Odwori, Mr Moses Magoba, Mr Abdu Mulindwa and Mr Justine Kayondo. All those witnesses came physically to the committee. 

The committee also interacted with some of the relatives of missing persons alleged to be victims of detention in un-gazetted centres. They claimed interaction with the police and Col Kaka who, in some circumstances, confirmed having some of the victims. Mr Joel Agape Kyeyune, for example, who was a second year law student of Kampala International University, disappeared on 8 May 2019. David Bukenya was arrested on 15 April 2018. Godfrey Sengooba Salongo was arrested by plain clothed policemen from a bar on 26 April 2019. Bashir Mukungu of Kitemu and Deo Segawa were arrested by ISO. Some of these people were later released and came and interacted with the committee.

Committee Observations

    1. The committee was not able to verify the allegations made by the alleged victims and relatives of missing persons it interacted with - 
    a) given that members were denied access to the alleged safe houses during their on spot visits; and 
    b) the Director General, ISO, Col Kaka, did not turn up when invited by the committee. 

    2. As directed by the witnesses, having been denied information by the minister, the committee visited Kyengera, Kabowa, Nalukolongo and Nakasero but was denied access. However, out of the areas visited, the minister could only confirm that Kyengera Base 1 was a safe house.

    3. The committee could not exercise its powers to summon the Director General as provided for in Article 90(3)(c)(i) of the Constitution because the Minister of Security, General Elly Tumwine, categorically stated that he would not allow the Director General, ISO, to appear before the committee yet some witnesses had made reference to Col Kaka.

    4.  The committee further observed that the minister had informed members that the heads of intelligence security agencies are represented by ministers in Parliament; thus, the matter of their appearance before committees of the House was a subject that required the interpretation of the Attorney-General.

    5. Given that the committee was able to interact with victims who alleged that they had been in safe houses and the minister having recognised some of the witnesses and also acknowledged that safe houses do exist –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. Whatever the honourable Member of Parliament is reading is very important and at an appropriate time, we needed to debate it as a House. However, I checked in the order of business of today and I do not see any information. I do not know whether it has been uploaded to the iPads; maybe others have it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS EGUNYU: Given that the committee was able to interact with victims who alleged that they had been in safe houses and the minister, having recognised some of the witnesses and also acknowledged that safe houses do exist and that he knew some of the victims, this is evidence enough to show that safe houses exist.
    6. Despite the fact that the committee had instructed the Director General of ISO, Col Kaka, to come with the minister, he instead wrote a letter requesting the committee to give him specific questions prior to the meeting, which the committee declined because it instructed that he appears with the minister to respond to allegations made against him.

Recommendations

    1. The Minister for Security be held accountable for failing the committee work by - 
    a) Denying the committee access to the safe houses; 
    b) Blocking its interaction with the heads of security agencies. 

    2. Security agencies should follow the established procedures of detention of suspects in accordance with Article 23(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

We also wanted to establish the involvement of security and other agencies in the alleged torture and we went ahead to meet the Uganda Police Force. The Uganda Police Force stated the following as the challenges that they are faced with:

They said that there is limited sensitisation on the anti-torture law. Many of the detention facilities were built during the colonial times with limited capacity. They are now overcrowded. 

There is limited capacity in the Uganda Police Force. They cited the fact that by internationally accepted standards, one detective is supposed to handle 12 cases per year. This is not possible in Uganda. 

Observations

    1. Suspects were still detained beyond the mandatory 48 hours.
    2. Suspects are dropped at police stations informally by security agencies and without police statements and Criminal Register Book (CRB) or the General Inquiry File (GIF). 
    3. Basing on the witnesses’ accounts, police was reluctant to conduct investigations where ISO was involved.
    4. We also noted that there is weak collaboration amongst security agencies.

Recommendations

    1. The Police Force should adhere to the 48-hour rule that requires suspects to be produced in court after arrest. This is under Article 23(4) (b) of the Constitution.
    2. Activities of security agencies should be coordinated and they should respect each other’s roles. 
    3. The Police Force, together with the Uganda Human Rights Commission, should investigate all allegations of torture and hold the perpetrators accountable. 

We went further –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issue of abuse of human rights is a very important matter. First of all, the Minister for Security is not here. However, we were comforted with the presence of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs who has also majestically walked out with his books and bag. 

Is it procedurally right for us to allow a minister to leave when there is a very important matter and he is supposed to legally guide the House?

THE SPEAKER: He has come back.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, as the concerned minister comes in, the Office of the Prime Minister, the Attorney-General and the Minister for Security are absent, yet there are issues that refer to them in the report that we are listening to. As we continue, we wonder whether we could use your office to ask the Office of the Prime Minister to send a message to some of those ministries to have somebody come in, in the meantime, before we debate the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I see somebody from the Prime Minister’s office, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here and Minister of Internal Affairs is here. You can proceed.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, we went ahead to meet the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). The DPP informed the committee that the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions always had issues regarding torture in the prosecution of cases prior to the enactment of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012, noting that cases where persons appear to have been tortured are not admissible.

The DPP noted that in Section 11(2) of the Human Rights Enforcement Act, where in any criminal proceedings it is brought to the attention of the magistrate or judge that any of the accused person’s non-derogable rights have been infringed upon, the judge or magistrate presiding over the trial shall declare the case a nullity and acquit the accused person. The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions’ concern was: what happens to complainants or victims in cases of defilement, rape, robbery or murder? What remedies are available to them as the first victims of rights and freedoms?

The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions further informed the committee that the office lacked an enabling law to allow them carry out their functions effectively.

Committee Observations

1. 	The Director of Public Prosecutions, in the chain of investigation, deals with the end product. The office handles the evidence that is presented to it by the police or any other investigative organ of Government.

2. 	The committee was concerned that the DPP does not have an enabling law to enable the office effectively undertake its mandate.

Recommendations

    1. The Office of the DPP should work closely with the police and other investigative organs of Government to improve on evidence collection and hasten justice.

    2. The Human Rights Enforcement Act, 2019 should be amended to provide remedies as those provided under sections 6, 14(1) and (2) and 15 of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012.

    3. Government should expeditiously initiate specific legislation for the Office of the Directorate of Public Prosecutions.

The Uganda Human Rights Commission (UHRC)

The Uganda Human Rights Commission led by Mr Medi Kagwa - now the late; May his soul rest in peace – said that for years torture had been a leading issue in human rights reports. 

He emphasised that while the Commission is not against arresting, it is concerned about the manner of arrest and what happens during and after arrest. He made reference to Article 23(3) and (5) of the Constitution, noting that a suspect should be given the reason for arrest and the next of kin should be, as soon as practicable, informed of the arrest and allowed reasonable access to that person because these are constitutional rights and should be observed.

Safe houses had died down but are now resurrecting and in the 9th report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces acknowledged the existence of safe houses but denied that they were used as torture chambers. 

The Uganda Human Rights Commission visits police and prisons at their own will. However, with security installations, the Commission used to provide a notice of three months to go there but now drops in and informs them while on their way, especially the quarter guard where suspects are kept.

They gave some information about Nalufenya and their role as Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Committee Observations

    1. The committee appreciates the work of the Uganda Human Rights Commission but recognises that its budget is constrained and needs to be boosted for effective delivery of their mandate. There is need to increase the number of the Commission’s regional and field offices in order to have a wider coverage.

    2. Although Uganda Human Rights Commission stated that it had noticed an improvement in compliance with the law by police, especially with regard to producing suspects within 48 hours, the committee notes that there are several cases of non-adherence to the law.

    3. Even if the Prohibition of Torture Act was adopted on 27 July 2012, it is not being implemented.

    4.  We also noted that the powers and functions of the Uganda Human Rights Commission are enlisted in Article 52 and Article 53 of the Constitution. The independence of the Commission is also clearly spelt out in Article 54 of the Constitution. However, the Commission had not used the powers vested in it and its mandate to ascertain the number of safe houses and their condition, as well as to establish information on the numbers of men and women incarcerated in safe houses in the country.

    5. Some cases of people having been held in illegal detention had not been heard to date, despite several petitions made to the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

    6.  The committee further noted that the Uganda Human Rights Commission was supposed to be accountable and had the power to order the release of people incarcerated. It appears that the UHRC has not fully exercised their powers given that it had not held any perpetrator of torture accountable.

    7. We noted that the work of the Commission is critical because any lag in their mandate could lead to loss of lives of the citizenry.

    8. We noted that Ugandans are not adequately sensitised about the role of the UHRC and the procedure that can be followed to ease their plight in cases of torture.

    9. The committee also noted that while the Commission had on several occasions recommended compensation, the implementation was minimal and the process lengthy.

Recommendations

    1. The budget for the UHRC should be increased to enable it to effectively carry out its mandate.

    2. Government should establish a victims’ compensation fund to expedite compensation of tribunal awards made in favour of victims of torture and other human rights violations.

    3. Government should expedite the ratification of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture to enable the establishment of a national prevention mechanism that allows unfettered access to all places of detention.

    4. The Uganda Human Rights Commission should be emphatic and increase its visibility in the exercise of its powers as mandated by the Constitution.

    5. The Uganda Human Rights Commission should take up all the cases by the witnesses and investigate them further.

The Internal Security Organisation (ISO)

Gen. Elly Tumwine, the minister in charge of security, informed the committee that on realisation that a person has been brought into a safe house illegally, disciplinary action is taken against the responsible officers in the organisation. Further, for purposes of ensuring compliance by the officers of the security organisations, anybody who violates the rules of operation and standard operating procedure faces disciplinary action.

The minister stated that a one Capt. (Rtd) Elijah Mwesige faces dismissal while Maj. Amos Alitegyeka, Sgt. Apuun Joseph, Cpl Opoka Charles, Pte Okwanga Celestino and CPC Okwi are pending action of the ISO disciplinary committee. 

Observations

1. 	The committee notes that allegations have been made about people whose whereabouts were unknown and and the relatives of the victims alleged that these missing persons were in the custody of Government. The committee could neither confirm nor dismiss these allegations.

2. 	The committee notes that holding a person incommunicado causes distress to the family, is a grave violation of human rights and contravenes Article 23(5)(a) of the Constitution of Uganda.

3. 	The practice of using plain clothed armed men to arrest people without following established procedure creates a gap for bad elements to take advantage and cause mayhem in society.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the aggrieved families apply for a writ of habeas corpus.

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we made a general observation and general recommendations. 

General Observation

The committee observes that much as safe houses are operated by ISO, there are reports of illegal detention centres under other agencies and some gazetted detention centres where suspects are brutalised and tortured. 

General Recommendations

    1. The committee calls upon all security agencies to observe human rights in the course of their work, as provided by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.
    2. All security agencies should undertake continuous training and sensitisation about the laws governing human rights of the country.
    3. Government should expedite the operationalisation of Chapter 4 of the Constitution on fundamental human rights and freedoms.
    4. The Commission should supply to Parliament a regular list of missing persons and all the people who had been duly compensated.

Conclusion

The committee notes with satisfaction that as a result of directive by Parliament to investigate the existence of safe houses, some detainees were reportedly released after the commencement of the investigation. Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for that and also thank the mover.  

Madam Speaker, we observed that the witnesses whom we were talking about later even came to the committee and we looked at them physically. Given the admission of the Minister for Security and the committee findings, as already discussed above, the committee concludes that safe houses exist in the country.

Human rights observance remains a critical concern to Parliament because Uganda is a signatory to international protocols of human rights and good governance. It is, therefore, necessary for the Uganda Human Rights Commission to follow up all the findings that have been established, especially visits to the alleged safe houses in Uganda, and furnish Parliament with a report within a period of three months.

All agencies involved or mentioned in alleged torture should be subjected to further investigation and feedback be made to Parliament.

The merits and validity of the claims made by alleged torture victims should be further investigated with an aim of compensation, and the perpetrators should be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Act, 2012.

Finally, Madam Speaker, a specific Act of Parliament for the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions should be enacted with immediate effect to improve its effectiveness.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to inform this august House, as you all know and the Rt Hon. Speaker is already aware, that the Chairman of the Uganda Human Rights Commission died and the work of the Commission has stalled. The tribunals are not sitting. So, as we deliberate on this, let us call upon the appointing authority to appoint the Chairperson of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and members of the committee. The report has been signed by the necessary one third. Members, do you have any comments on the report? I am not talking about members of the committee but listeners. 

5.01
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and members for this wonderful report. However, I just have specific comments to make regarding this particular matter. 

On a sad note, as a country, we cannot talk of the existence of safe houses and just sit and think it is a daily menu. The chairperson looked at a number of issues while they were in the field, and this Government must get interested in putting off whatever is called a safe house. I hope the minister looks into this matter very seriously.  

The existence of illegal detention centres in this country, first and foremost, is unconstitutional and degrades the quality of leadership of this country. There is no way we can claim to be in Government, sit down and listen to reports that we have illegal detention centres. Moreover, we have these people who are being tortured. It is actually unheard of. 

Madam Chairperson, you have reported that we need to have a compensation fund. Whereas it is good to have a compensation fund, it gives us a vote of no confidence that the country can plan to have funds to compensate those tortured and battered persons. I would like to propose that the Government looks into the matter of proclaiming that no form of torture should be entertained in this Government. The compensation fund will be there but it discredits the quality of Government. 

There is the operationalisation of Chapter 4 of the Constitution, just like the chairperson has reported; whereas we are talking about human rights being so critical, they are not a favour. The observance of human rights is not a favour or privilege. There is no way the Government can say that they are helping you to observe human rights. We cannot have something like this. 

Critically, this Government has a very big challenge of operationalisation of these laws. In Uganda, we have the best laws but putting them into action, seeing them being put into place, is a very big problem. We are passing a number of laws. Some of them have not even been tested and are even on the shelves. It is a learning point for Government to say that they must put into action every good law passed. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the inadequacy of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. In the report, we are looking at the Commission not doing its work and the chairperson is talking of funding and also the regional centres not being given enough human resources. The people suffering are the local people because the commissions are just there. Is it because the Government would want them to be like that? Is it intentional? That is a big issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is in regard to some of the recommendations in the report. Somewhere, the report makes very serious allegations about the Minister for Security who is a member of this House. It is alleged that the minister blocked and failed the committee from carrying out its work by denying them access to certain facilities and key witnesses. By extension, this action must have greatly undermined the quality of this report.

Madam Speaker, I believe if the committee was not blocked by the Minister for Security, probably their report would have been different from what it is. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to listen to the Minister for Security so that we allow him to exercise his right of natural justice? If an allegation is made against him, shouldn’t we hear from him, because it will also impact on what our debate and recommendations will be? We should debate knowing the actions of the Minister for Security and that of other ministers. Are we proceeding rightly?

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that we stop work because the minister has not come?

5.08
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have only two issues to raise. The first is the issue of the plain clothed armed men arresting our people. In my opinion, this is very dangerous because the day we get wrong people dressed in the same way and they start arresting our people, we might get into problems.

I think the people mandated to arrest offenders should be well known. For example, if they are arresting your relative, you should know who is arresting him and where that person is being taken. Africa is known for groups that fight Government. What if tomorrow there is a group that is trying to fight Government and they also come in plain clothes and start arresting people; how shall we protect our people?

Therefore, I think that the people mandated to arrest offenders should be known and be in uniform. We have seen occasions where men in ordinary taxis have arrested people. People who are not known roughly handle our people. Madam Speaker, this should stop.

Secondly, I am also worried about the existence of safe houses. This is a nation trying to attract investors. You cannot have investors when you have a country with safe houses, a country that is accused of torturing offenders. I think we need to look into this matter and if possible, make sure that it gets out of our books because it is a shame for the country to have such places. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, People with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report.

The issue of human rights is a critical issue and human rights are inherent. It is unfortunate when the committee says the Minister of Security interrupted their work. Where will people get justice? Where one individual does not accept to come to the committee, how will we get justice?

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree that arresting people could be done but how do you do it? When you read the report, one of the victims has already lost his manhood - his testicles have been destroyed. Even if you brought compensation, how are we going to bring this person back to a normal state? Why do we torture them to that level? I think in countries like the USA, you are arrested and given your freedom to do other things, like talking to your family, as you wait for justice because you are innocent until proven guilty by courts of law.

In the report, it is interesting to read that the minister even agreed that he knows some of them. This means there was evidence that the minister knew some of these people as people who were already in safe houses. What is so special about a safe house? If I have been arrested and the committee comes and they want to interact with me, I do not think that the committee would stop the work of ISO or the security minister.

Madam Speaker, if you are a committee chair and a minister refuses to come to that committee or he comes and is a bit arrogant and tells you the other sectors cannot appear, how do we expect the committee of Parliament to work?

I think it is critical that we work in partnership because this abuse and torturing of people is not good. Today, it is these people but tomorrow it might be somebody else. I think, as Ugandans, we signed the convention and we should stand by what we have signed. We cannot have it as double standards. I would like to think that we need a law that operationalises Chapter Four of the Constitution on human rights, so that we know how people are handled. Maybe that is something that is lacking. At the police, you are held beyond 48 hours. Some people even stay for two weeks while nobody is moving their case, depending on who they know. There is a lot of corruption.

Madam Speaker, as a politician, somebody can be annoyed with you and you are –(Member timed out.)
 
5.14
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, and I think every one of you knows this, governments have safe houses. This is a fact. We may try to put our heads in the sand but the fact is that any country or government -(Interjection)- Okay, can I mention the United States of America, United Kingdom –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the National Assembly of the Republic of Uganda and it is composed of very informed people, including myself. I have heard very good information about the USA and there are no safe houses in the USA. The only thing that is similar to a safe house could only be in Cuba, Guantanamo Bay because it has to safeguard the nationals of United States of America (USA). 

Even that Guantanamo Bay is not for the Americans. It is for the suspects from elsewhere. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to mislead a whole National Assembly of the Republic of Uganda comprising of very informed people, including myself? (Laughter) Is he in order?

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I have read and I have also travelled to the USA and they have safe houses but the purposes and the way they are used – that is what I wanted to establish and that is what I wanted to bring forward. (Interjections) Which problems?

Whereas those houses exist, the way they are used is the problem. We have heard that these safe houses should be used – they can be used to keep terrorists away from the would-be angered victims who would go even to the extent of lynching them. Is that what we are using them for here? Is that how we are using them here?

If it is a safe house, true it may not be known, but honestly, for anybody to deny a member of a National Assembly access – they could have probably said that you are going to access but kindly keep this to yourself as a Member of Parliament. After all, before you assume your seat, you swear to ensure that Government’s secrets are kept. We did not have that. That was very unfortunate and very unfair to the committee of Parliament.

Unfortunately, in that same regard, the alleged torture victims could not be confirmed as having been tortured simply because of the incapacity by the Uganda Human Rights Commission to give adequate treatment to these people. At the end of the day, we have a very incomplete report. 

First of all, we were not given enough facilities –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like us to note that every day is a learning day. Therefore, those victims, whenever they are tortured, they also learn how to torture. When they get a chance to go out of that prison, they will also torture other people. I would think that those people should be treated as by the law so that when they go out, they also follow the law.

Secondly, we have to know the disadvantages of torture. One of them is genocide; the second one is terrorism. The people who suffer torture are the ones who go out at a certain point and they become terrorists because they accumulate a lot of anger to the extent that they will never respect human life. The same applies to genocide. Any person who participates in genocide does not respect human life. That is a very dangerous situation that we are creating in this nation. 

I also noted with sadness the failure, which I may call refusal of the Director of ISO to come to the committee to present his position. That is contempt of Parliament. 

Treating Parliament with contempt is not for the first time and it is going to keep happening if we do not talk about it and look for a way to handle it. We need to know that those are the people who are supposed to be giving us clear information. If they do not come to the committee, we cannot get clear information. That means they will keep us guessing, which is very bad for this Parliament. 

Lastly, the report from the chair talked about a recommendation that requires the DPP to work with security organs closely. I would want to propose that we change that recommendation such that it reads that the security organs should be the ones to work closely with the DPP because they are the ones that bring the cases. If the DPP decides to work closely with the security organs, they might not manage because they will not be the ones with the cases and they will not handle the situation. 

5.22
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and the issues that they have highlighted. It disturbs me. 

I am a member of NRM and one of the fundamental changes that my party promised this country was the observance of human rights and rule of law. When such a report highlights failures and deliberate actions by agencies to deny Ugandans their human rights and refuse to observe the rule of law, it disturbs me. I get tortured. 

We have got known and gazetted detention centres. For civilians, we are supposed to be kept in police. It is known that police are supposed to keep civilians for not more than 48 hours and then take them to prison.

The soldiers and armed officers are supposed to be kept in military detention facilities. We have them and they are known. Where do these safe houses come from? What are they for? Who are those supposed to be kept in safe houses who neither deserve to be in military detention facilities nor the civilian ones? Where do we get this thing of safe houses?

My colleague talked about Americans. Americans take people to safe houses in order to humiliate them and violate their rights. It is not because they want to keep them lawfully. That is why they are taken away from the American soil. It is a deliberate decision; go, torture them, humiliate them, violate their rights so that they never risk ever again opposing the Americans. That is why the safe houses are there in Guantanamo Bay.

It is very disturbing that in this era, Government should be violating the rights of Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I also re-echo the comments made by my honourable colleagues that, indeed, Uganda should not be a country that should tolerate safe houses and abuse of human rights. I recall when the new Inspector General of Police, Mr Ochola came in office, he vowed to stop this vice and indeed, Ugandans were happy that Nalufenya was closed. However, it is again disheartening to learn that these safe houses exist and torture goes in there.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to find out about the capacity of the Government to scientifically investigate and prosecute the right criminals. That is where there is a problem. Does Government have the capacity to prosecute the right criminals? For example, do we have a forensic laboratory to scientifically detect who has committed the crime or we just use the kangaroo method of arresting anyone we suspect?
As we deliberate on this matter, the Government needs to put in place a mechanism to properly detect, investigate and prosecute the right people; we are looking at both human resource and the scientific capacity to deal with investigations.

Madam Speaker, the other issue – 

MR WOBOYA: Madam Speaker, the other issue is about the victims of torture. Sometimes, we hear about a lot of victims who have rightfully gone through the legal process and are due for compensations but the compensations never come. I come from a constituency where very many of them come to us asking how they can get their compensations and court awards.

It is unfortunate that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has stepped out but this is something he should look into. Many Ugandans who have fallen victims to this vice need to be compensated. (Member timed out.)

5.28
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for a very good report and for being courageous enough during the time they were stopped the committee from accessing torture centres. 

When can Parliament declare or say there has been contempt of Parliament? I saw the way my colleagues were denied the right to do their work and they stood there at the mercy of the LDU personnel who were protecting the place. I felt sorry for them. Wasn’t it contempt of Parliament when they denied members of Parliament the right to do their work?

I saw how the Minister in charge of Security was very arrogant. He is a very arrogant minister but in the report, I have not even heard a recommendation that he should be censured. I do not know whether he has bribed the committee or they missed a point somewhere. He has continued to be very arrogant and the committee is running away from facts. I propose that we put an amendment that the Minister in charge of Security should be censured because he has failed to give respect to this Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I do not know whether hon. Mbwatekamwa has really internalised our report. He has said that maybe, we should have gone ahead to recommend for the censure of the minister. However, when you look at our report, we have said that the Minister of Security must be held accountable. It is upon this House to take action.

Is it procedurally right for hon. Mbwatekamwa to paint a picture that we did not come up with a good recommendation regarding the Minister of Security?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reports are brought here for us to debate and enrich. You can make your proposal without passing judgment on the committee. You can propose an amendment.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I now propose that we amend and include the recommendation that the Minister in charge of Security should be censured by this Parliament because of contempt of Parliament.

I am going to disagree with one of the committee’s recommendations about compensation. If we say that Government should always plan for compensation, it would be as if we are legalising that they should torture and compensate. I saw a certain gentleman who testified that he lost his “central government” and he cannot meet his conjugal obligations. How are you going to compensate him in terms of money to make sure that he meets his conjugal obligations? What kind of feelings is he going to get from that money –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We are in Parliament and Members must communicate in plain language so that we understand and that the communication can be correctly recorded in the Hansard. We know of only one Central Government, which is headed by Gen. Museveni, the President of Uganda. (Laughter) We also know the local governments, which are headed by the various local government officials.

Can the Member tell us in plain English and using parliamentary language what “central government” means so that we understand? (Laughter) I must confess that I do not understand. What is “central government”? (Laughter)

Is the Member in order to use a language that cannot be easily understood by the Members?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you explain the “central government”? (Laughter)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The man’s manhood was shattered and he cannot perform his conjugal obligations. That is the “central government”, which is found on a human body. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I saw –(Interruption)

MR SSEWANYANA: Madam Speaker, the information I am giving him is about the relationship between the Central Government and manhood. You know, for a man, it is the manhood that governs the family. That is why he called it the “central government”. 

5.36
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson and the members for establishing this fundamental fact of torture and the existence of safe houses and the tortures they went through emanating from the most powerful minister here, who is a General, when they were doing their work. He made it very difficult for them to establish whether safe houses exist or not. 

Article 44 of the Constitution establishes the right from torture as a non-derogable right. When we see places established to do away with this fundamental human right in Uganda, as a house of the representatives of the people, we must remove our gloves when we are dealing with these persons. May be, we need to teach him bits of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

I know they are interested in remaining in power by hook or crook. That is why they have to use unconventional means to torture Ugandans. We find it unacceptable because it goes below the human required standards, the required constitutional provisions and international standards. 

We cannot tolerate this conduct anywhere it is being practised in this country. I will use this opportunity, when we are debating this report, to invite members of Parliament to call upon Government to close these safe houses because we have been told that they are in Kyengera and other places. We cannot continue to gloss over it by saying there are also safe houses in America. So what? This is Uganda. 

We have established that untold suffering is happening in these safe houses. Why should we allow them to continue existing in this country –(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I tried to follow up my observation. I also indicated that I was not in favour of misusing the safe houses. I was very clear in my submission. Is it, therefore, in order for my good friend, hon. Tinkasiimire, to insinuate that I indicated in my submission that I support torture of victims? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe hon. Byarugaba said that he is aware that many countries have safe houses. His objection is in how they are used. That is what he said.  

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I will continue with my submission and state that those who have suffered torture and the cases of tortures have been reported either to the Uganda Human Rights Commission or your office or Parliament and the facts have been established about the tortures. As such, they should be duly compensated in a timely manner. 

I invite honourable members to look at the provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 52(2), which provides that the Uganda Human Rights Commission shall publish periodic reports about human rights in this country. Members should get interested in reading the list of Ugandans who have gone through torture. We should find time to debate these reports such that it is not only our committees going down to investigate tortures. Many times, these torture cases appear in the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.  

I add my voice to that of hon. Mbwatekamwa that this minister, who is a General - I do not know why he was made a minister in this country but he is not fit to be a minister supervised by Parliament. I ask members of Parliament, without fear or favour, to censure this man and show him that this Parliament is only ready to operate on the rules of engagement, which is Constitutionalism. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I just would like to clarify that this House has debated a number of the reports of Uganda Human Rights Commission.

5.42
MR ABBAS AGABA (Independent, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. While the chairperson was reporting, she made mention that while interacting with the minister, he comforted them by saying whoever brings people to safe houses illegally has disciplinary action taken against him without mentioning those who have been disciplined.

This statement means that safe houses are legal and there is a legal procedure through which one ends up in them. How I wish the committee had probed him further so that we understand the legal status of the safe houses as they are presumed to exist and who takes responsibility of the actions of those managing them.

Madam Speaker, it was not very long ago when we brought to light the torture of one of the Ugandans; the Mayor of Kamwenge at that time. I would like to thank the House because when we raised his plight, this issue was given attention and he was released from where he was being held. Because of the continued debate against torture in this country, Nalufenya was closed. 

I am sure those of you who have used that route to Jinja, Nalufenya is no longer where it was. Wherever it went, I do not know but that place was closed. 

This engagement with the minister appears to have been so casual and that is why we are talking about an appendage of police or the courts that safe houses exist and we do not have powers to take action against whoever establishes them.

Secondly, the President of Uganda, around the same time we discussed the torture of the Mayor of Kamwenge, came out categorically and wrote a very detailed statement about torture of Ugandans, evidence procured through torture and all that was surrounding torture. And he categorically came through to be against torture. Therefore, I would wonder which Ugandan would even cover up for exposure of places where torture takes place.

To say the least, about 10 years ago, I saw a Member of Parliament lamenting on television that committees of Parliament had turned into torture – The minister was lamenting that committees of Parliament had turned into torture chambers. This was because of the rigour of the engagement the committees were having with them.

Committees of Parliament while doing their work, have the powers of the High Court. I am just wondering why the Committee on Human Rights could not take action on the errant minister for practical contempt of Parliament in failure to allow them access to the safe houses. If Parliament has powers like it has, we should better take more action such that the parliamentary committees and Parliament are not abused all the time and taken for granted. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.46
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in appreciating the committee for establishing the fact that these torture chambers exist. Of course, that was one of the major roles that they went to find out, whether they do exist. The chairperson concluded by saying that these torture chambers exist.

I fault the committee on one occasion that they keep calling them safe houses. These are not safe houses; these are torture chambers because the people they interacted with showed them how much they were tortured. We cannot keep calling them safe houses when in actual sense they are torture chambers.

If this Government is hell-bent on torturing Ugandans, we request them to come to Parliament with a law that allows them to do that. Otherwise, if they keep doing things outside the law, it is very unfortunate.

I am desirous of change in this country. We have young men in this country who are people power movement, who are being tortured every other day for expressing the desire for change in this country. It is very unfortunate that some are murdered and we lose some because we do not know where they even go.

These are cases and whenever we leave and all Ugandans are looking at this House, no other place, you cannot run to police or anywhere. The only place Ugandans are looking at is what Parliament is saying about what is going on.

Now that the committee of Parliament that we sent out to do work has come up to say that they could not get out the actual results because they have been denied access by the people who are torturing Ugandans, that is the Minister of Security and Col Kaka Bagyenda who is also mentioned and heads ISO. This Parliament as we leave, must give hope to Ugandans that there is something we can do about impunity. Impunity cannot go on while Parliament is looking on.

Madam Speaker, as this House debates this report, we must take action about people who continue to torture Ugandans. The Human Rights Commission is seemingly helpless. If it needs amending the laws, we must amend -(Member timed out.)
 
5.49
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for the report. I need to seek clarification especially from the Attorney-General who is here. In the report, the chairperson of the committee states very clearly that when they asked the Minister of Security about the legality of safe houses, the minister stated very clearly that there is no law at all. There is no specific law that governs the operation of safe houses. He also goes ahead to say neither is there any law that exists and stops them from doing what they are doing. 

To me, this is the central point where we must start. Why must there be houses called safe when they are actually torture houses? Why must they exist if there is no law that allows their existence? Ugandans are being tortured and even as I speak, another one is being tortured.

In the Eighth Parliament, I had three of my constituents when I was a Member of Parliament representing Pader. I vividly remember a one Otim who was tortured. He was kidnapped, detained and tortured for six months, every day and night. After they came out, moreover, after the six months, you are released without any body telling you why you ended up there and tortured.

Ugandans are being half way electrocuted. They electrocute you to destroy your manhood and womanhood. What kind of thing is? This torture must stop and the perpetrators must be put to book. unless this Parliament takes action, which is visible, we have to deliver to Ugandans who brought us to this House.

The only hope as other Members have cited is this Parliament. Therefore, we must come out very clearly on the perpetrators because the report has stated very clearly and it is upon us to take appropriate action. Whoever does not want to follow what Parliament says must not be tolerated anymore.

Therefore, I would like -(Member timed out.)

5.52
MS BABIRYE KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. As the name suggests, “safe houses”, are supposed to be safe for the people they are supposed to hide from the community. People like victims of war, sexual violence, victims of dangers like people who are threatened with death. They are supposed to be protected from those houses.

However, since Ugandans and the security officers do not know the importance of safe houses, they should be abolished. A safe house is supposed to be safe but they have now been turned into torture houses.

For the security officers, by principle, these houses are supposed to be kept secret from all. However, there is room for a few people to go and inspect them. Therefore, the security officers and the minister to deny the opportunity to members of the committee to visit these safe houses, see them and find out what is exactly taking place there was totally wrong.

I, therefore, suggest that if Ugandans do not know the importance of safe houses, they should be totally abolished. I beg to submit.

5.54
Ms joy atim (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for this report. We are aware and even the minister himself accepted that there are safe houses in this country. What do we mean by safe houses?

I read that safe houses are places where people who are hiding from police go to have protection or where the police themselves protect people who are in danger. However, our safe houses have turned into torture chambers. This is not acceptable.

The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda abhors issues of holding detainees in areas and places that are not gazetted. Where people are kept in safe houses, they have testimonies of how they have been beaten too much. Water is poured into their noses and throats to the extent that they cannot breathe. Bricks are tied on their testicles, guns are cocked into their mouths and they are told they are going to die. 

It is a place where dead bodies are thrown into the rooms where they are sleeping and they are asked to clean blood. This is not acceptable.

In their report, the 2018 Uganda Human Rights Commission headed by the then chairperson, the late Meddie Kaggwa, they said that the rehabilitation of torture – rehabilitating of people that are victims of torture is very difficult. First, they are not allowed to access treatment. 

Secondly, they reported that these victims are not compensated. In most cases, they are arrested when they have not done anything wrong and they are tortured. When it comes to cases of compensation, the report says that they do not prioritise payment of victims of torture.

I plead with this House that we have realised that the committee was denied access to these chambers and that there are torture chambers that exist in this country. It is upon Parliament of Uganda to tell Government and the would-be torture people that they are instructed not to allow Ugandans suffer in their hands.  Thank you.

5.59
Mr allan ssewanyana (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to commend the recommendations of the report of the Committee on Human Rights but with my reservations, which I think Parliament should consider.

For a number of times, there have been issues on this Floor about the behaviour of the Minister of Security and even some officials in the security agencies in this country. One of the issues was about the safe houses or torture chambers. Sometimes, this has happened to politicians and people have taken it to be political.

Many people from our areas have complained about the same and the ministers come up to deny that there are torture chambers or safe houses in this country.

Now that he has confirmed that they are there, the minister owes us an apology as Parliament of Uganda because he has been on Hansard several times denying that. 

The manner in which he treated the committee was not right. At a time when Uganda is trying to show a picture of good governance thereby establishing various institutions, which could manage such governance and there comes issues of torture; this torture is being embraced by the Government.

When the minister comes up with all the impunity before a committee of Parliament and ascertains that, “Yes, we have been torturing people,” what is that?

As a country and as Parliament, we must be very positive in support of the report of the committee and also the censure recommendation, which has been brought forward by our honourable member, Mbwatekamwa against the Minister of Security, hon. Tumwiine. 

When he continues to treat Parliament like that, it will create more disrespect to this Parliament from other ministers. It should be Parliament to put some sense into –(Member timed out.)

6.01
Mr Muhammad kivumbi (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the lowest moment of this Parliament that in this era and age, we are debating torture and that there are people who are trying to define what a safe house is and give it some bit of credibility.

The whole struggle of National Resistance Army (NRA) bush struggle where half a million Ugandans died was to draw a line in the sand that never again in this country shall Ugandans be tortured and their rights denied but that we shall be governed in accordance with the law established.

The custodianship of this Constitution rests with the House of Representatives. The people, who must ensure that the Constitution is obeyed, upheld and protected, are members of Parliament.

It is our enviable duty right now to act firmly and strongly and bring to book every person who is torturing Ugandans no matter who that person is. 

Therefore, tomorrow, all of us must queue and sign a censure motion against the Minister of Internal Affairs. (Applause) It should be non-partisan. It should not be taken as the Opposition versus NRM. It is about why we are here and why we are members of Parliament. 

Even the Director of ISO cannot escape. We cannot censure him but we must make a strong recommendation to the Head of State, who is on oath to protect and ensure the observance of human rights and people’s property in this country.

We must recommend to the appointing authority that the Director General of ISO must also go. 

There must also be a motion to compensate - people say, there is no amount. I would like to differ with some Members. Let us put the bar so high that if you torture Ugandans, you pay so much money. That is when the State will cease to act with impunity. Right now, the State can torture you and when you go the court of law, all they can do is to say you are acquitted.

They put a criminal charge against you and once you go to the courts of law, all they will say is that you were –(Member timed out.) 

6.05
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for their courage. When we tasked them to do this work, there were a lot of statements that could have intimidated them but I would like to thank them for standing firm.  

In light of Article 221, if you look at our Bill of Rights, this Article was put separately on the understanding that there could be excesses by our security organs. This Article calls upon all security organs to observe human rights of Ugandans. 

For that matter, we cannot even call these houses safe. They are unsafe because first of all, they are not gazetted. There are a lot of tortures and even psychological humiliation that takes place in such areas. 

The reasons that were advanced by the minister for the existence of these houses include witness protection. The minister should instead come with a proper witness protection programme for the country, where if you have witnesses you need to protect, you take them to such areas. Witnesses are never tortured; so, how do you take somebody to be your witness and then torture them? 

Madam Speaker, in some countries, there are maximum security cells or detention centres that are known. Everybody in the world knows that so and so is a very dangerous criminal and is being held in this maximum security area, which is properly protected. 

Therefore, I find it false on the side of the minister to have come to the committee and said that they do not have where to coordinate intelligence information from. We provide money for the CMI, ISO and ESO. They all have headquarters around here. That is where they should be coordinating their intelligence work but not in areas where they torture people. 

When I hear of plain clothed people making arrests, it brings bad memories to me in this House. Plain clothed people are the ones who walked from the President’s office, came into this Chamber and tortured members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, you wrote and to-date, nobody has answered you on who those plain clothed personnel that came here were. If they can do it to members of Parliament in the glare of cameras, then which Ugandan is safe? They did it. They took us one by one, tortured us and at that time, some colleagues were enjoying but it is coming back to haunt us. 

I think if you allow this kind of solution to political differences, land wrangles and businesses that have gone sour - because 90 per cent of the people that are arrested have nothing to do with criminal law –(Member timed out.) 

6.08
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There are two aspects that we must address very logically and one is torture. Even if the torture happened in a prison cell, it must be stopped. Another is detention in un-gazetted places. Even if one is there and is not tortured, it would be wrong and it has to be stopped. 
	
The committee report has been very clear. We may fail to trace all other agents of torture but there is one vivid suspect and agent of torture that has been brought to book. That is none other than Gen. Tumwiine. He has long been stubborn to Parliament and the committee is actually recommending compensation to Ugandans but we all know that, that may be hard. 

The only way Parliament can compensate the victims of torture is to seriously address this suspect called Gen. Elly Tumwiine. That he could block Parliament from interacting with the Director General of ISO and he is still posing as a minister - We actually have to prevail over that. Parliament must approve when he is being proposed by the appointing authority and we must allocate funds to have his ministry running but he denies Parliament a chance, out of its own obligation of oversight, to interact with the Director General of ISO, a civil servant. Madam Speaker, it is now or never that Parliament can be taken seriously. 

We have voters who have been made to lose their manhood – somebody submitted before – we have voters who have been maimed, we have those voters who have lost their relatives but the prime suspect is here and very clearly pointed out in the report. What is he keeping secret in denying Parliament access to the so- called safe houses? 

To me, that is a very serious offence and it must be this week that the process begins to have Gen. Tumwiine censured. That would be a –(Member timed out.) 

6.11
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and honourable members for presenting a good report. 

It is wrong for us to say that these are safe houses; they are actually torture chambers. You cannot convince me when everybody is complaining about what is happening there. 

Why was the committee denied access to these safe houses? Madam Speaker, I would like to request you, as a Member of Parliament representing the people of Rukungiri that you lead a team of members of Parliament to see what is happening in those torture chambers.

I lost my brother, Denis Mulindwa, who was tortured in 2004. Since that time, we have never seen him. Some of us are here quiet but there are many things happening and people do not know. In 2004, my elder brother was arrested, tortured and we cannot locate him. 

It is a habit of security to deny members of Parliament access to these areas. Recently, they denied members of Parliament access to Lubowa. All these things are happening and Parliament is quiet about it. 

We are talking about safe houses but I would like to tell members that there are small mini buses, which these security men are using. Those torture mini buses are deadly. 

Madam Speaker, one time, you should invite Col Kiiza Besigye to narrate what is happening in those mini buses. The men there are muscular. You cannot even see them because they are like wild animals. I do not think they are human beings. We need to also talk about those mini buses that are transporting suspects. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
My last contribution is the habit of some ministers not attending House sittings; absenteeism of some ministers with key ministries. I have never seen the substantive Minister of Internal Affairs in this House. Why is it always hon. Kania Obiga here and the Cabinet minister –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, there are key ministers. Today, I was happy that I saw the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but he is never here. Then, the Minister of Foreign Affairs. We have raised many issues concerning the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I have never seen the cabinet minister and his deputy here; they only come once in a while. 

Then the Minister of Security, Madam Speaker, we must censure this minister. We are tired of these bushmen. Whenever we talk about - 32 years up to now, they are still talking about what happened in the bush. If they shed blood, let them come and we go to Nakesero get blood, we give them their blood and we settle. We are tired of these people. (Laughter) Thirty-two years, you are still talking about the shedding blood of these people. We can get blood and we give them, then we live in peace. (Applause)

It is now 6 p.m., we have families, we are here talking about the issues happening in this country; they are never here. Why? Madam Speaker, this is the time for Parliament to act. Otherwise, we are looking idle and yet, this is the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Let them come and answer. If we start with hon. Tumwiine, other ministers will come and see what Parliament means.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, they are laughing at us all the time. These ministers say that we know that Parliament will talk and talk and nothing will happen. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson for the wonderful report.

Allow me also to thank Uganda Human Rights Commission. They have exposed very many kinds of torture in this country. For example, in Northern Uganda, people were tortured, Uganda Human Rights Commission got those people, went to court, awarded costs, 10 years down the road, up to now, those people have never seen the compensation money.

I would like to recommend that all those ones who are tortured and awarded costs by court, let Government compensate them.

In Amuru District and Northern Uganda as a whole, many people were tortured but up to now, they have never seen that money. 

Madam Speaker, looking at the character of the honourable minister Tumwiine, I think you remember how he behaved in this august House. He looks at everyone in this Parliament like kids or people who are useless, people who are not worth being in this country and he feels he is the only one.

Let us take action. Let us walk the talk. At this time, I call upon honourable members, let us organise the censure sheets and we start signing tomorrow. Let those who are bold enough, come, sign the documents, and let us teach this minister a lesson that he will never forget.

Ministers, Ugandans and security personnel should stop undermining Parliament. If you follow on the social media how the committee and the Chairperson were humiliated at the gate of one of the safe houses, you will wonder whether we have the rule of law in this country.

They were barking at the chairperson, abusing her and the team and one of them was saying that for us, we are less concerned about Parliament, yet, the Chairperson introduced themselves clearly that we are from the Parliament and we are executing tasks of Parliament.

They said they do not know Parliament and it is none of their business. It means there are other arms of Government that think they are more superior in this country. (Member timed out.)

6.19
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. I think this is a debate that is showing Ugandans that as Parliament we care about Ugandans that have suffered long in the safe houses.

Madam Speaker, these are not safe houses, they are unsafe and they are torture chambers. The public out there, Ugandans thought these are gazetted areas where they are supposed to be taken and every one visits there publicly.

However, when the committee went there, it was very disheartening. The committee was told to book an appointment before they could visit these chambers. I do not think this is fair that our people have been tortured, they have lost their families, children and property.

Madam Speaker, last year, on one of the media houses, there was either a professor or a lawyer who was picked and taken to a torture chamber, questioned several times and he could not even access his lawyers. Fortunately, he was released. Madam Speaker, I think this should sound a warning bell to the security that Ugandans are living in fear because of these unsafe houses.

On the issue of compensation, I do not see this as a big concern to Ugandans that they should be tortured and then compensated.
 
Uganda is running a budget based on borrowing from other partners. I do not think this would be fair that we can even borrow more money to compensate Ugandans for the pain the security organs are causing them. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.21
MS ANNA ADEKE EBAJU (Independent, Female Youth Representative - National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you for constituting the committee with these terms of reference because there were not really simple terms of reference to draw.

Ungazetted detention centres are presenting a very big challenge to us. In fact, when you constituted the committee, I was worried. I thought to myself, ungazetted detention centres and Parliament going to visit them, aren’t we in the end going to lend credence to this very illegal thing? In addition, indeed, I am very happy with what the committee has come up with.

It is not only Ugandans who are in those detention centres. A couple of months back, I came and read a list of Rwandan nationals who are held in those detention centres and to date, nothing has been stated about those particular individuals.

Madam Speaker, if we do not quote the recommendation of that report very strongly, then we shall be lending credence to the illegal existence of detention centres.

We must clearly state that today, henceforth, they are closed. If the minister has expressly admitted that there is no law under which these detention centres exist, why must they continue to exist? We must close them even before we censure him. They should not exist at all because they are illegitimate. 

Madam Speaker, we are speaking about compensation but this is money that should be directed towards developing Uganda.  Why are innocent Ugandans paying for the evils of individuals? Why must they pay to compensate other people who have been tortured to benefit particular individuals because this is definitely not in the interest of the country? If it were, then the due process of the law would be followed.

These torture chambers do not only present a case of inhuman degrading treatment and torture, they also present us with a case of long detention without trial.

The cost of justice has been pervaded because of the existence of these ungazzeted centres. We must close them and establish them rule of law. If we end this debate, without clearly pronouncing ourselves on that, then we have lent credence to their existence because the people who run them are going to say that since Parliament debated about “our existence, they know that we are running detention centres that are ungazzeted and it is okay”. We must close them and we must close them today. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to report that when we sent the committee there and they tried to get in, after two days, they got a number of those people and put them in coasters, drove them to Kampala and gave them Shs 5,000 and told them to go home. Despite their failing to enter, it was effective. They released them with Shs 5,000 at night.

6.25
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. one of the most revered human rights activists, the former Prime Minister of Canada who ushered in the Canadian Charter of Rights on Freedom and who is also the father of the current Prime Minister of Canada, is famously quoted for having stated that what described a developed country is not necessarily the skyscrapers or the big buildings in the country. It is how it treats its lowest members of the society. It was that statement that gave foundation for the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom. 

Having said that, allow me digress a little bit from the subject of torture. A lot has been said about that. I believe that we should put our money where our mouth is. 

We talk about human rights and at the end of the day there is no compensation. We are the ones who appropriate and we are not doing appropriation. We need to do something in this area. In the north, there is the war-death compensation among other things. Many of these things have not been dealt with. It is becoming meaningless. The Book of Lamentation is fully written and I think we need to take some action in this area. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to also say that Article 28 of the Constitution talks about a speedy trial. In most of our courts nowadays, a trial can take forever. 

Benchmarks around the world – for example, I practiced in Canada, I can tell you that if a matter in a lower court stayed for about 6-8 months, you would be dismissed for justice denied, justice delayed. 

In our courts here, things take forever – 

THE SPEAKER: How are the courts involved in this matter?

MR MAKMOT: I think what we need to do is amend the laws like in the Canadian Charter of Rights under Section 11(b); you make a constitutional application which allows you to have a matter dismissed for delays like that. There are laws and provisions that can be put in place like that.

I have seen fingerprints being collected. I lived in Canada, you do not just get fingerprints collected like that. You need a warrant for that. In Uganda here, it is a practice everywhere and it is a violation of personal integrity and freedom of security of persons among other things. This is an area that is a matter of concern and in many cases some of these countries that do not do these things use our country to do what they cannot do in their country. 

Other than that, Article 32 –(Member timed out.) 

6.28
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a wonderful report. I have some few concerns: 

Number one is the non-implementation of the anti-torture law. The report is clear, that law has been ignored and torture is now accepted in those areas. That is why I am concerned because this kind of impunity should not be allowed in this country. 

I would like to ask a simple question, how safe are the safe houses that are operating in this country? They are saying that the former criminals have now become witnesses. I do not know how a criminal can change from being a criminal and becomes a witness – although it appears that it happens after enough torture has been administered. That is of great concern to all of us.

Non-observance of the 48 hour rule given in our Constitution, as per the report; these are serious matters. People are held there for a very long time and they are not produced before any court. They are just there being tortured day and night. That is of great concern to all of us. 

The other thing that I would like to say, there is a complaint from DPP that they do not have an enabling law. The ministers are here. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to direct these ministers who are here, because this has been there for a long time. When someone was raising this matter here, I thought it was a joking matter but now I have seen that the complaint from DPP should be taken seriously and be acted on as fast as now. This matter has always come out and nobody seems to be interested in addressing this matter. 

Madam Speaker, please direct these ministers strongly to bring a law here because this is an embarrassment to our country because these people are saying they have no enabling law. That is something that should not be accepted. 

6.31
MR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the conclusions and also for having passed through that very difficult task because we saw how you were treated and how you tried to best handle the circumstances. 

I have been following the debate and I have also tried to look at the conclusions and the report. But as a Parliament, I think we are standing under very difficult times because the conclusions from the debate and from the report are very clear. We are seeing authorities, the ministers who are defying Parliament, even refusing to appear and trying to obstruct other officers from coming to Parliament. We are also seeing conclusions of Parliament, for instance, the suggestion that the minister in charge of security should be held personally responsible and also the conclusion by honourable colleagues that there should be a censure motion. 

When you look at these things, a censure motion will take another process and a lot of dynamics. I think, Madam Speaker, this is the time when you might have to direct us on how best to bring back the power of Parliament. 

The way the minister behaved, refusing the committee from even accessing certain areas – if Parliament wanted to have taken its real mandate, we would have immediately sanctioned that minister at that time. We would not have even passed certain funding to this Ministry of Internal Affairs, which has a lot of illegal things taking place. I see a situation where we shall debate, come up with a conclusion and – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for giving way, my brother. The information I would like to give is that the budget for that ministry comes here as classified expenditure. When it comes as classified, all these members just keep quiet instead of asking what this thing called “classified” is. Unless we open up the issue of classified, this man will still get money.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you for that information. The point I am raising is, we must stand the test of time. We must, as Parliament –(Member timed out.)

6.34
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin from where my colleague has ended. I think that of recent, the Government has put Parliament to test. Every time we stand here to make a decision, somebody from nowhere also stands on the other side and says, “This cannot work.” For example, when we were here over the curriculum issue yesterday, the permanent secretary also stood on the other side and said, “We cannot withdraw.”

The committee chairperson presented a report, which is very clear. The powers that Parliament has are very clear. They denied a committee of Parliament entrance and said, “Go and write a letter to seek permission before we allow you in.” A committee of Parliament invited a Ugandan to come and appear as a witness and he said, “My powers are above, unless you have the Attorney-General to write to me.” A minister was asked and he under-looked every Member of Parliament. He said, “Who are you?” He answers the way he wants. He began singing songs to them.

Madam Speaker, where are we? Which Government are we serving under? They call us Parliament, an arm of Government. Which arm are we when somebody from the other side sees Parliament as nothing? This must come to an end. When Col. Dr Kizza Besigye is arrested, he is taken to Naggalama but they say he is in Luzira. Suspects in the Kaweesi murder case are arrested and taken to Luzira. Who are these people who are taken to these torture chambers? 

The minister came and said, “We keep them there so that we find our information at wish and will.” Under which Government are we? If we do not belong to this Government – (Interruption) 

MR AMORU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is in regard to what this Parliament resolved regarding the UPDF operations on the lakes. My constituency has a number of landing sites. However, even after Parliament directed for a halt of the UPDF operations on the lakes, these officers publicly stood and said that they receive directives from only one person - the President. Therefore, as he has put it, you sit and wonder what our mandate is in this country. Thank you very much.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, for the information. Madam Speaker, if there is only one person that can give instructions for anything to happen in this country and that it must only be the Head of State, they should let us know. We know that if somebody is arrested, it must have been done by the police and the person must be taken to the courts and prisons but somewhere somehow, somebody is arrested by people who are in plain clothes and taken to areas where –(Member timed out.)

6.39
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari South County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. However, my problem is with the observations and conclusions. When we talk of compensation, compensation becomes hard to define, especially in scientific terms. Do we compensate in monetary or non-monetary terms? For example, for a victim who has been tortured and has lost his manhood, what compensation can you give him? If he is a husband and you give him money, what compensation can you give his wife? We need to be very clear and scientific when defining this “compensation”. 

Furthermore, you know we are in a world of mafias. The moment you allow mafias to compensate, we shall have problems. I remember a case in my area where a gentleman was slapped and they took the matter to the LC 1 and the LC 1 court said, “Just give him Shs 10,000 and he goes away.” When the man went back, he said, “I have now known your price. Every time I get Shs 10,000, I will come and slap you and I give you the money.”

Therefore, we need to be very careful with this kind of compensation. I do not know whether we should go back to the jungle law where they used to say, “An eye for an eye”. We need to set the bar high for this kind of compensation otherwise, compensation may end up being abused or misused. Thank you.

6.41
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me time to comment on this. I would like to thank the committee for the information they have given us. I would like to remind the House that in Chapter Four of our Constitution, the limits of the Government are clearly defined. The role of the Government is to protect and promote the rights of individuals. Nowhere does it say that the Government can interfere with the rights of individuals at any point.

What we are witnessing and what we have been debating on a daily basis tends to confirm that actually, we are not operating under a constitutional regime. Maybe we are being ruled by decree. If we are really being governed under the constitutional culture, the Government should not be allowed to behave the way it has been behaving.

Madam Speaker, it is true that our African leaders have been humiliated by being taken to the ICC. For some of us who have hearts of Africans, we really feel aggrieved to see our African leaders being exposed in the ICC. However, the report of this committee has provided very strong evidence that this Government has a question to answer on the issue of atrocities and abuse of rights. I find that some of these people who pretend to be working for Government are actually doing Government a disservice by their individual behaviours. 

If the Minister of Security can stand before a parliamentary committee and say he is aware there is no law that allows him to operate safe houses but he is also aware that there is no law, which bars him from operating safe houses, this means all of us, whether you are a Member of Parliament, minister or the Speaker, are candidates to be tenants of that safe house. Anytime you can be arrested and kept where nobody, including Parliament, knows. More so, the Director General of Security was asked to come and face the committee and he declined to do that. The minister said that this director cannot face the committee without his authority –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee chairperson and the members for the report. 

As we debate the report, many Ugandans and non-Ugandans have been tortured through the illegal safe houses. As Members of Parliament, we have suffered a lot of humiliation. I remember the Committee on National Economy, while carrying out their duties were stopped from doing their work. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time we asserted our powers on the ministers who think they are above everybody and they can do whatever they want to humiliate us. For example, it is not the first time the Minister of Security is doing this. He has done a lot already. He has abused us and he has even gone ahead to insult individuals. 

Honourable members, if we do not act now, it is going to continue the same way it has always been done. I, therefore, support those who are saying we censure the minister so that others can learn from this action. The earlier we do it, the better. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you for presiding over this Parliament and for guiding us whenever we are doing our work. The minister’s disrespect should end today. I call upon members that we move a motion of censure.

6.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the chairperson and the committee members for having the courage to produce the report because many a times, some chairpersons and members of committees ducked. You know what happened with the Kasese report, which was even destroyed. So, I would like to thank the committee for that courage.

I also would like to thank the committee because you have been able – members were asking whether there are safe houses or if there is torture. I believe safe houses have been established even if they deny to have done it. 

However, what is disturbing is the conduct of the minister, Gen. Elly Tumwine. Madam Speaker, this is not the first time the minister has misbehaved. Do you remember when he asked who the Speaker is? Do you remember the case of hon. Cecilia Atim? Do you remember when he boxed hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament at the pigeon holes in the lobby? This minister has a history and this is enough ground for this House to censure him now since it has reached this level. 

Honourable colleagues, we should stop lamenting. We are not using the powers that we have. Hon. Lyomoki, do you remember in the Sixth Parliament when members censured some powerful ministers in the Ministry of Security? The minister even came on the Floor of Parliament to intimidate the members by saying he had a file on them but the members stood firm and brought them down to their knees. That is what we need. If we just talk and leave it there, they will continue doing the same thing. 

If they think this Parliament does not have power, why do they come here for approvals? Why do they lobby the Members of the Appointment Committee when they have been appointed ministers so that the committee members forget the past and approve their appointments? After they have been approved, you can see how they develop wings and start misbehaving.

Those who have not experienced the safe houses should ask Dr Baryomunsi here. He has been behind bars and he knows what it means. I wish Gen. Moses Ali was here. I am also a victim. In 1988 before I came to this House, I was in a safe house. In the Seventh Parliament, we were part of the people who were able to get people out of the safe houses who were kept on the Northern Bypass. 

What people go through in safe houses – Just imagine it is your wife who has been raped in that safe house. Imagine it is your husband or sister or brother. What would you think?  We should put a stop to this.

Madam Speaker, I do not know why I have heard other countries banning some people from traveling and yet they have not banned some people here from traveling. Hon. Lyomoki, I am reminding you of what these Generals have been doing. They keep telling us that they went to the bush because the Government of hon. Nsaba Buturo had abused human rights. However, they have come back to do the same thing –(Member timed out.)

6.51
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much has been said already. Personally, it hurts me so much to spend this time here discussing this issue and yet these are some of the issues, which took people to the bush. They remind us every day how they lost their eyes. They even walked to remind us of what they did and where they passed. In spite of all those, we are still telling Ugandans today that there is torture.

People have died. There are people who are moving but they have lost their senses and body parts in those safe houses. A “safe house” is where you are supposed to go to be taken care of. A “safe house” is where you hide from torture. They call those facilities “safe houses” when they take people there to be tortured and killed. 

As mothers and women, we are tired of torture. I am supporting the members to move the motion to censure the Minister of Security. The time is now. This saying, “I do not care. It will not come to me” is not true. Today, it is me and tomorrow, it will be you. It will come to you, your child, husband, wife, brothers and sisters and you will cry. We have cried enough. Thank you.

6.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motto of Uganda is “For God and My Country”. Jesus left for us two important commandments: “Love your God with all your heart and love your neighbour as you love yourself.” 

In the Ninth Parliament, we used to pray with hon. Tumwine and he was even the Chairperson of Anti-Corruption Forum in Parliament of Uganda here and he was much saved. However, this saved person is the person who allows torture chambers to exist.

Today, we should say no to safe houses. These safe houses must be closed. If we know that in 2012, we made a law here that outlawed torture and yet torture continues to exist just as we see - I remember sometime in the past, even crocodiles and snakes were used to torture people. If you know that that is a human being, you know that if somebody is a criminal you take the person through the law.

We know that when you go to Luzira, there is the lower and upper prison. If the person has committed an offense that he cannot stay with the rest of the people, I believe they have a place there. Why should we allow these safe houses to exist in Uganda? If they are existing now, and we saw how the committee members were denied entrance to those safe houses, that means they were trying to hide something from the committee. Therefore, it must be the decision today that Members of Parliament and Parliament of Uganda should close the safe houses.

Dear colleagues, when Members of Parliament go to do their work and you see that they are denied doing their work- it happened to us. We were up to about 11 Members of Parliament when we went to check on Apaa and we were told to go and seek permission from Adjumani. We were completely blocked by soldiers. Why do we accept that to happen? Those are symptoms of dictatorship. 

You see a country can move well when we allow democracy to thrive. Even if I am not good, allow me that I am a Member of Parliament and that the public resources have already been expensed for that oversight. Why do you block me? You are hiding something that is supposed to be brought out and handled.

Safe houses and hon. Tumwine who believes that he is a strong believer and saved person - the needful should be done to him. I also accepted it-

Madam Speaker, you saw here in Parliament when Members of Parliament were tortured, you tried to ask who those people were and they were never disclosed. To date, we continue to do our work without -(Member timed out.)
 
6.57
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for the job they have done. They have exhibited that they have powers as a committee and as Parliament and they have done their job.

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has got powers. To know that it has got powers, we have debated a lot of reports on human rights and the Government has listened and a lot of action has been taken. A lot of good has been done as a result of Parliament doing a good job.

As you have stated, even when they were denied entry, I saw the following day many people being released and that is the power of Parliament. Therefore, you cannot stand here and deny that Parliament has power. Parliament of Uganda has got power.

Madam Speaker, after saying that, the Government of NRM does not at all condone the torture of anybody; whether guilty or innocent. Even His Excellency the President has put it on paper and published it to every Ugandan that there are civilised methods of extracting information from any suspect. That one is on record. 

There is nobody neither a minister nor a Member of Parliament who is above the law and has got a right to torture anybody. Therefore, if anybody commits a crime, that one is brought to book and should be punished to that extent of the action. 

Torture can be anywhere and we have seen it; not necessarily in the safe houses. We have seen people being tortured in even police cells which are legally gazetted, we have seen people torturing each other in the Chambers of Parliament here and we have seen it everywhere -(Interjection)- no, please. I have listened to you and I know that is a characteristic of people from that area. However, Madam Speaker, -(Interjection)- this is not imbalu -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, hon. Byabagambi is my colleague. You know we were supposed to have gone for chemical engineering together in Russia but I could not go because for me Makerere took me. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I have been in Parliament and I have never seen where it is called a “torture chamber”. The only thing I know is that there is a Chamber where Members of Parliament sit and talk. Now, if one or two members disagree among themselves and one of them boxes and the other retaliates, is that torture? That means that those are exercising their physical fitness.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister who went to study chemical engineering in Russia in order to say that the Parliamentary Chambers is a torture chamber?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you say that this is a torture chamber?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I think my good friend here has imputed motive which was not mine. Well, some of the Members of Parliament here were saying that they were tortured in the Chamber and hence I was referring to that. Really, that is not true and I mentioned even the corridor and did not talk about the Chamber.

Madam Speaker, to conclude, the issue here which we should look at is not where the torture is taking place. The issue should be separation of the place and the actions being done in those places. Nobody should be tortured whether in safe houses or anywhere –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, you guided the minister and asked the minister whether there is any torture chamber in this Parliament; he did not answer. The minister, instead of retracting the statement he made concerning the existence of a torture chamber here in Parliament, he is trying to justify it. 

Is he in order, to give impression that we in Parliament are torturing people; that there are torture chambers in this Parliament? Unless the minister extracts and withdraws that statement, we have no power to listen to him. We can move a motion that he should not be so heard because there is no torture chamber in Parliament. I think I have been here longer than you but I have not seen one. Therefore, are you in order to accuse Parliament of having a torture chamber?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what did you say? Have you seen a torture chamber here?

Mr byabagambi: Madam Speaker, to make it clear, I am withdrawing the statement that this is a torture chamber. Of course, what is already on the Hansard is that some people were tortured here but I have withdrawn that. 

Finally, we have listened to the concerns of the Members of Parliament and genuinely so. However, the issue should not be that the Government condones or promotes torture.

The Government is going to take action. We have a meeting on Thursday and I will report to the Prime Minister the concerns of the Members of Parliament. Where security agencies have gone wrong and whichever individual has committed a crime, they should answer for it as individuals but it should not be put on Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have been happy if, at some stage, the Government came back with a treasury memorandum on the reports of Parliament on human rights. Then we would know that you take the work we do seriously but they are quiet. If you do not respond and tell us what action you have taken - We would be happy to see real action being taken. People have been named here; Government officials and ministers, in this report. Please show your commitment by taking action, which the country can see. No one has been arrested over this. Anyway, make closing remarks.

7.06
Mr Muhammad MUWANGA kivumbi (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I move under rule 60 to amend the recommendations of the committee to add sub-sections (5) and (6) on section 6.

Sub-sections (5) and (6) read:

“All safe houses and un-gazetted detention facilities be closed with immediate effect.

(6) A vote of censure against the Minister of Security, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, be initiated as provided for under rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.” 

Under this rule, it is well articulated how a minister can be censured. Our recommendation is that we move under that rule and that the process be initiated. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the right rule would be 56 where you give an oral notice, which I think you have done and then set into motion the other processes. 

You have given oral notice under rule 56. We can then go to Rule 60. Move under rule 56 first and then go to rule 60.

Mr MUWANGA kivumbi: Madam Speaker, I move under rule 56, which is oral notice of motion that we seek to amend, under Rule 60, the recommendations of the committee to add Section 6(5), to read:

“All safe houses and un-gazetted detention facilities be closed with immediate effect.”

Sub-section (6) to read:

“A vote of censure against the Minister of Security, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, be initiated as provided for under rule 108.” 

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?

Mr lYomoki: I second the motion but I would like to seek your guidance on how we can improve it. Whereas we would like to initiate a process for censure, this House should also take a decision that we have lost confidence in him. Those are two different issues. 

Even as we are going for a process, that resolution should be part of this motion so that we do not wait for the censure motion. I would like to amend that recommendation to read that the House has lost confidence in that minister and therefore initiates a censure motion.

THE SPEAKER: Is it adding value to the motion? I think the motion is clear. Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee, with amended proposals, be agreed upon by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Ms EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the time you have given this report and for the fight that you put up against human rights violators.

I would like to take the opportunity to thank the committee members on both sides because we worked as a team and produced this good report. Without the motion that was brought by hon. Sebaggala and hon. Kassiano Wadri, maybe we would not reach where we are.  I thank them.

7.12
Mr abdulatif sebaggala (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, allow me to most sincerely add my voice to what the chairperson has said. 

Madam Speaker, when you instructed us to investigate, it is true that we saw many Ugandans being released without any charge from the so-called safe houses at Lwamayuba Islands, Kyengera and other areas and many of them appeared in our committee. 

It was because of your initiative and guidance that the so many Ugandans who were being tortured were released. When they went to various police stations, they had no case and they were given Shs 5,000 to go back home without any charge. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to most sincerely thank you very much for being there for all Ugandans, in as far as fighting for human rights is concerned. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING APPROVAL OF AMENDMENT OF THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Honourable members, I do not see the persons in charge of these items so we shall handle items 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 tomorrow. I am giving notice that item 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 will be handled tomorrow. 

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Speaker, I am here to stand in for my chairperson for the report of the Gender Committee. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see your minister. That is why I am giving notice that items 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 will be handled tomorrow. The House is adjourned to tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

