

Tuesday, 28 February 2017

Parliament met at 10.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting. I would like to begin by asking you to observe the decorum of the House. Can you kindly put away your posters. (Applause) You know the candidates and you do not need to dress. (Laughter)

Secondly, honourable members, I would like to express my very grave concern at the way citizens of Uganda were treated yesterday, when they were summarily evicted from the Park Yard Market before the notice period had expired. (Applause) We shall want an explanation tomorrow from the Government about why Ugandans are being treated as if they are rubbish. Therefore, hon. Nankabirwa, the Government Chief Whip, we want an answer tomorrow about the way those citizens were treated.

Honourable members, in fulfilment of my obligations under Appendix B, rule 13 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I have taken measures to ensure that the nine Members of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) representing Uganda represent, as much as is feasible, the political parties represented here, the shades of opinion, gender, which is very specific, and other special interest groups in Uganda.

I have continuously reminded you, the electorate, and I am doing so again, that Article 50(1) of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community states as follows: “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”

Honourable members, as you go to cast your ballot, in your choice of the nine representatives, try to ensure that you conform to the requirements of the treaty as I have indicated above. In addition, to ensure that the treaty is observed, I caused a clear roadmap to be worked out for the elections. It was published and gazetted in the Uganda Gazette, which is the official document of the Government.

This was done to reach as many people as possible so that they can participate in the elections. In my interactions at various points with the various groups, I brought to their attention the requirements of the treaty. The Clerk, following my instructions, publicised this election process. Indeed, I am comforted to note the overwhelming response from the public, who responded to a call for nominations to the East African Legislative Assembly.

Honourable members, you will note that the candidates who are going to address you this morning are from different parties represented in this House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups. Of these candidates, 10 are nominated by political parties represented in the House, 37 are drawn from the youth, persons with disabilities and other shades of opinion as required by the treaty. I further inform you that 13 of these 47 candidates are women. Therefore, at least 30 per cent of women have applied to become members of the East African Legislative Assembly.

Therefore, within the confines and spirit of Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community and rule 13 of Appendix B of our Rules of Procedure, I carried out my responsibility of trying to make it feasible that the persons to be elected to represent Uganda in EALA represent the face of the Ugandan Parliament.

Honourable members, in voting we are short by three Members; two Members lost their seats and our colleague died recently. The voters are Members of Parliament. Ex officio members will not vote. On Monday, 27 February 2017, nominated candidates attended a briefing by the Clerk to Parliament. 

Today, the House will begin by listening to the candidates who will address them from behind the bar. They will speak from behind the bar at the front there. Each candidate will be given seven minutes in accordance with rule 12(1) of Appendix B.

Members will not interact by way of information or clarification when candidates are campaigning. Also, do not put up your posters when candidates are campaigning. The issue of posters is concluded. Close them and let the candidates speak to you effectively.

The order in which the candidates shall address the House shall be as indicated on the Order Paper. Once the campaigns are concluded, the House shall break to allow Members prepare for the voting that will take place in the South Wing car park. 

In order to quicken the process, we have four polling stations. The voter register or list of voting Members has been divided into four groups. Polling station No. 1 has names from hon. Jesca Ababiku to hon. Alex Byarugaba. The names in polling station No. 2 will be from hon. Flavia Byekwaso to hon. Peter Lokeris. Polling station No. 3 has names from hon. Samson Lokeris to hon. Zerubabel Nyiira Mujumbi. The fourth polling station has names from hon. William Nzoghu to hon. Francis Zaake. The names will be displayed in your polling stations. 

Members will proceed to the voting tables where the part of the register that contains their names is. They will then receive a ballot and proceed to the voting booth. Members are supposed to tick nine names of their choice from the list of candidates, not seven, not three. It will be a short ballot. 

Members are advised to seriously take into account Article 50 of the treaty when choosing the nine names; take into account the political parties, gender, interest groups and shades of opinion. Once a Member has chosen and ticked the nine names from the 47 on the ballot paper, he or she shall fold the ballot paper and deposit it in the ballot box. After voting, a Member shall have his or her finger marked by indelible ink to prevent multiple voting. After voting, Members will convene in the Chamber to receive the results at a time to be announced. The bell will be sounded to indicate the time for return to the House. 

The Clerk shall be the presiding officer for purposes of tallying the results. She will work with staff and allocate them to support the interests of the candidates. The parliamentary staff shall tally the results obtained by each candidate. The Clerk shall rank the candidates in descending order, with the candidate having the highest number of votes being on top and the candidate with the lowest at the bottom. The Clerk will then submit the ranked list to the Speaker and the Speaker shall announce the results to the House. 

Honourable members, that is the process for today. I therefore invite you to listen carefully to the candidates so that you can cast your votes from a point of information. Thank you very much. 

ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 12 OF APPENDIX B OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA BY THE CANDIDATES NOMINATED TO REPRESENT UGANDA TO THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you are free to sit anywhere in the House. Those who are standing can move to this side of the House; it is free sitting today. Honourable members, we now invite hon. Martin Agaba.

10.30
MR MARTIN AGABA (Independent): Good morning, honourable members. Madam Speaker and honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, I would like to thank you very much for making time to be here. My name is Agaba Martin Edgar and I am contesting as an independent candidate for EALA. 

First of all, I would like to appreciate all those that participated in the signing of the East African protocols and those that took part in the initiation of the Northern Corridor Integration Project. I would like to thank you so much. 

As Martin Agaba, I will focus on the following things as a legislator: First, I will focus on education. I will ensure that we have quality foundations in Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE). I will ensure that each and every individual that comes out of these programmes comes out innovative, an initiator and above all, an implementer of ideas. I will make sure that the students from UPE and USE are job makers and not just job seekers. 

I will also endeavour to see that we have quality education fees for all the students. Students from Kenya and Tanzania that come to study in our universities should be paying the same amount of money like any other students. That is one of the issues I will focus on.

The other thing I will focus on is sports. Our neighbour, Rwanda, has the Kagame Cup. I will make sure that we also have the Museveni Cup –(Laughter)– Yes, the Kabaka has the Kabaka Run, there is the Cancer Run for Rotary, the MTN Run; we need a Museveni cup. This is among the things that will motivate development in our country. 

On education, I forgot to highlight the issue of all girls receiving pads. This not only affects Ugandan locals but also girls from other regions. 

As I conclude, you know Uganda is the food basket of our nation. One of the things I will focus on is agriculture. I will ensure that I work with other ministries to see to it that Uganda not only produces what we can consume but also produces more than we consume. Right now, there is milk that is being kept for three months, which milk is got from Kenya. Uganda needs to invest in milk so that we can be able to supply to neighbouring countries. (Interjections) - As I conclude - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are interfering with the candidate’s time. 

MR AGABA: As I conclude, I would like to say that my slogan is, “Nothing beats implementation”. Therefore, I will ensure that we implement policies that will affect not only the international community but also the locals. As a legislator, I will make sure that the East African Community is given precedence in other parts of Uganda and not only Kampala. 

The other issue I will focus on is health. We have been experiencing hunger in Karamoja but I did not see any MPs. I did not see hon. Mbidde, hon. Opoka or hon. Nakawuki doing anything about the hunger that was in Karamoja. (Laughter) Even when it came to the cancer machine that was affecting treatment in Mulago Hospital, the Kenyan Government came in to intervene.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members, for your attention. As you go to cast your vote, remember I am No.1; vote for Martin Edgar Agaba as MP EALA. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we now have candidate Rose Akol Okullu. (Applause) Honourable members, I ask you to observe decorum. They are all ours. Candidate Akol, you have seven minutes.

10.39
MS ROSE AKOL OKULLU (NRM): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I am delighted to be here before you to thank you for the support you have given me so far. (Applause) I would like to seek your vote today to represent you as a Member of Parliament at the East African Legislative Assembly. 

My name is Rose Akol Okullu. I served in this Parliament for the last 10 years in various capacities. As a minister in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, I represented this country at the East African Community Council of Ministers. While I was the Chairperson, Board of Trustees, Parliamentary Pension Scheme, we made changes to ensure that as a Member of Parliament, when you retire, you have a befitting package. Furthermore, when I was a Commissioner of Parliament, we worked together with other members of the commission to ensure that the welfare of the Members is well catered for together with the staff of the commission. 

I served in this Parliament as the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Budget Committee. We advocated for equity in allocation of resources. I further served this institution as a representative at the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly where we protected the interest of our Government and negotiated for an economic partnership agreement for the East African Community as a bloc. 

As I seek to represent you at the East African Legislative Assembly, first of all my priority is to consolidate the achievements of the customs union, the common market and to ensure that a monetary union is achieved within 10 years. Madam Speaker and honourable members, we will promote security and stability of our country and member states to ensure that development takes place within our community. (Applause) 

Mainstreaming gender into all the activities of the community will be one of the key items that we will promote at the East African Community (EAC). I will also ensure that the assets and projects of the community will be equitably distributed among the member states.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am sure it is very fresh in your minds that recently, we suffered a lot especially when there was a long drought as result of climate change. Issues of climate change and food security will be high on the agenda when we go to the EAC. 

Representing this country at EALA is a diplomatic role and I would like to say that I will ably represent this country to promote, protect and advocate for equity in the distribution of resources. Our communities need to be sensitised on the East African Community so that they own the East African Community and also to advocate for their inclusiveness so as to deliberate on the East African Community. (Applause)

Honourable members, I pledge to work with you to promote the EAC to the grassroots communities and ensure that they benefit from the projects and programmes that we will pass at the EAC. I would like once more to thank you, honourable members, for your support. I would like to ask once more that today, as you go to vote, vote for hon. Akol to represent you at the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause)

I will not disappoint you but be of service to you. We will work together in your different communities and constituencies. I thank you for the support and may God bless you all. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Order! Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to treat all the candidates with decorum. They are all Ugandan candidates. We know there are those you support but express that in the ballot box; do not intimidate anybody. Treat all of them equally because they are all Ugandans. Please, put down your posters. 

10.47
MS ALGRESIA AKWI OGOJO (Independent): Madam Speaker and Deputy Speaker, honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, my follow contestants, citizens of Uganda who are watching these proceedings, ladies and gentlemen. I greet you and bring you greetings from my family. (Applause)
 
I stand on this podium with a sense of great humility and pride; humility in the wake of those great Ugandan architects of our history who stood here before me, and pride in the reflection that this forum of legislative debate represents human freedoms and social justice in the purest form ever devised. Here are centred the hopes, aspirations and the faith of the people of our country. 

I am called Algresia Akwi Ogojo and I stand here for one purpose and that is to serve my country. I started my education in Usuk and Dabani Girls Primary School and I was admitted to Namagunga for my - 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, please listen to the candidate. 

MS AKWI: Thank you for protecting me, Madam Speaker. I started my education in Usuk and Dabani Girls, where I completed my PLE. I went to Namagunga for my O’ Level and A’ Level. After which, I joined Makerere University where I obtained my Bachelor’s degree in Law. I was fortunate to be given an opportunity to study for my Master’s degree under a scholarship from the United States Government in Georgetown University. 

I do not stand here to advocate for any partisan cause because I believe the issues of East Africa are fundamental and go beyond partisan considerations. I believe that the level of the East African Legislative Assembly is over and above this and it should cater for the issues that pertain to and affect the people in our country. Therefore, the issues in the East African Legislative Assembly should be resolved at the highest level. 

Honourable members, I believe that I am a worthy candidate for you to elect to represent this country at the East African Legislative Assembly. I am very conversant with the treaty framework of the EAC because I actively participated in its formulation.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

When I was a regional coordinator, I established Akina Mama here. While I served as the Akina Mama regional coordinator, I had an opportunity and privilege to read that treaty. I found that the treaty was more concerned with commerce and trade issues and it was lacking on human rights. There were no provisions on human rights, gender, peace, security and conflict resolution; there were no wider issues on agriculture and environmental protection and yet these are pertinent issues that affect people in our communities. 

I got busy and raised money. I organised a workshop for women from the then East Africa - Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda - and we drafted an alternative treaty, which we presented to the then Secretary-General of the East African Tripartite Secretariat. (Applause)

Honourable members, the draft treaty, which we saw, did not provide a clear link between the East African Legislative Assembly and national parliaments. It also did not provide a clear link between the East African Court of Justice and the courts of justice from the partner states. 

I am glad to inform you that our alternative treaty proposed that members elected to the East African Legislative Assembly should be elected from outside the national parliaments. This was to enhance accountability to the national parliaments and for the members to be able to undertake the oversight function, which is a critical function of any Member of Parliament. I am glad that the proposals we gave were adopted and are in the treaty today.  

Unfortunately, the jurisdiction of the East African Court of Justice was not adopted. Honourable members, many of you are aware that there is a gap between the Pan African Parliament, the East African Legislative Assembly and the national parliament. Why is that so? If you give me your vote, I will work with you and we rectify this problem. 

Honourable members, I had the privilege of coordinating a capacity development programme for the East African Community in finance management, internal audit, public procurement, human resource management and planning. With this inside information and knowledge of the system, organs and institutions of the EAC, I will be an asset to Uganda in undertaking oversight of the institutions and programmes of the EAC. (Applause) 

I know that there is plethora of strategic plans- (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Honourable members, I would like to invite candidate Hellen Adeke. Please, allow the candidates to speak. You are welcome. You have seven minutes. 
 
10.47
MS HELLEN ARIONG (Independent): Madam Speaker, honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, all protocol observed, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Hellen Ariong Adeke. I am contesting for the position of Member of the Fourth East African Legislative Assembly. I am a holder of a Postgraduate Diploma in Human Resources Management. I, therefore, offer myself as the best candidate for the East African Legislative Assembly.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Please, the candidate is on the floor. 

MS ARIONG: East Africa is composed of six countries - Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi and South Sudan - with over 200 languages spoken, a large population and a number of tribes.

Madam Speaker, the following are the key issues I will handle if I am elected the Ugandan representative to EALA: One, the customs union: I will follow the progress of the customs union. I will follow up the issues of free movement of persons, the labour market and capital across the borders of the East African Community. I will ensure we have a wide market for all the East African people for economic development, encouraging rural agriculture and prosperity for all the people. 

Monetary union: I will ensure that we have one common currency in the East African Community. As an educationist, I will promote education for all, with emphasis on girl-child education and minimising school dropouts.

Industry and infrastructural development: I will promote liberalisation of transport, air, water, roads on the trans-African highway for easy access to rural areas and urban centres. 

I will promote monitoring and evaluation. This knowledge will be disseminated to all East African people. I will promote decision-making and competitive roles to be used in the treaty.

I will also agitate for human rights for all people of East Africa. I will improve communication and technology –(Interjections)– No; I have done it by myself –

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle, please.

MS ADEKE: Thank you very much. Vote Adeke Helen. East Africa oyee! (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you; please, allow the candidates to speak. Do not heckle and intimidate them. I now invite candidate Richard Basiime. You have seven minutes.

11.01
MR RICHARD BASIIME (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, allow me to extend my personal greetings and also greetings from the ordinary people like me. I would like to appreciate the work and service that you have been doing for this nation.

My name, once again, is Richard Basiime Bashenyi. I am a Ugandan by descent and I hail from Kajara County, Ntungamo District. I hold a Bachelor of Science in Economics and also hold a Postgraduate Diploma in Computer Science of Makerere University. I have also trained in a host of other programmes, both here and abroad.

About my work life, I started off as a mere transport officer in 1995 at Civil Aviation Authority. I later joined Xerox Uganda in 1998. I later worked for Computer Point, which is a major IT vendor in the region. I also did a short-term consultancy assignment in Djibouti as a business consultant in 2006 to 2007. 

Later, I worked for the telecom industry. I joined Warid in 2008 but left in 2009 when they were sold to Airtel. I eventually worked for Tigo Rwanda in 2011 and 2012. Tigo is a major telecom company in the region. I later worked as a consultant and general manager for IFID Africa, a consultancy firm. Last year, I served as the Executive Secretary of the Uganda Institution of Professional Engineers.  

About my leadership and political role, I would like to say that I have been a student leader; I was the Minister of Culture in Livingstone Hall, Makerere University. I have also played a role as a junior politician at the local scene. I participated in the National Resistance Movement (NRM) primaries of 2010 in Kajara County, Ntungamo District. However, I was unable to make it but I did not give up; here I am. 

I am dedicated because I have been an actor in this region. In economics, there is what we call economic actors; these are the real people on the ground who run the day-to-day business and they sell their services. I started off as a small-scale trader in one of the neighbouring countries. I said that I worked for Xerox and I took on assignments in the region. I also worked in Rwanda. I, therefore, understand the sentiments, expectations and frustrations that face an ordinary citizen while trying to seek opportunities in any of the sister countries or partner states.

Madam Speaker, the urgent need for integration stems from the fact that we are operating in states that are not viable - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members; allow the candidate to inform you about his capacity.

MR BASIIME: Madam Speaker, I know that there is a lot of politics at the local level but I can assure you that I am not seeking for this job - I would still want to call it a job, though they said somewhere that they do not want that. This is a job and this is the biggest job interview that I have attended so far. I have been successful in all the previous interviews but I do not know how this one will go.

There has been a joke among my colleagues, especially in the economic circles, that someone said that she is going to sell the revolution to Arusha and some other person also jokingly said that she was going to take defiance there, something like that. Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– I No, my understanding is that we are going to Arusha to discuss serious business for our country and my role as a Member of EALA would be effective representation and oversight. 

As a professional who has seen how much money we are losing to foreign companies, which are taking all the prestigious contracts from our country, I would like to push for a policy on capacity building and local content, of course without compromising quality. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to rest my case by again asking you, honourable members, to give me your vote. I am a professional and have worked in the region; I have tried to live the agenda and I understand the concerns of the ordinary citizen. (Applause) Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Cissy Bayiga. Honourable members, let us have order. Candidate Bayiga, you have seven minutes.

11.07
MS CISSY BAYIGA (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, all protocol observed. I honour you. My name is Cissy Bayiga Oeschger. One, I am a mother and married and I am an independent candidate. (Applause) 

I come as an independent candidate for a reason. I take these party issues like a stepmother and a stepchild with a father. When a stepmother tells the child to do some housework, the child will assume they are mistreating her. However, when the father tells the mother about the kid, it will assume she is great. The reason I come as an independent is to bridge the gap and to create unity among all the parties in Uganda and East Africa.

I stand for natural resources, tourism, agriculture and gender. Today there was already news about caterpillars that have begun destroying maize in 25 districts in Uganda. If we stand together as East Africa and begin fighting for agriculture and eliminating all these pests, we shall be the food basket for the whole world, and I think you believe that.

We have drought in so many places, in Uganda, South Sudan, and yet we are gifted by God and we can grow a lot of food without watering or doing anything. We have many natural resources - lakes, rivers, mountains - and yet we are reckless sometimes. I am sorry to say that, but we do not mind.  Tourists go to other regions and yet we can promote tourism here and better our economy.

I am here to request you to trust me. I have tried so much to serve my country but you have not given me an opportunity. I am here requesting for that opportunity today. (Applause) I would like to request you for an opportunity to serve Uganda, East Africa and my region. Thank you very much, for listening.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, candidate Cissy Bayiga. I now invite candidate Bwengye Muhangi. You have seven minutes.

11. 12
MR LAUBEN BWENGYE MUHANGI (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, I would like to take this opportunity and thank God for such an honour to be in your presence. I cannot take this for granted.

Madam Speaker, allow me to recognise a few Members who represent me - hon. Sheila Kabaije and hon. Bafaki. I would have cheated myself if I did not recognise them. My name is Lauben Bwengye, married and a businessperson for the last 16 years, and a Christian who is not shy about it. I have two Master’s degrees; one in law and another in investigative journalism. My recent dissertation is based on the East African market, specifically the challenges and opportunities.

Honourable members, allow me to quote James Freeman who once said, “A politician thinks about the next vote but a statesman thinks about the next generation.” Therefore, my humble pleasure, honourable members, is that in your endeavours always think about the next generation.

Honourable members, a question will be asked as to why I am in front of you. I am here to seek your mandate for EALA representative, where I feel I have the capacity and virtue to represent this country. It all comes from my research where I found gaps within our East African Community.  I congratulate my predecessors for a job well done specifically for a few protocols that they have passed, but there are gaps.

The first gap is the visibility of what has already been achieved among Ugandans. You will agree with me that if an inquiry is carried out now, very few Ugandans will know what has been achieved or what the benefits of a united EAC are.

Honourable members, another opportunity is on the strengths, like what the Baganda say, “agali awamu gegaluma enyama”, literally meaning that together we stand and divided we fall. I do not need to say this because you know it very well; Uganda is a landlocked country, so we cannot do without Kenya, Tanzania and other neighbours. Therefore, we needed the East African Community as early as yesterday.

Honourable members, I am here to put these facts before you, specifically the gaps. As an aspirant, if I am given the mandate, I will make sure I sensitise the public. How do we do this? Believe it or not, some of our predecessors have been living on cloud nine and yet the citizens, who are the authority in the community, do not know what takes place the other side.

Honourable members, you will believe me that a number of our predecessors just came here recently to look for your votes but not to sensitise the citizens who are the right beneficiaries of the East African Community. Do you know that our brothers from Kenya usually come, buy maize here, take and grind it and export it to Uganda as Unga at the expense of our businesspersons? Such cases are some of the highlights that I will begin with.

There is the issue of language. If we pursue the East African Community without emphasising the issue of Swahili as the single language, we shall not go anywhere. If I could use the example of China; with 1.4 billion people, they speak the same language and are able to communicate both economically and politically.

Honourable members, we have been saying that the South Sudanese failed to pay Ugandans, but honestly speaking, it was not deliberate but an issue of language. Some of my Ugandan businesspersons could not speak Dinka and yet the majority of the South Sudanese use Dinka. Therefore, the emphasis on a single language will be one of the points I will advocate. 

Honourable members, you know very well that a number of protocols have been passed, like the Common Market Protocol, Single Customs Territory. However, they have not been fully implemented not because Ugandans do not want to but because they have not been well explained to the beneficiaries. No wonder, you find our brothers and sisters in Rwanda coming here to buy sorghum, taking it to Rwanda and bringing it back here to sell in our markets. This is not because Ugandans are not hardworking people - (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Alice Drito. You have seven minutes.

11.19
MS ALICE DRITO: Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I am a Ugandan with proven experience in good governance. I accumulated this experience after serving in this continent on governance programmes. 

Honourable members, we need a sustainable East African Community. Now is the time that we need to put our priorities right in order to have a sustainable East African Community where we can enjoy our economic dividends, security and peace. When you give me your mandate to represent Uganda in the East African Parliament, first and foremost I will protect Uganda’s interests in the broader region. Secondly, I will advocate for other areas which I think are delaying the integration process. 

The East African Community is governed under good governance. We need to build trust in the partner states so that we walk the talk of real integration. We have been having challenges of delays in assenting to Bills in the parliaments. We need to fasten this process. 

Term limits and age limits are governance issues. We need to build consensus on these issues so that when we are in the community, we do not disintegrate due to small interest areas.

Peace and security: This region has been torn apart with internal conflicts. Honourable members, we do not want to see another genocide here. We need to a rapid regional force to avert conflicts of that kind.

In regional integration, there is a syndrome of politicising the land issue. There are member states that feel that free movement of East Africans will mean free settlement. We need to sort this out.

On climate change, we cannot afford to fold our hands and wait for devastating effects of climate change. We need to have regional initiatives in place to come in with shift interventions. 

I will add value to economic governance at a regional level. We need to remove those unfriendly regulatory mechanisms and facilitate our businessmen through loans with reduced interest in the banking sector.

The monetary union is something which has got stuck in our hands. Give Drito a chance to get into that Parliament and I will have alternative solutions. Honourable members, this is a world of digital currency. We have moved away from paper money that we stuff in our bags and pockets. Let us go digital currency to avoid the fears of losing our currency values.

Social integration: Honourable members, let us consolidate our existing similarities in language, intermarriages and cross-border tribal settings. I will invest in contributing ideas to free the differences.

Honourable members, the East African Community Parliament needs quality. I have worked beyond regional borders and I have served in good governance programmes. I will take value addition there. I have a track record of good gove6rnance. Give me a chance; this is my passport to get there. I need a visa from you in form of votes to enter EALA. I appeal to you that as you vote tonight, let us desist from voting on patronage basis. (Candidate timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Ibi Ekwau (Applause) Order, honourable members! Take your seats.

Before hon. Ibi speaks, I would like you to join me in welcoming hon. Kasule Lumumba, Secretary-General of the NRM - she is in the gallery; hon. Mike Sebalu, sitting Member of the East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Milton Muwuma, Member of the Ninth Parliament. Hon. Ibi, you have seven minutes. 

11.28
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC): Madam Speaker of Parliament and distinguished honourable Members of Parliament, I thank God for this opportunity and congratulate you upon wining the elections. I know it was not easy but I thank God who brought you this far.

I am Ekwau Ibi Florence from Kaberamaido District. I am a teacher by profession, a social worker and two-time legislator. (Applause) Madam Speaker, I appear before this House at a time in history when the Speaker of Parliament is a woman, the Leader of the Opposition is a woman, the Government Chief Whip is a woman, and the NRM Secretary-General is a woman. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I am passionate about education, women and children, climate change and matters of natural resources management. When you mandate me, I will champion the following: On education, I will harmonise the discrepancies in the fees in relation to national and international students in the East African Community. (Applause) I will work hard for the harmonisation of the curriculum and the standards of education in the East African Community countries. (Applause) I will vouch for centres of excellence in the East African Community.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am passionate about women and children. I am passionate about trafficking in persons. As a Member of the Ninth Parliament – hon. Anifa Kawooya and members of the Committee on Equal Opportunities can bear me testimony -(Applause)- I vouched for the trafficking of persons law. The children, women and the girl-child of Uganda need to be protected. (Applause) If I get the platform, you can trust me on this; I will do this, honourable members.

Madam Speaker, on the question of the common market, I would like to state that a common market without community involvement is no market at all. I will champion awareness. I will vouch for the fisherman in Kalangala. I will talk for the Irish potato grower in Kisoro. I will talk for the farmer in Yumbe. I will talk for the farmers and represent their issues so that the farmer is not fleeced by the middlemen who are fleecing and exploiting the farmers. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I will bring feedback to Parliament. Honourable Members of Parliament, you deserve a stake in what happens in Arusha; I will give you feedback and I will be there for you. You must be in the know and you deserve to know this.

Madam Speaker, peace and security is a vital aspect of the East African Community. Government needs support in EALA. I am mindful of my brothers in the Sebei and Karamoja regions. I am mindful of my brothers and sisters in the Albertine Graben. I am mindful of my sisters and brothers in the areas of Zombo, Lamwo, Yumbe and Koboko who are threatened by border raids. (Applause) I will vouch for and try to advocate for the security of this country. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, Uganda has a comparative advantage in tourism. Uganda, the Pearl of Africa, needs to be marketed. As Ibi, I will be your ambassador on tourism. I will carry the Ugandan flag. If it is about Uganda as a country, it is about all of us. I will market the adulating hills of Bunyaruguru, the hills of Kisoro, the hills of Kabale, the mountains of Rwenzori and Elgon as well as the beautiful Sipi Falls. I will advocate and be an ambassador for the tourism industry in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, in general, I will work with the eight members you will send to vouch for the issues of Uganda. I am passionate about the Lake Victoria Environmental Programme, the Nile Basin Initiative, the Standard Gauge Railway Project, the pipeline for our petroleum. Given the mandate, I will try to vouch for these issues, having served in the Committee on Natural Resources.

Madam Speaker, I thank the members of the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) for sending me to this assembly, well aware of the quadruple role of legislation, representation, oversight and diplomacy. I will be the diplomat that will help prosper the aspirations of Uganda as a county. I will carry your flag high and you can be sure of that.

I bring competence and experience as tested options. I will work with you all as a friend. You are my true friends indeed. I trust you to make that choice. I am Ekwau Ibi Florence and I think I meet that criteria. 

I am very grateful. I appeal to the woman candidacy. A woman is a woman whether in red, blue, green, purple or no colour at all. (Applause) Therefore, I vouch for that and I request that you give me the votes. I will represent Uganda. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please sit down, honourable members. I now invite candidate Twaha Ibanda.

11.37
MR TWAHA IBANDA (Independent): Madam Speaker of Parliament and Members of this august House, I thank you all. I salute you all in the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) spirit; jambo. 

Today is a unique and fundamental day in our country where Uganda is determining those who are best suited to go and represent Uganda’s interests in the East African Legislative Assembly. Honourable members, as you all know, Uganda is at the epicentre of promoting, deepening and widening the integration in the region. I am here today in front of you-

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR IBANDA: Honourable members, I am here officially before you to request for your support and mandate to represent Uganda’s interests in the East African Legislative Assembly.

Honourable members, my choice to be an independent candidate is because I wanted to be like a common good - to serve you all like a road. Once you give me the opportunity to go to the East African Legislative Assembly, I would like to go and front these issues:

One, I would like to promote industrialisation in the region. Industrialisation will help us to address the issue of unemployment which is affecting Uganda and the region as a whole.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I will advocate for and promote the harmonisation of the East African education systems, so that we design our own education system that can create more job creators compared to job seekers. 

I will also advocate for professionalism and other skilled labour to be allowed to move freely in the region. Furthermore, I will promote political federation in order to promote peace and security within the region. This will help us in addressing the push and pull factors of the refugee crisis in the region. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you are all aware that Uganda is the food basket for this region. Allow me to go to EALA and promote agriculture for our country because –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order!

MR IBANDA: As I was saying, at the regional level, it is Uganda that is supplying food.

Honourable members, I will also help in the harmonisation of policies in EALA. With your mandate, I will have the capacity to stand strong, like I am standing before you, to defend our interests in that regional parliament. 

Honourable members, as I conclude, I know that you all know me. Thank you for the support you have given me from day one when I declared my intentions to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly. It has been a long way. Early last year, in February, even before you were sworn in, I approached you on phone, on WhatsApp and SMS. Today I am here to seek for your votes. Kindly, give me the votes.

Madam Speaker, regional integration is the pride of the young generation and a foundation for unshakable roots. We have the potential to determine and achieve our dreams as East Africans. Let us unite East Africa. Let us not forget that our destiny was given to us by God and our potential to defend and negotiate for our interests, continentally and internationally, still lies in God’s hands. 

Honourable members, I kindly seek for your votes. Ibanda Twaha is a candidate of choice and a results-oriented person. I promise to make Uganda proud. Ibanda Oyee! Twaha motto! Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Kaluuba Enoch. You have seven minutes. 

11.47
MS ENOCH KALUUBA (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, all protocol observed. I am humbled to stand before you this morning to ask for your vote to be a representative in the East African Legislative Assembly. 

My name is Kaluuba Enoch, a son to Mr Mukungu James from Buikwe District. I hold a Bachelor’s Degree in Laws. I also hold a Bachelor’s Degree in Management –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen to the candidate. 

MR KALUUBA: I also hold a Bachelor’s Degree in Arts, majoring in economics, from Kyambogo University. Further, I hold numerous certificates, especially in the line of defence, having served with the United States Government for a while. 

I have also worked with MTN Uganda as a communications expert. I also worked as a teacher in a couple of schools like Namilyango Senior Secondary School. In the previous parliamentary elections, I also expressed interest in the NRM primaries.

Madam Speaker, I ask for votes from all the Members of Parliament as an independent candidate. I believe I have made consultations. I have read and I have lived a life that is worth serving the community.

Madam Speaker, kindly allow me to use the words of a certain general who once said, “Leave issues of generals to generals.” He was actually trying to say that he was basically acquainted with those issues better; he had lived that life and he was worth respecting. In that regard, I have tried to acquaint myself with all the basics and all the necessary knowledge relating to the East African Community as required. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I know there is a yardstick that you expect from people who wish to represent the country in the East African Legislative Assembly. However, I would like to add a few things. I am committing myself to two things. 

One, in terms of democracy, the world has seen two things in the previous months –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, there are seats in the middle.

MR KALUUBA: We had two presidents swearing-in in January; one in the United States and the second in Gambia. Surprisingly, the one in Africa swore in from Senegal. A wise African would defend that and say it was because this is Africa. However, in my view, we better handle issues of democracy as they should be.

First and foremost, I pledge that when I go to the East African Legislative Assembly, we will make sure that power is handed over to the due authority before elections. We saw what happened in Gambia; the President remained in power even during the polls and he refused to leave. In my view, therefore, if we use Gambia as an example, I believe we are likely to lift the East African Legislative Assembly to another level. 

Most likely, the West African bloc was organised and they were able to send the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) to contain the situation in Gambia. In our case, however, we have nothing. During my time in EALA, we are going to put up a federalised army that can support us in these kinds of scenarios. This army would come in during the South Sudan crisis, for example.

Madam Speaker, my second point is about retaining senior Members in the Legislature. I am aware that so many Members here have served Parliament since the 1980s, but we do not have a procedure to retain them in the East African Community. I am of the view that we should elevate legislators who have served to a senatorial level. We have people like hon. Sam Kutesa, the Vice-President, H.E. Edward Ssekandi, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and yourself, Madam Speaker. We need to find a way of consolidating such experience instead of getting rid of them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I now invite candidate Kamateneti Ingrid Turinawe to address the House. (Interjections) Honourable members, please take your seats. Order! Order! Can I invite Ingrid Turinawe to speak for seven minutes.

MS KAMATENITI INGRID TURINAWE (Independent): Madam Speaker, at the end of it all, I am the winner. I have managed to expose what you are. I am the winner at a national event like this; international cameras are around, I am on the record of the Hansard; I am the winner.

Madam Speaker, Zlatan Ibrahimovic is a great player of the world and he plays in Manchester United football team. Alexis Sanchez is a great player in the world and he plays with Arsenal. The fans and team members of Manchester United will never like Sanchez because he is a great player. The fans and team members of Arsenal will never like Ibrahimovic because he is a great player. At the end of it all, you must know that this is Uganda. We are electing members to go the East African Legislative Assembly to lead and protect a cause on behalf of this country. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda Cranes is our national team. When Micho, the coach for Uganda Cranes, is picking the players to go and represent the country, he picks the best players from every team. He does not look at the teams but at the best players. This is the moment where I must say that I am the best player who must be picked to go and represent Uganda. I stand for a cause and when I stand for a cause for my country, nobody will shoot me down. I have the courage, the passion and the liberty to represent my country.

Madam Speaker, what is happening here can never bring me down because I came here expecting what you want to do and I am very happy; I am being entertained because big is big. That is why I am the best candidate.

Madam Speaker, I wish to go to the East African Legislative Assembly to lobby, advocate for and initiate policies that will promote our country in the East African region. I plan and stand to support the monetary union and economic union, where we can have a central bank for the East African countries. This bank would ensure that we control prices, have price stability, control the exchange rate and also have a common currency so that we can harmonise the microeconomic policies.

I am committed to calling for the complete opening of the borders so that our people and labour can move freely and we can secure employment for our people. Therefore, I stand to lobby, network and agitate for our civil societies. I will lobby the big civil societies in East Africa so that they can interact with others.

I will promote the human rights and freedoms of our people. I will stand for our journals to make sure that they are always published and sent to the East African Community countries. In this way, our people will be sensitised to make sure we all understand the East African Community Treaty, cooperation and integration.

I will also lobby to make sure our cultures are respected and protected in all the member states. I plan to effectively agitate, lobby and advocate for the minority in our countries especially for the albino law that is going to be tabled. I will support that. I will also support and protect the democracy in our countries.

Madam Speaker, this is the time for us to move from here and gather our concerted efforts to protect our country because as we speak, Uganda is lagging behind the other East African countries. Given a chance, I will make sure that I lobby for the continued deepening and broadening of the integration and cooperation of our countries.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for the support and cheering that you have given me. I know you fear your bosses but you promised that the vote is a secret ballot. Therefore, from here you must consider - Look at your villages and the people around you and know that FDC is a great party in our country.

The Forum for Democratic Change is a great party in our country. We have more than three million voters that must be represented. Therefore, from here, go and vote for Kamateneti Ingrid Turinawe; vote for quality and strength; I will stand on behalf of my country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to just listen to the candidates and you will effectively make your choices on the ballot paper. That is where the show will be made.

Let me now invite candidate Mathias Kasamba. (Interjections) Order! Honourable members, when you waste candidates’ time, we shall stay longer here. Candidate Mathias Kasamba, you have seven minutes.

12.07
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA: Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, brothers and sisters in this House. Allow me to take this opportunity to thank you for giving me the chance to present myself to you as a candidate for the East African Legislative Assembly.

Allow me to thank Members of Parliament who prepared us, under the NRM leadership, to go through as the NRM flag bearers. I also would like to thank all the leaders of the parties/shades in this Parliament. I present myself as one of the most credible, tested and humble servant leaders of this country. (Applause)

I am Mathias Kasamba, born in Kakuuto, grown up in all the parts of this country and I have been a servant leader in this Parliament for the past 15 years. I have worked tirelessly and selflessly to make sure that we provide a better livelihood for the people of Uganda. (Applause) I would like to present myself to you as one of the team of nine that will be elected today to represent Uganda in EALA to defend the common interests of Ugandans. (Applause)

During my career as a leader in the Parliament of Uganda, I initiated the establishment of the East African committee to strengthen linkages between Parliament of Uganda and EALA. When we go into integration, the most important element is cooperation, cooperation and cooperation. We cannot cooperate as East African partner states without cooperating as Ugandans. (Applause)

I want to assure you that during my term as a Member of Parliament, together with Gen. Elly Tumwine, we established a cooperative savings and credit society, which is one of the most formidable ways of self-help, self-management and making sure that we improve the financial capabilities of the leadership in the Parliament of Uganda. 

I want us to emulate this. The Kenyan economy is managed almost 60 per cent by co-operators. I want us to emulate the good deeds of financial management and co-operation as individuals in the partner states to improve the quality of life in the region. 

I cannot miss out on the food security situation in the region. There is a saying that Africa has the potential to feed the world. However, it is very unfortunate that Africa, and more so the East African region, is becoming a net importer of food. 

I want to work with you, Members of Parliament, because you are the people’s representatives, to heighten and improve productivity, scale up production, increase varieties and make sure Uganda, – (Applause) – Yes Uganda, holds 47 per cent of the agricultural arable land in the East African region. We must turn this potential into a reality. I want to assure you that when you vote for me to the regional parliament, I will champion Uganda’s position in improving the reality of food production. 

The most important element, as I conclude my submission, – (Interjections) – Give me the chance – (Interjections) Thank you very much. I pledge to be a total servant and increase cooperation and the realities of this country. (Applause) Thank you, brothers. Thank you, friends. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite candidate Janet Kenyangi. Order, honourable members! You are consuming the candidate’s time. Candidate Kenyangi, you have seven minutes. 

12.14
MS JANET KENYANGI (Independent): Madam Speaker, ministers present and honourable members in all your different capacities, I greet you. My name is Kenyangi Janet Kikwaya. I am standing for EALA on the independent ticket. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, do you know how much time and money we lose on road delays across borders? Do you realise how easy and cheap transport would be if we worked on a joint infrastructural project? Look at the standard gauge railway under the northern corridor; do you know how much would be achieved if it was extended to all the six East African countries? Have you imagined how much potential we have as a population of 160 million people? Honourable members, we can get all this if we deepen the integration. 

For how long shall we see our brothers and sisters, our mothers and fathers going to Arab countries for employment? For how long shall we see our brothers and sisters, mothers and fathers from Burundi and South Sudan butchering each other? Do you know that we can do a lot with regional stability?

Madam Speaker and honourable members, what I am talking about does not require age, experience or qualifications; it takes a voice that will speak louder than any other, and I am that voice that will speak loud. 

Do not do this for me, do not do this for you, do it for the future generation that will benefit out of the integration of the East African Community. Do it for your children and your children’s children who will sit back and be proud of the decision you made today. I still remain Kenyangi Janet Kikwaya. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Honourable members, the more you make noise, the longer we shall stay here. I now invite candidate Fred Luyinda to address the House. 

12.18
MR FRED LUYINDA (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am Luyinda Fred from Makerere University. I am here not by windfall but for a cause and the change that East African must see. There are a lot of mandates that East Africa has to address and as per my manifesto, I will address the following: 

If I am given the authority to go to the East African Legislative Assembly, I will address issues of education. Research and education in tertiary institutions, through the Inter-University Council for East Africa, has not been implemented. 

Recently, a doctor at Makerere University, who was awarded a PhD in veterinary medicine, showed potential in coming up with a vaccine that will treat East Coast Fever (ECF), a disease which has been perturbing us. Therefore, this shows that research is very important and we must consider it. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I promise to work hard so that I can be part of the change I want to see. 

Concerning the issue of agriculture, why should we suffer from famine? Why should we see people from Moroto and Northern Uganda suffer yet we have the source of the Nile? Sudan is utilising the source of the Nile by coming up with irrigation schemes like Gezira and they are not suffering. If given power, I will implement that.  

Another point in my manifesto is on security. We might think that as a country, we are secure enough but we are not. In neighbouring countries within the partner states like South Sudan, the Nuer and Dinka are fighting; in Burundi recently, there were misunderstandings with their president. We have seen an increasing influx of refugees within our country and we have been incurring costs which we are not supposed to incur. 

Therefore, why can’t we come up with a common East African force that can bring peace? I will give the example of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS); when President Yahya Jammeh first conceded defeat but later he denied, they intervened and the country got its peace. If I am voted into power, I will ensure that there is security in our country. 

As I conclude, because I must conclude, I am looking forward to an East African Community where our leaders will not be our misleaders. I am looking forward to an East Africa Community where our leaders will not be influenced to make decisions but will take a step to make decisions on their own. I am also looking to an East Africa where the youth will be trusted with power to lead because as I grew up, I was always told that the youth are the leaders of tomorrow and honourable members, my tomorrow is today. Today, we must see your trust for the youth. 

I am ready to represent the youth in the East Africa Legislative Assembly and to work on behalf of Uganda. Why should we consider people of high calibre? Where were these people when Mark Zuckerberg, a young person at university, came up with Facebook and now even those who were considered high calibre are using it? 

One of the presidents within Africa said the youth are the future, but not oil because oil can become extinct. Why don’t we trust our youth? Why do you deny us a chance? When you deny me a chance, you are denying your child a chance. 

We must be part of the change we want to see. Vote for Mr Luyinda as a representative to EALA because I have got the potential. I supposed leadership was about muscles, but it is about how we relate with people. We should not judge the phenotypic appearance; we should not depend on morphology but let us consider ideology. 

Please, add me to the nine candidates to show the people of East Africa that we are proactive; we will not go by what they are doing but we will be a living example so that they get to know who we are. For God and my country. Thank you so much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite candidate David Matyoli to address the House. You have seven minutes.

12.24
MR DAVID MATYOLI (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable members, guests and the public present to watch this important occasion as we determine the people who will represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly. I am David Matyoli from Namayingo in Busoga sub region. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to start by saluting the NRM Government under the leadership of His Excellency Yoweri Museveni Kaguta, who came into power and championed the peaceful coexistence of Uganda with other member states. This gave them confidence to revive the East African Community, which had disintegrated at one point. I salute him in the strongest terms possible. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to say that the East African Community is not being initiated today; it existed at one time but collapsed. This is the reason we should guard against what led to its collapse. One of the reasons was representation. The person we will elect today will determine the success of our integration process. 

I would like to hint on some of the achievements that have been highlighted today. When you listen to the members who represented the country in the East African Assembly, they read a multiple number of achievements, but they are not there when you move to the ground. Recently, I was in Busia and I witnessed discrimination. In Busia Hospital, just about seven kilometres across the border into Kenya, they have written clearly that a Ugandan or any foreigner has to pay Kshs 2,000 and a Kenyan pays Kshs 1,000. 

This means that discrimination is still rife. How will we integrate when this is still going on? We need to elect people who will be firm and address these issues so that the other members from other member states can understand them. 

We have got a number of protocols that have been arrived at by the former members of the East African Legislative Assembly, but those protocols have not been implemented because of lack of harmonisation of the legislative reforms at EALA to match with those at the national level. If one formulates a legislative input from EALA and you do not harmonise it with the ones on the ground, the implementers will not be able to implement it. This is because at the end of the day, when you go to the police officer, they will not know what you are talking about. 

Honourable members, I would like to inform you that EALA is sounding today like it is something new because people do not know about it and yet we have been represented for over 15 years. If you introduced a Member of Parliament from EALA and told the public that this is a person from EALA and he is a Member of Parliament, they may think EALA is either a municipality or a new district because they do not anything know about it. 

Therefore, you should vote for a person like me who will move around with you in the constituencies, interact with the people and sensitise them about integration and tell them that it is the way to go.

On issues concerning labour under the Common Market Protocol, when you go across you realise that we still have a lot of impediments or factors that are hindering labour mobility. Kenya one time made a pronouncement in 2012 where the immigration ministry clearly said that they had caused changes in the regulations regarding the issuance of work and residential permits. If we are integrating, we would want people to come in and get work; why tighten the grips at the lower level? That means there is some mistrust and hypocrisy among the member states. 

Honourable members, we look forward to see to it that the integration process grows stronger, but today if you look at the East African newspaper it shows that Burundi has applied to join the Southern African Development Community. This means we are disintegrating the community because people are not satisfied. Why can’t we emulate other umbrella institutions like the ECOMOG forces that went through ECOWAS to install peace in a country where problems were about to occur?
 
I therefore urge you, honourable members, to vote for people not simply because you are sympathetic towards them or because they have said, “I am the one who has the institutional memory…” - We have clerks, who keep records and will help us to understand what they said; we shall continue from there.

Honourable members, I would like to assure you that if I am chosen as an EALA representative for Uganda, I will always be willing to help you out in your constituencies because I am a very flexible person. If at any one time one of you calls me to your constituency, I will ensure that I go there so that we address the young people and initiate projects. We can even go as far as looking for donors out there in Kenya and elsewhere. I will not always be in Parliament; I will have to lobby and advocate for some projects that can help our areas so that we can also have an advantage. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, none of you was elected to this Parliament because of sympathy or because of your ability to retain institutional memory in the House. You were elected because of your ability to serve.  Even the Speaker was voted back because of her performance in Uganda and Kamuli in particular. 

I would like to thank you, honourable members, for the zeal you have shown. This is what I want to take to EALA. If you pay attention to international news, you will notice that Uganda made international headlines and our name was tarnished; they reported that Ugandans were fighting in EALA. Why should we continue having this kind of representation? I am a gentle and diplomatic person with a lot of integrity; I will not stand by and watch members of DP, NRM and other parties fighting. I will tell them, “We are ashaming Uganda; we need to work as a team”. Therefore, I would like urge you to support Matyoli and we shall have peace, development, teamwork and coordination. I want to assure you that you will not regret voting for me.

I have personally been to Bushenyi and interacted with hon. Gordon Arinda. He is promoting the growth of passion fruits in his area. We can emulate China’s example; when they resolved to become a republic, they resolved that they would not import anything. Therefore, anybody that wants to come and bring something here needs to establish their factory in Uganda or East Africa so that they can buy our fruits and our children can get employed. 

Madam Speaker honourable members, you should take note that at one point we had the East African Examinations Council, East African Railways and the East African Development Bank. However, they all collapsed because of the calibre of legislators that were there. 

We must harmonise the syllabuses and all the other learning systems. One time we heard about a big politician from Mombasa who came here and studied law at Kampala International University (KIU) but when he went back, they thought KIU was a secondary school. This implies that the Inter-University Council for East Africa, which we are being told today is an achievement, is not on the ground; otherwise, they would be aware that KIU is a university and not a secondary school.               

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you should not go to the market and procure products that require further processing when the ready ones are available. I would like to pray that you take the right decision today –(Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Racheal Mpiriirwe. You have seven minutes.

12.32
MS RACHAEL MPIRIIRWE (Independent): Madam Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, honourable members and everybody present, I salute you all. I am called Racheal Mpiriirwe and I am an independent EALA aspirant.

I begin with a short story: Cecilia is a woman conducting business across the Rwanda border. Every time Cecilia has to transport her goods to Rwanda, the clearing agents at the Rwanda border put up hindrances. This limits her from taking her goods to Rwanda until she is forced to part with a certain amount of money in order for her goods to cross over to Rwanda. In face of this injustice to the Ugandan traders, the Rwandan traders are free from this and they have an enabling environment to freely trade within Uganda and East Africa at large. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Cecilia’s story is just one among the many stories about what Ugandan traders face while carrying out cross-border trade, especially those in the informal sector. Uganda cannot favourably compete within the East African Community because of such challenges. Whereas it is very easy for a non-Ugandan to get employment, start business in Uganda and to top it up all, obtain land in Uganda, it is next to impossible for a Ugandan to obtain the same favours in other East African partner states. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and honourable members, can you imagine that just recently, the Law Development Centre (LDC) of Kenya recently denied Ugandans the opportunity to study from there? If you send me to represent you at the East African Legislative Assembly, I will push for the status quo to change. 

We cannot keep helping other countries develop at our cost. We need to commit to the treaty and Acts in the EAC Charter in order to have fairness across the region. It is to Uganda’s disadvantage that we open our borders to other countries while they have kept theirs closed.  Honourable members, if we do not do this, it is us - me, you, our relatives and even our children in future - who will be down and look on while other East African countries benefit. 

Honourable members, as lawmakers in this country, you also have a great role to play. As I am there pushing for us to benefit from the EAC, it is also your role to push for those same laws to be domesticated, putting into consideration the Ugandan person. If the EAC passes a law on transportation of the agricultural products, for example, it is my role as your representative at the East African Legislative Assembly to partner with you, the lawmakers in this country, to make sure we make the laws and put restrictions on how much agricultural produce will leave this country. (Applause)

It is disheartening to know that whenever we get towards harvest time, traders from Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan come to our country and buy off all the harvest in the gardens, including the seeds. The local farmer is therefore left with nothing to eat and nothing to plant for the next season, hence the recent hunger spell in our country. Honourable members, if you send me to represent Uganda at the community, I will push for us to fully benefit in the East African Community. 

It is again sad to note that whereas other countries come here and take goods, it is hard for us to go and get goods from them; for example, you cannot cross the Rwanda border to Uganda with any agricultural products. 

If you vote for me, I promise to push for an EAC that is people-centred and driven. I believe it is time for us to create a generation and make future generations proud of what we did here. Let us stand and fight for our country, Uganda. We can still benefit from the East African Community while we also put our people into consideration. Thank you so much. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Racheal. Honourable members, let me now invite candidate Mary Mugyenyi to address the House. (Applause) Order! Candidate Mugyenyi, you have seven minutes.

12.38
MS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM): Thank you, honourable members. (Applause) Madam Speaker, honourable Members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen, I salute you all. Habari zenyu                                                                                           mweshimiwa. (Applause) 

My name is Mary Mugyenyi and I am very honoured to stand before you and ask for your authorisation to represent you in the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause) I am very grateful for the opportunity that you have given us and for the support so far shown to us as we looked for votes from you. Thank you very much, honourable members. 

I have worked and served my country in different capacities. I have worked as a lecturer at Makerere University. I was a Member of Parliament in the Seventh Parliament and Eighth Parliament, where I represented Nyabushozi County. I have represented my country at the Pan-African Parliament at the international level, and I have been the Vice-President of the Pan-African Parliament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and honourable members, about 36 million Ugandans, including myself, vested their powers in you, and collectively in this House, to defend and protect the Constitution of Uganda. Vision 2040 clearly spells out the aspirations, vision and hope of our people in Uganda. Our national anthem clearly informs us that in order to achieve the prosperity that Ugandans aspire for we have to work together with our neighbours. Here we are putting different bits and pieces together to be able to work with our neighbours. I believe that this is the spirit that informed our leaders to establish the East African Community. 

Madam Speaker, I realise that our history has been tarnished by divisions, much of which we did not contribute to. Our countries and our people have been divided through colonisation. While we are not able to change our history, it is within our means to shape the future, so that we have a better future for the people of our region. This is our opportunity and indeed I acknowledge this and I am cognisant of the achievements that the East African Community has so far registered. (Applause)

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we have registered achievements of great magnitude, for example in infrastructure development we have the standard gauge railway with Kenya and the oil pipeline with Tanzania. We also have the common visa that allows our guests in and has boosted tourism in the region, the one border post, and the customs union that has seen increased volumes of trade amongst our people and has made us realise better revenues for our countries. We have the common market that has been established and the monetary union has had its foundation laid through the protocol that was signed. 

Madam Speaker, I realise that there are key areas of operation by members of the next East Africa Legislative Assembly. I want to point out a few. A strong legal framework is needed. We all realise that at the time of signing the treaty that established the East African Community, there were only three countries - the founder members – but now we have grown to six members. We have grown not only in size but in numbers too. We, therefore, need to review the protocol to be able to accommodate the changes that have had. I am also aware that there are more countries that are showing interest in joining the East African Community. That is why we need a legal framework that can accommodate that. 

Madam Speaker, we need a legal framework that can pave way for the establishment of women and youth councils at the regional level, which we do not have right now. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please! Allow the candidate to use her seven minutes effectively.

MS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we need to ratify the protocols that were passed by our heads of state. Many of them are not ratified. The laws that are legislated at the East African Community level by EALA are not domesticated and translated into laws that can be implemented here; there is an information gap. 

Many of the benefits and opportunities that are available at the community level are not known by our population. Therefore, once you send me as one of the nine members of the East African Legislative Assembly, I will be constantly asking you to let me inform this Parliament about the opportunities for our people. I will do this so that in turn our honourable members of the Ugandan Parliament can inform our population and the population can tap what is available for them. 

Madam Speaker, I also realise that –(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I now invite candidate Chris Muhango. You have seven minutes.

12.44
MR CHRIS MUHANGO (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, it is a great opportunity for me to be here. I thank the Speaker for giving me this opportunity to present myself as an EALA candidate who is championing tourism and who is ready to market Uganda’s tourism in the East African region. I am called Chris Muhango. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the honourable members give me a listening ear because the message I am going to present is an important one that may help us to increase our tourism ranking in the region. I thank you very much.

I have two points to make. The first point is: why did I choose to contest to represent Uganda? Currently, Uganda’s tourism and competitive rankings are low in the region. The recent release from the World Economic Forum indicated that Uganda is fourth, below Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya.

We initiated a campaign to market Uganda in order for us to increase on our tourism rankings and attract more tourists, which translates into more foreign exchange. It was during that campaign that we identified this Parliament and the one that I am requesting you to send me to – the East African Legislative Assembly – and also the Uganda High Commission in Nairobi and in Dar es salaam, so that we could work together to increase our ranking. I then decided that instead of asking them to do what I want to do, let me come and offer myself. 

Therefore, if you give me this opportunity to be a member of EALA, it will be easy for me to implement this campaign of marketing Uganda’s tourism campaign. We have codenamed the campaign “Tuende Uganda”. It is the equivalent of “tulambule”, which is being championed by hon. Kiwanda, and we are working together. (Interjections) Just listen to me for minute, honourable members - 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Allow him to speak.

MR MUHANGO: I want to give you one example of how we can use EALA to increase our rankings. Currently, we have three mountains in Africa that lead in mountaineering - Kilimanjaro, Kenya and Rwenzori. About 28,000 mountaineers go to Mt. Kilimanjaro each year, 17,000 go to Mt. Kenya, while Mt. Rwenzori receives 800, although last night I was told they are actually 2000 who go to Mt. Rwenzori. 

If we market the East African region as one bloc, we will market the three mountains together. What does that mean? It means that we will pull tourists to visit the three mountains and we will get an opportunity to increase the numbers that come here. Every mountaineer currently brings US$ 7000 to Mt. Rwenzori. If we were getting 10,000 mountaineers, how much money would that be? We would get Shs 200 billion. Honourable members, I request that among the eight candidates that you have identified, include a marketer. You cannot avoid marketing now in the global world. 

Let me give another example. Currently, we have more gorillas than any other country in the whole world - 600 mountain gorillas. However, across the globe, Rwanda is known for gorillas. The reason for this is poor marketing. I am here to tell you that we need to touch this button called marketing; it is a game changer. Maasai Mara in Kenya is smaller than 10 per cent of Serengeti but it receives more tourists than all the national parks of East Africa combined. The game changer is marketing.

I am a member of the Kenya Marketing Society and I am a charted marketer by profession. I have worked in the East African region, the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) and the South African Development Community (SADC). I have lived in Arusha and worked in Rwanda and I have helped them to package. Therefore, I know the region very well. I am, therefore, requesting you to send me among the nine-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you put down those posters.

MR MUHANGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have produced materials that we would like you to go with. I am a publisher and this is a book that markets Uganda as a very good brand. Call me, Chris Muhango; call me beautiful Uganda. 

Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. Whether I am voted or not, I request that- (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Candidate, can you please leave. 

Honourable members, at the beginning of this sitting, I asked you to put down your posters. It is unfair for you to wave posters of a different candidate when somebody else is on the Floor. All these are Ugandans and they are all candidates; treat them with decorum, please. 

I now invite candidate Mukasa Mbidde. (Applause)  Order, honourable Members! Honourable members, can you sit down and allow the candidate to speak. Candidate Mbidde, you have seven minutes. 

12.54
MR FRED MUKASA MBIDDE (DP): Thank you, honourable members. Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition, and for the avoidance of going by the wayside of the time limitation, all protocol observed.

Honourable members, thank you for this welcome. I can promise and guarantee you one major thing: I am not going to take your welcome for granted. To my colleagues and friends, this is a campaign but to me it is a memory. I was here five years ago and promised you one major thing - that I am going to work tooth and nail for the achievement of the great East African Community economic El Dorado. (Applause)

Honourable members, I promised to work tooth and nail for the purposes of achieving the four limbs of integration. I can promise you that the Customs Union Protocol, Common Market Protocol, Monetary Union Protocol and Political Federation Protocol are the major limbs that guide the aspiration of any Member of EALA.

I can guarantee that for the first two limbs, I have done wonders as the Chairperson of the Committee on Communication, Trade and Investment. I can equally tell you that I have done half of that job that I promised. The reason is that I have served for only one half of the treaty’s provision of a two-term limit.

Honourable members, I can tell you for a fact that the East African economic integration, the East African political federation and practically the integration process of East Africa is not yet there; it is at negotiation stage. It is at a stage at which “brains” must be sent consistently and continuously for purposes of the negotiation that is required of us.

Honourable members, we have campaigned as parties, shades and special interest groups but I can guarantee you that the job before us is a diplomatic one. (Applause) We have campaigned as parties, but what must be exemplified before EALA is a single political party called Uganda. (Applause) The country must exist before parties. I have personally negated the terrible compulsion to pursue a line that is unequivocally contrary to the process of Uganda’s economic integration before the East African Community. 

Honourable members, I have not succumbed to all the intermittent rodomontade that has been seeking to establish that I, Mukasa Fred Mbidde, should act in such a way that instead of opposing a political organisation, I am required to oppose Uganda. That is not my duty; that is not a diplomatic job. Honourable members, as you know, I have negated that compulsion and terrible idea by stating consistently that I cannot kowtow in their poohoo (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, order! Please sit down, honourable members. 

MR MBIDDE: Thank you, honourable members. Honourable members, permit me to state clearly - (Applause)- Thank you, honourable members. 

Honourable members, you voted for me for one term; one footstep is not a journey. Kindly, vote for me for another term, which will complete the journey that we organised and prepared together. Let us do it again, honourable members. We have done it before, let us do it again; send me to Arusha and I will not disappoint you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please sit down. Join me in welcoming hon. Norbert Mao, the President General of the Democratic Party; he is up there in the gallery. (Applause) We also have the Secretary-General of the Democratic Party, Dr Siranda. (Applause) When I get the names of the other guests, I will let you know. 

Let me now invite Candidate Mwasa Musamali. (Applause) Honourable members, please sit down. Candidate Musamali, you have seven minutes.

1.03
MR PAUL MUSAMALI: Madam Speaker, honourable members, thank you for the opportunity that you have given to me to address you as I ask for your vote to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly. My name is Musamali Paul Mwasa. 

Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank all Members of Parliament, irrespective of their political shade, who nominated me to be able to come here and campaign before you and the country to represent Uganda. In a special way, I would like to thank the members of the NRM Parliamentary Caucus who overwhelmingly voted for me to be able to come here as a candidate of the NRM.

However, remember that it is Uganda that I am going to represent, not only NRM. For those of you who did not vote for me in the caucus and those who voted for me, it is now time for us to consolidate this vote so that we are able to go to the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the candidate to speak please.

MR MUSAMALI: Honourable members, I am aware that you voted, but you will need to seal this vote. 

About the East African Community, it is clear to this country that Uganda and the East African states have already embraced the community. There are a number of protocols that have been signed - the Customs Union Protocol, the Common Market Protocol -(Applause). 

Honourable members, I am seeking for your vote to represent you. I want to initiate just two things. I have asked for your vote so that we are able to rejuvenate and harmonise the current laws and move on as a community. I have the necessary experience which you, the Members, have nurtured. You have mentored me - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take your seats.

MR MUSAMALI: Lastly, give me your vote to enable me serve this country. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, I now invite candidate Matthew Mutyaba. You have seven minutes. Honourable members, listen to the candidate. 

1.07
MR MATTHEW MUTYABA: Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, the Opposition and the ruling party in this Parliament, and all the citizens of Uganda. I am Mutyaba Matthew Omugave and I am before this Parliament to present what I have – God given for Uganda. 

I qualify to be a Member of Parliament of the East African Community due to the following reasons: One, I have a saying that disability is not inability. (Applause) If disability is not inability, I should be one of the beneficiaries of this nation to represent Uganda and be a hot cake for Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly.

I have a policy here to present. Firstly, I want to do what we call “effective discussion” in the East African Legislative Assembly. Many times, if we have no Member who can offer effective discussion, our country, Uganda, misses out on the opportunity to sell the ideas we have to the East African Community. I would like to speak to you, honourable members; I am somebody who is approachable, reliable and acceptable to represent Uganda in East Africa.

Secondly, I will advocate for increased budget allocation for the agriculture sector. (Applause) As Uganda, we know very well that we are good in agriculture. As a result, I am very ready to advocate for an increased budget allocated for the sector.

Thirdly, I will advocate for the rights of the unprivileged. We have very many people who are unprivileged and have no voices. Examples of these are persons with disabilities, the poor and those in the rural areas who do not know what is going on. When I am sent to the East African Legislative Assembly, I will be flexible and a hotcake to present the issues of Uganda.

Furthermore, I will advocate for what we call a border-to-border open market. We have Ugandans who are hard workers but the challenge is that they are hindered; there is no open door for them to sell their goods to the other side. However, if I go to EALA, there shall be a door open for every Ugandan to sell and share every good thing in East Africa.

The other issue is about inter-cross relationships within the East African countries. Recently, I heard about Ugandans who were evicted from Tanzania and yet we have people in EALA. I am saying I am the right person to defend Uganda so that every Ugandan shall have the right to enjoy the East African inter-cross relationships, movement and stay within East Africa.

Another issue is that I want to put my emphasis on what we call “unity”. Let me tell you, Members, if we lack unity in the East African Community, Uganda will never achieve its goal. Even in Kiswahili we say, “Umoja ndio nguvu” –(Applause)– Tu kiwe pamoja tutapokeya ushindi. Therefore, I would like to tell you that mimi ni mtu ambao nastahili nipokea kula because I know the language which I will use to connect with the people.

In addition, I am very flexible and I will carry the ideas from the Parliament of Uganda to the East African Community. How am I going to do that? I will be coming to the Parliament of Uganda and collecting all the ideas you have and sell your ideas to the East African Community. All the East African parliaments will then come together and we sell Uganda’s ideas for the achievement of a better Uganda and East Africa.

Honourable members, I think all of you have heard about Nkrumah and you know what we call “Pan-Africanism”. Let me tell you, Members, that this is a struggle of war where there is liberation. As East Africa, we need to be united. You studied about Nkrumah and Pan-Africanism as well as those who struggled to bring Africa together. As Matthew Mutyaba, I am the hotcake who is qualified to go to EALA; disability is not inability. (Applause)

Furthermore, I would like all the presidents of East Africa to be together and co-operate. In this way they will have access and bring East Africa together in order for development to come to Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda and South Sudan.

I call upon you to vote for me. I would like to tell you that as you see me here, I am gifted with very many talents -(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I now invite candidate Hassan Ssentongo Muyanja. You have seven minutes.

1.15
MR HASSAN SSENTONGO MUYANJA (Independent): Thank you very much, honourable Members of Parliament. I am overwhelmed by the support. (Laughter) Wherever I have passed, you have given me applause and I would like to thank you, honourable members. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rebecca Kadaga, and the Leader of the Opposition and all Members of Parliament present tonight.

Honourable members, I stand here more than 15 years after the East African Community was re-established. Up to-date, the task of perfecting the union, integration and inclusiveness, boldness and superiority of this union moves forward. It moves forward because of you, honourable Members of Parliament. This is because as we are seated here, you are going to carry out the noble duty of electing EALA representatives. 

It moves forward because of the able and visionary leadership of the then presidents, Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania, Daniel Arap Moi of Kenya and Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda, who on 30 November 1999 signed the treaty re-establishing the East African Community.

Honourable members, the man before you is Hassan Ssentongo Muyanja, born 31 years ago in Kyazanga Sub-County, Lwengo District. I am a graduate of a Bachelor of Education of Makerere University. I am also a graduate of the Rotary Leadership Institute. I am a businessman and family man who is married with children. I am a member of the Rotary Club of Kajjansi and a Muslim by religious affiliation.

Honourable members, my candidature in this race would, in a normal African story, prove unlikely. This is because I lost my parents at a very tender age and I had to continue the struggle of growing up and paying school fees for myself up to university. That is the spirit of persistence. It is the spirit of determination, hard work and sacrifice. If given opportunity and I am elected to EALA as Uganda’s representative, this spirit will be sanctioned in the younger generation in Uganda and in the East African Community in general.

Madam Speaker, this campaign has reminded me of the bloody history where we have come from, the hard times where have come from and the hardness in the political instability which existed in the 1960’s. I stand here to reaffirm the strength of our country and reaffirm that this country has come from far. We have picked ourselves up as a country and as a union and we are yet to move forward. Honourable members, I know that with your vote, the best for East Africa is yet to come.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, if voted to represent Uganda in EALA, I am going to carry the spirit and memory of a life-long appreciation of a good Member of Parliament; a good Member of Parliament who will not forget you and who will bring Arusha to Kampala. By this I mean that I am going to Arusha to deliberate issues and I will come back to my voters to inform you about what transpired in Arusha. At the same time, you will also inform me about what to deliberate on in Arusha.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the candidate speaking before you will visit you in your constituencies to popularise the integration agenda. It is one of the reasons why in 1977 the East African Community collapsed. Most Ugandans and East Africans in general at that time did not know the cardinal objective of the East African Community. I am a capable candidate and a candidate of integrity and competence. Based on that, I would like to request you to vote for me today and we make history.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I stand before you here when more than 10 million Ugandans are going hungry - this is according to the New Vision research – and when businesses are collapsing and companies are laying off workers. For the best of East Africa, I would like to request you, honourable members, to vote for me. 

We need to revive agriculture and we need to support the agricultural sector. It is based on this that I request you to vote for me to the East African Legislative Assembly. Vote for me so that I can galvanise and support the agricultural sector in Uganda and in the East African Community in general. It is public knowledge that the agricultural sector contributes 40 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP). This is 11 times more than the gas and oil sectors combined. So, we have a lot of potential.

Madam Speaker, I will make sure that protocols like the Maputo Protocol and the Malabo Protocol, which urge African governments and East African governments to commit 10 per cent of their budget to agriculture, are actualised. This will be done through lobbying, looking for markets in the region and making sure that farmers use modern techniques of farming, amongst others. 

It is based on that background, honourable Members of Parliament, that I request you to vote for me. (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Mwambazi Joseph Kazura. You have seven minutes.

1.22
MR JOSEPH MWAMBAZI (Independent): I would like to thank God for this wonderful opportunity he has accorded me to appear before you, distinguished ladies and gentlemen. In particular, I would like to thank God for you, Madam Speaker, for the way you have steered this Parliament. That qualifies you to be a hero.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am going to Arusha but on condition that we team up together to transform Uganda. I am a gentleman with ideas and I have come up with a proposed Uganda development programme. I would like all of you to share this and a copy should be submitted to the Speaker. 

I would like to see that we create goodwill between our people - the people that brought you in this House – and the East African Community. I want to see to it that we share the burden that you have in your constituencies. You are my constituency but you did not come from air; there are people that brought you into this House. 

I would like to act as a think tank for the transformation of your constituencies. Starting tomorrow, - because you are voting for me today - I would like to see that we sit together to transform Uganda because Uganda is the Pearl of Africa. Uganda has to shine in the East African Community. Actually, it is Ugandans that started the East African Community - the Buganda Association. It was started from here. We have to carry our banner and fly it high. Uganda has to shine. 

We have passed through a lot of turbulence. This is for northern Uganda. This is for hon. Hamson Obua, which will be shared by –(Interjections)- Copies will be availed to you, honourable members. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like us to sit together because at the end of the day, even if you legislate in this Parliament without helping the people down there to realise their potential, you will have done nothing. 

We talk about East Africa but East Africa is composed of people of various walks of life and various shades of opinions like me, as is articulated in the treaty. Therefore, I have come so that we can team up. I am available to help you to predict trends, give counsel to you and help you implement whatever is agreed upon for the betterment of Uganda and East Africa. Therefore, your vote will count. The moment you vote for Joseph Mwambazi, you will have voted for yourself. This will be a vote of confidence in your existence in this House.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you. I have a lot to say. I have helped many nations. I am the Director of the Centre for Defence and Diplomatic Affairs and a retired army officer. I am the one who in 2005 proposed the promotion of RO/001, Lt Gen. Kaguta Museveni Yoweri, to the rank of general in the company of Frank Tumwebaze. 

Hon. Frank Tumwebaze can inform you more. I launched a proposal when the clock was ticking for his retirement. They had forgotten to promote him. As a token of appreciation, I wrote the proposal. Hon. Tumwebaze can attest to that. Hon. Amama Mbabazi is the one who handled it because at that time, he was the Minister of Defence. 

I am ready to make Uganda shine. I am also the one who counselled those that were advocating for the independence of Sudan. When many people were supporting the referendum in Sudan, I told them that the war in Sudan was not about the breaking up of Sudan and it has come to pass; it was prophetic. You need to have people that have got a taste of foresight. I am ready to give you counsel so that we may see further. 

Vote for me unanimously because you stand to benefit from what I have proposed. I pray that God blesses you, whether you vote for me or not. (Applause) May the Lord who brought the National Resistance Movement political system, which advances individual merit, and the God who helped Yoweri Museveni, who was a nobody, to govern for all these years help you. (Laughter) 

Now that I have come, none of you will die. You will live to see the glory of the Lord in the land of the living. Alleluia! (Interjections) Our motto says “For God and my country”; unless we are for God, we will be for nothing. We have to be for –(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I invite the whips to call their Members back. We shall take a lunch break after the candidates have all spoken. Let us respect all the candidates and be present when they are speaking. Whips, please bring back your Members. Let me invite candidate Mwambu Herbert Emmanuel.

1.30
MR HERBERT MWAMBU (Independent): Madam Speaker and distinguished honourable members, I am Mwambu Herbert Emmanuel. I come from Sironko District on the slopes of Mt. Elgon. I went to Masaba Senior Secondary School, Nabumali High School and Makerere University where I pursued a Bachelor of Commerce and Master of Business Administration. Honourable members, thank you for that great reception. 

First of all, I wish to salute all of you, honourable members, for having made it to the Tenth Parliament. You fought very hard in your respective constituencies and you got here. I thank you so much for that. 

Honourable members, when I was growing up as a young child in Maluku Prisons, I used to have a hobby of bird hunting. It was not for the sake of it but we wanted to roast them for muchomo.  We used to pick stones, which we thought were very effective in shooting down these birds, and mould them to smooth round stones and dry them. These stones were very effective. Madam Speaker, I am one of those stones. Once this stone hit the bird, it would certainly fall down. 

I am going to EALA on an independent ticket and I am going to do the following: Honourable members, my mandate is grounded in Article 49 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community as amended in 2006, and this is basically about representation. What am I going to do? I am going to effectively represent not only this House but also the entire Uganda in the following areas:

I am very passionate about intra-trade within the East African Community. What is the local person going to benefit? I am talking about the businessman in Kikuubo, the wheat grower in Kapchorwa and that small farmer of Irish potatoes in Kabale. What are they going to benefit in this East African Community? Honourable members, I am going to make sure we get opportunities and communicate to our people so that they take them up.

Honourable members, I am also passionate about the co-operatives and the co-operative movement. You will bear with me but in Uganda today, it is only Bugisu Co-operative Union that is still standing. This could be a model in the whole of the East African region to look at. Can we revive the co-operatives? That is what I am going to do at EALA.

Madam Speaker, there is the issue of a monetary union. Having a very good background in finance and accounting, honourable members, I will be very handy in trying to bring forward pieces of legislation that are going to help us achieve the monetary union faster than we should have, which is 10 years from 2013.

Honourable members, the issue of climate change will be on my agenda. Some of our population are dying of hunger and extreme weather. However, if you give me your mandate, I will certainly do whatever it takes to make sure we plant more trees, rejuvenate the trees that have been cut down and restore the wetlands.

Honourable members, I seek for your votes right now. I would like you to catapult me - this stone standing before you - to EALA to represent Uganda effectively so that I add value to the legislation, oversight and appropriation of the budget to make sure our people benefit exponentially in that Parliament.

Honourable members, you need a person like me who has a knack for figures in the Parliament. It is not only about speeches and theories. Look at the example of Kenya; they exported goods worth $690.1 million in 2014 to Uganda while we only exported goods worth $199.3 million. What is Kenya doing which Uganda cannot do? We need to establish this and position ourselves better in the community. Better still, I will also be able to push for the co-operation between SADC, COMESA, ECOWAS and even hopefully, European Union to make sure that these bodies are together. 

Honourable members, I seek for your vote this evening. Let us be part of the change we want to be. Vote for Mwambu from the slopes of Mt. Elgon. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite candidate Charles Mwanje. You have seven minutes. 

1.38
MR CHARLES MWANJE (Independent): Rt Hon. Speaker and Members of Parliament, I am humbled to stand before you here on matters of principle and professionalism encompassed with socio-political and economic order of the East African Community. 

I promise, if you give me support as a Member of East African Parliament, I will do the following: One, I will help contribute towards removal of non-tariff barriers that have become an impediment to trade and industry. 

Secondly, honourable members, if supported, I will lobby through my communication skills and friendship that I enjoy within the Great Lakes Region - Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya - to ensure that we harmonise laws and policies that have become impediments to the development of the socio-political and economic order in the Great Lakes Region.

The other issue, honourable members, if supported, is that I will work on the poor economic infrastructure through networking of our roads on water and land to ensure flow of networking systems. This would propel industry and markets in the Great Lakes Region. 

Another issue is that of peace and security. The issue of peace and security has a component of term limits in the Great Lakes Region. If elected, I would generate a debate on mechanisms that can ensure that we respect the term limits in all the partner states like it is in Kenya and Tanzania. You find situations of atrocities and human rights violations in Burundi, as a case in point, that are due to the fact that when Nkurunziza was defeated he decided to cling to power. 

On that phenomenon, ladies and gentlemen, I propose that we establish a body like ECOMOG, which propelled Jammeh to leave power because he had been defeated. We would like all member countries of East Africa to have a body similar to that of ECOMOG so that we can enjoy peace, security and continuous political stability.

The other issue is: if supported, I will ensure that I generate a debate so that every member of the East African Community gets free insurance like it is in Rwanda. In Rwanda, every citizen has health insurance. Therefore, if ably supported, like I know that you are going to support me, I will ensure that I generate debate and seek consensus from all member states so that every community member accesses health insurance.

Ladies and gentlemen, the other issue is that I would also generate a debate so that we can have an East African Community university and hospital where members of the East African Community would get services at low charges. 

If supported, once again, I would also help in having an East African Community market that will help to get market for the products that will be coming from all over the East African region. In Rwanda, for example, they have a lot of coffee, we have bananas here, Burundi has cattle; we shall have an economic bloc that will ensure that we have markets all over so that we can reduce poverty in our member states.

Ladies and gentlemen, one of the issues that failed the previous community members is the establishment of the East African political federation. If supported, we shall ensure that we have a political federation if you have term limits. This is because we cannot think of political federation when Kenya and Tanzania enjoy different political systems. Therefore, before we think of an integrated East Africa, we need term limits in all partner states of East Africa. 

If supported, I would help contribute towards debate on systems that can harmonise counterfeits in East Africa. Today, we have a lot of products that are fake. Therefore, if you pick me, Mwanje Charles, the best independent candidate, I will ensure that we generate systems that will fight counterfeit products in East Africa. 

Another Issue, ladies and gentlemen, is that through lobbying and my communication skills, I would also generate a debate on systems that can help us have a stronger market in Africa. If supported, I would introduce a debate on systems agreed upon by all member states to ensure that we develop a strong environmental authority system that will have the capacity to bite whichever country violates our environment. Individuals should be taken to answer to their crimes as long as our environment protection policy is upheld.

If supported, ladies and gentlemen, I would also help enhance regional trade alliances in all member states through trade partnerships and discussions. Also, through relevant systems of cooperation and initiatives, I would help contribute a debate towards having a stronger security and immigration system. When you go to Rwanda, immigration systems on –(Candidate timed out).

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite candidate Susan Nakawuki. (Applause) Order, Members! Take your seats. Candidate Nakawuki, you have seven minutes.

1.45
MS SUSAN NAKAWUKI (Independent): Thank you, honourable members. Madam Speaker, distinguished members of this august House, shikamoo mheshimiwa –(Applause)- Nawalete ya kusalimia kutoka Bunge ya Africa Mashariki.

My name is Susan Nakawuki, also known as the lead car. I am a lawyer by profession, married with three children. I have had the opportunity to serve you at the national level as the member for Busiro East in the Eighth Parliament, and at regional level at the East African Legislative Assembly.

Honourable members, I would like to first of all congratulate you upon making it to the Tenth Parliament – (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the candidate to speak.

MS NAKAWUKI: I would like to quote two verses from the Bible. One verse is Galatians 6:7, which says that what you sow is what you reap. The Bible also goes ahead to say that a good tree which bears good fruit shall never be cut down. Here I am presenting myself to you as a tree with good fruit, honourable members. –(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Sit down. Allow the honourable member to speak.

MS NAKAWUKI: Thank you, honourable members. Allow me to say that my life in EALA has been a journey, which we have moved on together, and this journey is not yet complete. I need you to come with me and we complete this journey together by giving me a second term in EALA. This august House set a precedent of giving EALA members their second and final term. Honourable members, I request you to apply this – (Interjections) – Thank you, honourable members – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Take your seats, please. 

MS NAKAWUKI: Honourable members, let me make just make one request. I hereby request for your vote, honourable members and I request for that overwhelming support in the box outside there. 

Honourable members, we have been able to achieve a lot as an assembly and there is a lot we have not completed. I need to go and consolidate the achievements we have made –(Applause)– Thank you. I am humbled. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Please, take your seats. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Mariam Nalubega. (Applause)

1.51
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent): Madam Speaker and the Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, the Leader of the independents, distinguished honourable members. I must say I am so humbled to be here today. 

I want to thank God for this gift of life that has enabled me to live up to now. I want to introduce myself to you; I am Mariam Nalubega, a former member of this august House and a well nurtured leader. I am a very committed person, determined and I am a courageous woman. I am a fighter and a very exposed and experienced person. (Applause)

Honourable members, I want to thank all of you who have given me courage to come here today and contest among the nine best candidates who are going to be voted today. I believe and know that I have the capacity and potential to further the gains and interests of Uganda in the EALA. 

I believe in integration because I know that together we can sink or rise. Honourable members, like I have said, I have acquired enough experience, legislative skills, and I am well versed with the integration process because I have been part and parcel of the process of integration. I have participated in enacting laws that have facilitated this integration. 

The integration is based on four pillars: the common market, customs union, political federation and monetary union. These are very important pillars. I know that our Government, which we are going to represent in EALA, has a key interest in these four pillars.

Honourable members, some of you have worked with me and you know my potential –(Applause)– You know that I am a very active legislator. My passion in this House was to see to it that we have quality service delivery and accountability. I stood for women issues and for the health of the Ugandan population. These are the issues that I want to carry on to EALA in Arusha. 

Honourable members, when I was here, I did a lot of things which are still exhibited in this House. I am the founder of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Media. I am the founder of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Youth Affairs, a forum that is very vibrant. This integration is going to be moved largely by the young people in East Africa. I want to go to EALA and champion the same forum I started in this House to ensure that young people are part of the integration and that they benefit in all the processes of the integration. 

I have been an active member of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and an executive member. You all know my passion when it comes to maternal mortality and infant mortality rates. I am a champion in population issues. (Applause)

I am a team player. When we go to EALA, we are going as Ugandans. You know that I am very capable of mobilising everybody beyond Parliament and in our communities. In Uganda, we have the Uganda EALA Chapter. This chapter has been dormant; I want to go and revive it so that I can network with you and give you feedback, consult with you and get to know the issues to be tabled in the assembly. Honourable members, I will help you to reach out to the communities and sensitise them and make them appreciate the integration. 

I am a woman of different skills and attributes. I have participated in the East African games and I am a medallist. I have been running for Uganda. I have been playing netball for Uganda as a centre player – (Applause) – I will make you shine in EALA, honourable members. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am determined to push Uganda’s interests in EALA. I will work with you, honourable members. I am standing as in independent but very dependable.  I am a very assertive leader but so diplomatic. Trust me, honourable members; I will not let you down. The Mariam in me stands for values. I ask you to trust me and send me to EALA. Give me your vote, honourable members. Let me be among the best nine. 

Madam Speaker, I want to appeal to Members to do a soul search. If I was laying in state today, I know many of you would stand up and give good memories of me; please, make them today as you vote for Mariam Nalubega. Asanti sana. Mungu awabariki. I stand for Uganda. I stand for women. I stand for young people. May God be with you as you take this decision. For God and my country. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Denis Namara. (Applause) Order! Take your seats, please, honourable members. Allow the candidate to speak. Candidate Namara, you have seven minutes. 

1.58
MR DENIS NAMARA (NRM): Madam Speaker and gallant honourable members of the Tenth Parliament, one of the greatest philosophers, Frantz Fanon, wrote in his book, The Wretched of the Earth, that every generation must, out of absolute necessity, defy its own destiny and either make it or betray it. 

I am here before you, honourable members, to make a case for the East African integration and I am called Denis Namara. I am a 33-year-old lawyer by profession, an advocate of the High Court and other courts subordinate thereto. I am currently pursuing a Master of Laws in oil and gas from the University of Dundee. 

I was born and raised in Bunyoro subregion in western Uganda, but bred and baked in the blazing furnace of youth leadership in Kampala. I started as the Guild Speaker of Makerere University and rose through the political ranks to become the President of the Uganda National Students Association, galvanising synergies to be the Chairman of the Youth League of the NRM and thereby qualifying to be a member of the NRM Central Executive Committee (CEC). Honourable members, I was appointed by His Excellency the President to be a senior presidential advisor at the age of 28, a role I performed impeccably. 

In 2012, I stood for Member of Parliament for EALA, but as fate would have it, I lost by only one vote. I stumbled, but I did not fall. After five years of gathering more experience and political momentum, I present my candidature to you once again, men and woman of valour, men and women in the higher echelons of power and the real crème de la crème of the nation. I present myself as the vanguard of transformation, a ray of hope and epitome of tranquillity and an embodiment of integrity to represent the people of Uganda at the regional assembly. 

Honourable members, I strongly believe that the shared prosperity and strategic security of the people of East Africa forms the pinnacle of the East African integration. We must come together to remove the strategic bottlenecks to trade by fast-forwarding the implementation of the economic integration protocols. I am referring to the Common Market Protocol, the Customs Union Protocol and the Monetary Union Protocol. We must take advantage of the high population of East Africa of over 170 million people with a combined GDP of over $150 billion.

We must come together to harness the achievements that come with the joint infrastructure projects like the standard gauge railway, the oil pipeline and refinery, while partaking serious future projects like the development of –(Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR NAMARA: Honourable members and gallant intellectuals, we must protect our economy against foreign forces. We must come together in order to integrate and protect the strategic security of the people of Uganda. I, therefore, kindly request for your vote and support so that together we enter into the annals of history as victors. 

May God bless the Tenth Parliament. May God bless the people of Uganda. For God and my country. Mungu awabariki. (Applause)
 
THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! Please, sit down. I now invite candidate Jackeline Nassanga Oba. You have seven minutes. 

2.04
MS JACKELINE NASSANGA OBA (Independent): Rt Hon Speaker of Parliament, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, honourable members present and the audience at large. I am here to represent Uganda in the East African Community. I have an independent mind and would like to represent my nation. 

I am a social scientist by profession and double as a teacher. I specialised in international relations and diplomacy; therefore, I am well versed with issues to do with treaties, law and foreign. Basing on my background as an executive director with international relations and on my career as a mother and teacher of this nation, I am here to articulate the following issues: 

I would like to advocate for an East African railway because most of the goods that we have are perishable and non-perishable. I come from the eastern region of Busoga, where we used to have the Uganda railway operating. It used to be a big support to the economy of the Basoga and the eastern region. Therefore, I will advocate for the East African railway to work in our favour so that we are able to sell our goods. The African mother, who is the backbone of agriculture in Uganda, will have a living and have money to support her family. 

I will also advocate for customs and tariff rates. Our rates are very high. Our farmers grow their crops and when it comes to the time of selling them, they sell them at low prices that they do not benefit. We know that 90 per cent of Ugandans are farmers; therefore, I will have to fight hard to ensure that everybody gains out of his or her sweat, basing on the tariffs and fighting hard to see that our monetary value rises up.

In the newspapers today, they have written that the economy of Uganda is low and reducing further. We need to monetarise this economy and we must have an East African currency. This is very important; otherwise, we are fighting for no good reason. If the Kenyan currency is high and the Rwanda franc is also high and we are the ones with the lowest currency in East Africa, then there is need as East African legislators to ensure that we fight and make this come to the same base. 

I will also ensure that we put a policy on human trafficking. Most of the youth are educated, but they are not employed because Uganda does not have jobs for the youth who are the majority of the nation. If we implement a policy on human trafficking, our children and little brothers will be going to China and other countries and the East African states to give value for what they have studied. They will make sure that they gain and support their families, rather than going there as refugees and foreigners and in the end, they die and their families lose them. 

I also would like to emphasise the issue of security. We thank the NRM Government for the security that we have; that is what we should emphasise and make sure that it has a base. If we, Ugandans, are settled and Sudan is not settled - There is need to ensure that our security in East Africa is the same. We must have a force or a combatant group that will be able to take care of us when we have issues around us. If Uganda did not support Sudan in the many wars it has faced, for example, we would have lost many of our people. Therefore, it is a very important issue. 

I also would like to advocate for a policy on refugees because Uganda has become a dumping place for refugees. Even though we have a heart to keep the people that have had issues in other nations, it does not necessarily mean that we should be a dumping place. 

All East African nations should fight to ensure that the issues that cause refugees are stopped. When refugees come into the country, they come with the aim of settling here because we are hospitable. However, many times this is abused. We allow Sudanese, Kenyans and the other nations to come here but in the end, they fight us. We must, therefore, come up with a policy and take in what we can afford. We should not settle every refugee just because we have a good heart.

As a mother of this nation, I have the women at heart. That is why I said I have an independent mind and I am carrying the Ugandan flag. I would like to let you know that women have suffered a lot. They are not given a mandate in decision-making, especially at lower levels. As an East African legislator, I will ensure that I sensitise and advocate for women’s rights because Articles 121 and 122 of the treaty advocate for women empowerment and all programmes inclusive. 

As one of the legislators that you are sending today, I will ensure that women are empowered in skills, in their work, at decision-making level and in all issues that are done from the local level to the international level –(Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Nyero Francis Lakelle. You have seven minutes. 

2.12
MR FRANCIS NYERO (Independent): Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the chief whips in the House and the Clerk to Parliament who is our returning officer; honourable members of the 40 municipalities, honourable members of the 126 districts, honourable members of the special interest groups in Parliament and the directly elected Members of Parliament. 

My name is Francis Lakelle Nyero. I am a former candidate for the NRM vice-chairmanship, 2015. I was also a Member of Parliament aspirant, 2016. Now I am an EALA candidate for 2017. I am credible, competent, mature and focused, which address the attributes of a candidate who should go to EALA. 

An EALA candidate should be knowledgeable about the politics of the five countries, which is different from the constituency politics. Ours are a good six countries to work on. I know the economies of all these five states, their national security, governance and the obstacles as to why we cannot get a logical and comprehensive federation of the East African bloc.

Allow me to address a few bottlenecks. One of the bottlenecks is the legislators that were there in the last five years. They did not do their work. Secondly, my main focus will be the poor implementation of the protocols, which were already signed. As I speak now, about 10,000 Ugandans have been deported from the United Republic of Tanzania. The United Republic of Tanzania is one of the traditional member states of the East African bloc. It is important to sound the vision, the mission and the commitment of the forefathers who brought East Africa together. (Applause) I strongly believe that the East African bloc is facing a lot of prejudice from Tanzania. They claim that we are land grabbers; we are not land grabbers. 

Three, we have got problems in the country here because those who represented us there did not know the problems on the ground. If we knew the problems on the ground, we would have set up policies in the apex assembly in Arusha, which would deal with the cultural institutions, the cultural leaders and protection of cultural properties. All these would have been dealt with from there.

Fourthly, land is a major issue everywhere. When you go to Amudat, Amuru or even Kibale in Bunyoro, there are a lot of land cases and there is chaos. We need an apex policy from that side. 

Five, the lady who represented us there did not address the problems of the nomads, pastoralists and the minority. We have been discussing the problem of the Karimojong pastoralists for 20 years in this Parliament. What is the use of the East African Legislative Assembly? 

My background is in defence. I believe if we got the core problem of the East African Community like presidential term limits harmonisation, we shall sail. What is the methodology of dealing with this crisis? One, when I go to Arusha next month or so, I will move a motion in the assembly to enact a law called “The Presidential Retirement Protection Law, 2017”. This will allay fears of sitting presidents, who have overshot their time in presidency. This will remove obstacles of federation and make everybody comfortable. It will also set a good precedent for everybody to sit and move the East African bloc at one pace.

I am complaining about how we messed up the vision of our forefathers in the assembly. What an opportunity? How do we lose five years, when the vision is to protect the cultural institutions, the economy, land, businesses, human beings and life? 

We are talking about unemployment. Where is this team in Arusha? If the British and the European Union cultivated human resource for indispensable opportunities in governance, can’t we do it? We talk about infrastructure; get the politics right and infrastructure follows. We talk about agricultural transformation; unless we deal with the first priorities first, we cannot address agriculture. Get the politics right. (Applause) 

We talk as we are handling special hopes. We are disappointed that up to now we have the nomadic pastoralists - the Karimojong - disturbing northern Uganda and refugees disturbing northern Uganda. Where is our assembly in Arusha? (Candidate timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite candidate Obua-Ogwal Benson. (Applause) Candidate Obua, you have seven minutes. 

2.20
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (Independent): Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is my greatest pleasure to stand before you today to present myself to you so that you can send me to go and represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly. 

I would like to start by telling you that I have been praying for all of you. Many of you know that I am prayerful. Honourable members, I am going to say this with all honesty; I pray for you every week at least twice, mentioning you all by name since you were sworn in. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Allow the candidate to speak.  

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Madam Speaker and honourable members, as I present myself to you, I come as a candidate who has integrity and is willing to serve you. You are my primary electorate and I am also going to serve Uganda as a nation. 

As most of you know, I am a team player. I work very well with everybody. When I was in this House for my first term, my favourite position was where hon. Gonahasa is seated. When I was a shadow minster twice, my favourite position was where hon. Simon Oyet is sitting. I loved working with everybody, so I always reached out to Members of the ruling party. I worked very well with the Cabinet ministers whom I shadowed. In that same spirit, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I trust you to send me as one of the nine members, who are going to serve this nation and put Uganda first. 

Madam Speaker, I am determined to increase the shine of Ugandan members of EALA to another level. My credentials speak for themselves. I took the trouble of sending you my web page - www.bensonobuaogwal.com - so that you could see for yourselves. I also sent you my profile and pleaded to you using technology. I addressed each of you by name and constituency and sent a video to tell you more about myself. 

I have represented this country very well outside the country. I was elected, in absentia, by the Makerere University Students’ Guild to be the Secretary General of All Africa Students Union based in Accra and I served this nation for a whole five years. During my five years, there was never a scandal. In fact, if any of you went to Ghana today, you will be well received because of the record I left there. Many of you who have visited Ghana can testify. 

While there, I did a course in the University of Ghana, Legon Centre for International Affairs and Diplomacy. I did a Master of Arts in International Affairs and Diplomacy. My dissertation topic was very relevant to what I am about to embark on in EALA. It was, “Regional Integration in Africa: Challenges and Opportunities in the 21st Century”. As a matter of fact, the university has called me to improve that dissertation a little so that they can award me an MCO. Madam Speaker, you cannot therefore doubt my credentials. I do not need any institutional memory because I have institutional memory even before going there. 

What is more is that I sat at the feet of people like Prof Adebayo Adedeji and A.K.B. Asante. These are leading gurus in international relations, especially regional integration. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank you for the support you have accorded me so far. I will not disappoint this country. I will not put the name of this country into any disrepute. (Applause)

When I was in this Parliament, one of the credentials that I added was to serve as shadow minister for East African Community Affairs. The minister that I shadowed can testify that never once did we have any acrimony but we worked for the good of this country. I suggested things to them which they took on board. I was also the shadow minister for ICT.

My experience is good, in fact excellent. However, above all, I have travelled the world and I have seen how regional integration can be messed up by people who do not know what they are going to do. From day one, I can assure you that I am going to start doing the things that need to be done to make our East African Community a better one.

A lot of people have really told us what they are going to do, but those are things that we have to do together as a Parliament. I am going to represent you and I will come to you and present a lot of issues that we need to handle together. I will be reporting to you from time to time –(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now invite candidate George Odongo. (Applause) - Order, Members! Please, take your seats and allow the candidate to speak. You have seven minutes.

2.27
MR GEORGE ODONGO (NRM): Madam Speaker and distinguished members of this august House. It is my highest honour to address you on a matter of my candidature and to request for your support to endorse me to represent this country at the East African Legislative Assembly. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, this election has gripped the country and they are watching with keen interest because this country has a history. Everybody wants us to tell our story and this Parliament today has a duty to tell that story. (Applause)

I would like to thank members of the National Resistance Movement who endorsed my candidature and Members of this House for the continued support since I declared my candidature. Madam Speaker, I know that this House has different shades; we have the yellows, blues, greens, the reds and the colourless. However, in this election, allow me to indulge this House a little a bit to make me paint it black, yellow and red. This is because this election is about representation of this country to EALA. (Applause)

My candidacy is premised on raising the threshold of our democracy and governance in the region. Democracy and governance is a soft power that drives great nations. You are all aware that even as we speak, there are countries that are part of this community that still have a very huge problem of governance and democracy. It is our duty as a Parliament and as the EAC to address ourselves to the issue of governance and democracy because that is what is going to define our relationship as countries that are part of this integration.

We must look power in the eye and speak truth to power. It is not enough for us to integrate out of sentiment. We must be able to raise the bar of this country. (Applause) We have no more luxuries. It is time for East Africa to act -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please sit down and allow the member to speak.

MR ODONGO: Madam Speaker, as I ask for your vote, I would like to draw your attention to the recent events that have defined the EAC. We have just included South Sudan within our integration. That means we are expanding the frontiers of our struggle as East African people.

However, the 170 million people and the argument that our population provides market has got to be translated. It is my considered opinion that an integration of poor people is a burden. This election must, in principle, integrate the East African Community out of poverty. It is my considered opinion that the East African Community must come up with a Marshall plan that is akin –(Applause). Madam Speaker, thank you so much. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Order! Take your seats. I now invite candidate David Okwere. You have seven minutes.

2.34
MR DAVID OKWERE BEECHAM (Independent): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker of the partner state of Uganda, honourable ministers present, Members of Parliament and fellow East Africans in the gallery, accept my greetings this afternoon.

I am profound to stand here before you this afternoon to reaffirm the commitment of our founding fathers of the East African Community - the spirit of Julius Nyerere, Jomo Kenyatta who spearheaded the integration that we need to push and which has brought us here today. If it was not for the lives and sacrifice of our founding fathers like Julius Nyerere and others who made efforts to push for the integration, we would not be where we are today. 

Madam Speaker, I stand here before you after the devotion and sacrifice by the spirit of the East African Community youth ambassadors where I have been for over seven years. In that spirit, we have spearheaded the integration process. We have worked together with East African Community Secretariat and we have understood the dynamics of the integration and what it is about. It is in that spirit that we have worked hand to hand and shoulder to shoulder to make sure that we fight for regional integration. The regional integration is based on the principle that we stand united to advocate for a true spirit of leadership.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, in line with what I have mentioned, the East African Community and all the partner states have always advocated that we come together as one. The EAC now has a population of about 65 per cent youth; but where are the 65 per cent youth population? They are the young leaders of tomorrow. However, at the same time, they are always the frontrunners whenever there is an outbreak of war in the region. 

Madam Speaker, when war breaks out, the youth are always the ones at the frontline. They are at the frontline to destroy but not to contribute to development in the country. We cannot compete with other regions, or other partner states or blocs because of misconception or the message being delivered to the youth. Madam Speaker, I am here to seek the mandate of honourable Members of Parliament to make sure that we call for the deliberation and restoration of hope in the integration process. 

My candidature came from all the youth of the East African Community who endorsed a petition for my candidature in Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. We have always pushed petitions very hard before this very assembly, where we presented a plight for the youth before you, Madam Speaker. We also presented another petition before the Speaker of the East Africa Legislative Assembly, crying for the plight of the youth. At the moment, the East African Community is developing a 2050 master plan for the integration process and the master plan lies in the hands of the youth, so we cannot leave them out. If we leave our continent and country in disarray, then we cannot continue working together. 

Our population in the integration is about 160 million people. Our number is big enough to compete with other countries that have come together. In the United States, for example, they came together and worked for the betterment of their continent. In the United Arab Emirates, countries came together and worked for the betterment of their people. If those countries came together, why don’t we come together and work as one? We cannot sit and wait and leave things to go astray; we must put things in the right order. 

Honourable members, I seek for your mandate in the East African Community, where I have been a youth ambassador. It gave me a lot of privileges and I feel I can fall within Article 50 (2)(e) of the Treaty, which provides that if one is to be elected a member of the EALA, then they must have had proven experience - (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Kennedy Oluma. You have seven minutes.

2.42
MR KENNEDY OLUMA (Independent): Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, my fellow countrymen, ladies and gentlemen. It is a great honour for me to take the opportunity to address the House and the nation. I stand here seeking to represent my country, Uganda, at the regional East African Legislative Assembly. 

Honourable members, today’s election is not just about me and you; it is about the unyielding hopes, aspirations and dreams of the young men and women of this nation. It is about the future that we can be able to bear together. Today’s election is about the aspiration that we bear as a country. I seek for your vote so that I can be able to carry the flag of our nation to the East African Legislative Assembly.

Honourable members, I would like to assure you with my personal life story that the dreams of our forefathers can become true if we hold our visions together. It is not about me or you; it is about us as a country. This has got nothing to do with my colour, where I come from, what I have, what I know or whom I know; it is about us as a nation. There are many young men and women out there that hope that we can be able to offer leadership. It does not matter where they come from, they must be able to aspire and become somebody in this country and we must be able to offer that leadership. 

Honourable members, I would like to assure you that the challenges that we face as a country have nothing to do with our parties and where we come from. It is something bigger as a nation. We can offer the country the little hope that we have not seen before. As we sit here, our votes today can determine the great dream that my child and yours can be able to aspire for. 

I come from a very small community and in that community, we have dreams and hopes. Two or three years ago, the young men in that village gathered themselves and put their dreams together. They said they must defy the odds and move out into the world. As I speak today, a little team from Onduparaka realised this dream and is playing in the Uganda Premier League. This seemed impossible before and seemed unrealistic. We can define the same future for anybody today.

Just a few years ago, we were singing, hoping, praying and asking when our country will be going to the Africa Cup of Nations. Recently, we saw our boys put forward all the energies to defend their talent out there in the Africa Cup of Nations in Gabon. That is the unyielding hope that we have for this country for the young men and women.

Today’s election is not about me; it is about the women that we lose every day. It is about the many unemployed young people that are looking for jobs every day. It determines the fate of the East African Community. Honourable members, I would like to assure you that the East African Community is one of the smallest formations compared to others. However, even with its size, it has made tremendous efforts. That is one of the reasons when you go to our neighbour, Somalia, it is safer because of the East African Community. When you go across the border, our men and women in uniform die and defend us together regardless of their colour, tribe or race. That is the service that we must be able to offer this country. 

When I seek your vote, I seek your vote because I share the challenges that this country faces. However, that does not mean that we have not consolidated some achievements together. Indeed, we have created opportunities to work together with other countries and member states, but we must not forget that our energies matter. In this journey, we cannot walk alone. 

I am a Christian and my Bible tells me that when we put our faith in the Lord, our strength shall get better and we shall be energized and soar above like the eagle. We shall walk a journey together. I appreciate that there are leaders that have been there before; they have moved and walked, it is now time for us to run so that our children can be able to roar and soar above in the air. That is the future of this country. 

I am aware that the political dynamics of this country have changed drastically; I have to know you for you to vote me. I have to give you something for you to vote for me. I know that you, Members of Parliament, can defy all the odds and elect me as a Member of Parliament to represent this country at the East African level. Regardless of what it is, I know you can do it, not for me but for the sake of this country. This country bleeds for leadership and I stand here to offer it. 

My name is Oluma Kennedy and I seek your vote and mandate. However, it does not end at that; even when you vote for me today, it is my humble request that you do not leave me alone. We should work together as Members of Parliament and build our partnership stronger so that we can be able to articulate our issues at the regional level and most importantly, for our country, Uganda. 

I love this country. Let us all say that patriotism has no political party. Let us say that patriotism does not belong to any of the districts. It lies within us. It lies in our blood. It is our responsibility -(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Samuel Oola. You have seven minutes.

2.50
MR SAMUEL OOLA (Independent): Madam Speaker, members of this great house, ladies and gentlemen. I come from Nwoya District. My desire to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly has been informed by wisdom and compassion. It is informed by wisdom in the sense that I am convinced that my ability needs responsibility to expose these possibilities.

Honourable members, when you grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will champion the integration process and ensure that the three protocols - the common market, customs union and monetary union - are expeditiously implemented.

Honourable members, if I am elected to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will ensure the expeditious harmonisation of laws and policies that have long affected the implementation of the integration process. You will find, for example, that the common law here in Uganda and in Rwanda are not in tandem. When elected to the East African Legislative Assembly, I will ensure that there is a harmonisation process so that our legal systems are at par with each other.

If I am elected to represent Uganda in the East African Parliament, I will expedite the formation of a regional force that will be a pillar of peace and security within the East African region. Each partner state will then be in a position to make a contribution towards the promotion of peace and security within the region.

Honourable members, if you grant me the opportunity to represent this country in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will champion the formation of an East African food reserves authority. This authority will ensure that in times of bumper harvest, crops are purchased and kept in one pool so that in the event of famine or any disaster, such an authority can release food. This can eventually stem the problem of hunger and famine, which I know this House has been discussing. The formation of a regional food reserves authority can go a long away in ameliorating the problem of famine and hunger in the region.

When elected to the East African Legislative Assembly, I will ensure that members from the different partner states commit themselves to the Maputo Declaration, which clearly states that African governments should increase their budgetary allocation towards the agricultural sector. Honourable members, if you grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will ensure the speedy implementation of the tripartite free trade zone. I will do that by advocating with members from other partner states so that the tripartite free trade zone is expeditiously implemented to avoid the overlapping of membership.

If honourable members grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will strongly advocate for the speedy implementation of trans-boundary infrastructure such as roads, railways and the oil pipe. I will make sure that I make Uganda proud within the community. I will also make sure that I always stand with you. I will periodically inform you about what is transpiring in the regional body. I will make sure I am at the forefront of popularising the notion of the East African Community among Ugandans, so that they can know what it means and give support to the regional body.

Honourable members, if you grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will advocate with members from other partner states to ensure that the monetary union is speedily implemented so that trade within the region can be enhanced. 

Honourable members, if you grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the regional parliament, I will make sure that democracy, good governance and constitutionalism are enhanced and strengthened. Where we have similar political systems, to avoid the collapse of the East African Community like it happened in 1977 because we had different ideological compositions, I will be at the forefront of ensuring that there is uniformity and harmony of the political systems so that each and every member within the community can appreciate, recognise and respect the regional body.

Honourable members, if you grant me the opportunity to represent Uganda in the East African Legislative Assembly, I will ensure the speedy implementation of laws and policies that can mitigate climate change, which is currently ravaging our community and causing our people misery. I will ensure that laws and policies relating to environmental protection are enhanced. I will coordinate with other - (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite candidate Opoka Okumu. (Applause) Honourable members, please sit down. Candidate Opoka, you have seven minutes.

2.59
MR CHRISTOPHER OPOKA OKUMU (UPC): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a sitting Member of the East African Legislative Assembly –(Applause). I am a lawyer by profession and I have been the Secretary-General of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). I have worked hard with other colleagues in the other political parties to form the Inter Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD), which is a very important organ for dialogue between political parties, so that we have harmony in our country.

Madam Speaker, permit me to congratulate all of you, honourable members, for having won the elections. Some of you felled giants and giantesses; you deserve the victory. I would like to thank this House for having elected me in 2012. I now stand before you seeking for re-election. Who does not want another rap? (Applause) 

Honourable members, institutional memory is very important. When you elected me, I discharged my duties. I have worked, served and I have delivered. I did not betray your trust. Therefore, I am asking for ekisanja. I am asking in the words of His Excellency President Museveni – I am asking for another rap.

Madam Speaker, I served with distinction. I was first elected by my own colleagues to be the Vice-Chairperson of the Uganda chapter. I have served as a Commissioner in the East African Legislative Assembly. I was elected by the whole House to preside over the assembly to amend its laws. I was elected by the whole House when the assembly faced problems; they said, “Chris Opoka, you are the only person we respect” – (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! Please sit down, honourable members.

MR OPOKA OKUMU: I thank you for this powerful endorsement by the whole House. Thank you, honourable members. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker, for presiding over this assembly. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please sit. Honourable members, stay here; do not go. Let me invite candidate Alfred Otim. Honourable members, listen to all the candidates; they are all ours. You have seven minutes. 

3.05
MR ALFRED OTIM (Independent): Madam Speaker, honourable ministers and honourable members of Parliament. I would like to thank you for the opportunity you have given me to stand in front of you. I am a candidate for Member of the East African Legislative Assembly. I would like to mention a few things which are basically taking me to represent our nation Uganda in the assembly. 

First and foremost, I would like to focus on the issue of unemployment. I have realised that unemployment is a very serious issue in Uganda and in East Africa as a whole. You do realise that Uganda is releasing a very high number of graduates almost every week and all these graduates are being trained on the basis of job seeking rather than job creation. Therefore, my concern is: how are we going to address the issue of unemployment?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I appeal to you to listen to all the candidates. We are about to finish.

MR OTIM: I believe that I have to go and prepare for the generation that holds the future of this country.

Secondly, all of us are well conversant with the fact that the future of a country depends on the youth. It is the reason I am standing in front of you so that our senior leaders can guide us on what to do. I would like to appreciate that once senior leaders have held some positions for some time, at least there should be a time when they give an opportunity to the generation that is going to hold the future of this country. They can give us the expertise and advice on how we are going to handle issues affecting the region.

Thirdly, I would like to focus on the issue of education. I am still going to use Uganda as a point of reference. When you look at our economy, you will realise that education is still very low. Most of the public schools in Uganda cannot compete with the private schools that have the capacity to give quality education. What are we going to do to put Uganda’s education - It is through education that we are going to streamline the development of our country.

I also would like to strengthen the institutions that give practical skills to students. When you look at our technical training institutions, they are not competent enough. That is why most of the people who graduate from these academies come to the field unskilled. You may find someone from Kisenyi teaching these candidates practical skills. Therefore, I would like to represent the country and give her an upper hand in restoring all these policies we have lost over time. 

Another issue I will handle at the EAC is health. How are we going to promote our health facilities in the region? Most of our health facilities are lagging behind in terms of medical equipment and medication. These are some of the things I am going to handle when I am given the opportunity to go there. 

Therefore, it is for this cause that I really request you to entrust me with your votes because I will be the voice of the country. Thank you so much. May God bless you all.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate, Andrew Mutegi. You have seven minutes.

3.11
MR ANDREW MUTEGI PAITO (Independent): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon Speaker, Rt Hon Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament, honourable members of Parliament, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Paito Andrew Mutegi. I come from Nwoya District. Currently, I am the CEO of Acting Media Limited, an advertising agency incorporated both in Uganda and South Sudan.

Honourable members, it would be naive of me not to acknowledge the several questions that are running through our minds, especially during such a time when you and I are gathered in this House to elect representatives of Uganda to the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Our youth are asking questions about how competitive their labour will be in the face of integration. Our business community is asking how competitive they will be when our borders go open. Recently, we witnessed Sembule tumble. The person in your constituency, Nakamya, is asking how relevant the idea of the East African Community is to her. 

Others are asking how sustainable it is to run the East African Community, especially with budgets funded largely by donor funds. We all know that 60 per cent of funds supporting the East African Community come from donor sources and out of the 60 per cent, 90 per cent comes from the European Union. The European Union right now is grappling with issues of immigrants. As a result, budgets are being cut down and delays in funding are the norm of the day. How can we sustain such a system anymore? Whose agenda is it that we only take care of 40 per cent and foreign nations take care of 60 per cent? 

Others are asking questions about how co-ordination between EALA and the national parliaments can be enhanced. I have shared moments with Members of Parliament and indeed, they told me that EALA is still operating autonomous to the national parliaments. By all means, these are issues that need attention. 

Others are asking questions about co-ordination and consolidation. How shall we have the achievements that we have so far put in our pockets as a result of the East African Community - the Common Market Protocol and the single customs union - consolidated?

Honourable members, during such times, such questions are expected. However, these questions are by no means unique. Each question needs to be given the attention it deserves. I will not pretend to know all the answers to the questions we have and neither will I convince you that it will be easy to negotiate some of these protocols. However, you and I agreed that to enhance competitiveness in this region, we need to harmonise our education systems. Uganda is pursuing the seven-six-three system of education while Kenya is pursuing the eight-four-four system of education. For us to talk about integration and instil confidence in our citizens, we need to harmonise the education system.

On sustainability issues, I suggest we adopt the direction the Africa Union has taken. The African Union has earmarked a 0.2 per cent levy from imports to run the African Union’s affairs. I am confident that such a method can be adopted for the East African Community as well so that we stop depending on foreign parties.

There are those asking questions about how relevant the East African Community is to our citizens at the constituency level. This starts with you and me taking the message of integration right to the grassroots. I am confident that when EALA has to sit in Uganda, they will go to the district council halls and deliberate from there. It does not have to be the national parliament at all times. Personally, I have taken the mantle; the billboard you see at the Airtel roundabout is partly so that you see I am interested in this position, but secondly, to create awareness amongst our people. After all, this entire agenda of the East African Community is about them. 

Honourable members, we cannot talk about consolidation without thinking of political integration. The East African Community deserves a constitution that provides the backbone upon which the integration will occur. We need to harmonise political practices across the region. Uganda is pursuing the local governments system of service delivery and Kenya is pursuing the devolution system. By all means, all these need to be integrated and harmonised.

Honourable members, may the faith that you have in the East Africa that you and I believe in, and may the hope that has brought you into this House this afternoon, keep burning in each and every one of us until we see the East Africa we believe in unfold before us or before our offspring to come. May I now take this opportunity to say that over and above your votes, I need your trust. Entrust me with your vote - (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Ruhinda Nganwa. You have seven minutes. 

3.19
MR RICHARD RUHINDA NGANWA: (Independent): Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament and everyone who has gathered here to listen to this fundamental speech on how we build the integration. I am from Kyankwanzi District, a district that is centrally and economically positioned but politically peripheral.

I happen to be carrying a DNA transplant to connect to the eastern part of Uganda, the land of the wise people that only saw a star swing in the sky and identified that a king had been born. I am an independent candidate vying to represent Uganda in the East African integration. Our question here would be: if we are building the East African integration, what are we looking at? Many people would think of economic development. Many would talk of a free market but a free market without integration and a secured ground - I imagine, where are we heading? 

That is why I suggest that we first think of integration of the East African region, which must have a pertinent ground of security. Security should be the number one because once we have a secure ground, then we shall have peace and harmony. We shall walk economically freely and trade everywhere and do everything the way we need it.

When you look at what is happening to our neighbours in South Sudan, where the Nuer kill the Dinka, you realise that the integration we are developing - much as many of you would think of institutional memory and doing something beyond, it becomes an institutional menace, in my wisdom. This is because if our traders are losing much of their wealth in South Sudan where the ground is insecure, if we have our sisters and brothers dying over Rukwanzi Island on Lake Albert, what would you call security or integration? If we can have our brothers dying in Rwenzori in the manner that they die, would you call that security or integration? Once we have this integration and security as the unifying force, then we can walk other ways like building economic development. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to thank these ladies, whom I have pity on, for they have gathered and sat here to listen to us since we began. They have realised that there is something we need to do and that is why they have paid attention to all this. 

I beg you, honourable members, to determine an independent, dependable, viable and credible candidate and Ruhinda is number one. Ruhinda is number one if you desire to develop an economic integration that will thrive all over and lead Uganda to the best skies and planet, and an integration that would have Africans or black people thriving worldwide and dominating the world. This is what I am eyeing.  

Anything would happen today but I believe it is not easy to disband a vision. Once you have mandated me to represent Uganda at the East African Legislative Assembly, I will make sure that agriculture becomes our best option so that our people do not die of hunger, like the 10 million people who are suffering in South Sudan and also in Uganda where our land is fertile. 

Honestly, Uganda can become a food basket globally, but it is too pitiful and absurd to see that we are importing food from Pakistan and from everywhere, which has cost the economy more than US$ 15 billion. 

Ladies and gentlemen, I will look for integration that will enable us build transport and hospital infrastructure so that we do not go to the Asians, who have already put their act together, to seek for medication. I will also think of an industrialised economy where we can have unemployment solved amongst the youth. I am one of the Ugandan youth that is capable and knows Uganda from all it ranges to the end. At least I have stepped in every area in Uganda.

I beg for your solidarity as we stand together, just like we were in Moroto as we bid farewell to our fallen loved young mother, Annie Logiel. I beg that we maintain the solidarity as we walk tomorrow after I am elected as your EALA representative. We need to touch where we have been hurt for a long time. Many of us do not know Swahili but it is almost becoming the lingua franca of the East African region; in Swahili they say, “Mutaka kiunguni hakishainama” loosely translated that when you want something under the bed, you must bend. Let us bend and touch down onto the ground and secure the ground where we have all that is happening. Let us bend and touch the environment.

When I was in Moroto, I saw how people were suffering. The pastures have dried off and everything is dying because of the degradation of the environment. We would not love to remain politicians who articulate issues but become policy makers. I believe I will be a representative who will touch the ground; a candidate who will always beg you that we fly altogether. I beg that you allow me use the word “we” because I believe I cannot represent Uganda alone but I can do so with your minds, your brains as intellectuals, doctors and men of intelligence that have gathered here. I request you to vote for me. Once I am voted for today, tomorrow will be the best of Uganda. Uganda will stand great, always remain stronger –(Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Seruwuge Yasin.

3.26   
MR YASIN SERUWUGE (Independent): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga, honourable members and ministers. I am Seruwuge Yasin, all the way from Bukoto West constituency, Lwengo District. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God who has given me the opportunity to be here to speak to the Parliament of Uganda; it is not easy, my friends. (Laughter)

I once contested but due to some issues of cheating, I was unable to go through. However, here, I am very sure that there is no cheating. You will have to vote me at all costs –(Laughter) 

I would like to inform Members of Parliament that I have three very important aspects that I would like you to yield and mine me because to get where I am, you need to go and mine me – I am No. 41, Seruwuge Yasin. You should mine me out of the very many candidates because I am a very obedient man. If I am assigned work, I can do it; for example, I know that on issues concerning the East African Parliament, it is you, the Members, who send me. I am very trustworthy and I will do whatever you send me to do on your behalf. 

I would like to inform you that as you see me, one day –(Interjection)– Walaikum assalam – I am happy because this man has said, “Assalam alaikum”; EALA needs balance. If you look at the number of members so far, NRM has six but there are no Moslems. My dear Members, I kneel before you; give a chance to Moslems and you will have no problems. Al-Shabaab is fighting us just because we ignore them. If I am voted, I can communicate to them and they stop disturbing Uganda and Kenya. 

In Uganda, I have realised that we need to share our strength over others. Kenya is militarily weak while we are economically weak. Our main cause of economic weakness is inflation. If we join together, I think I can lead Uganda towards having a common currency that will help us. Kenya will also benefit because we are very good regarding security. If you give me a chance, I can handle the security issue. 

Before I leave the floor, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament here; I am Yasin, an independent candidate, very far down on the list. I am ready to serve and I have experience of serving. If you look at my background, you will see that we began a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) called Popular Private Investigations Department, which can help us change the problems of Uganda. It is already working in Kenya although here it has not yet taken off. Give me a chance and you will see it working here. Thank you very much. For sure, I need your support. It is you to give me a chance. It is not easy to know my name but I am Yasin Seruwuge. Thank you, honourable members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Godfrey Ssali. You have seven minutes.

3.32
MR GODFREY SSALI (Independent): Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, honourable members from all the political shades, I thank you very much for the work you have done. Before you is Godfrey Ssali, representing the private sector of Uganda. 

I stand for the private sector because it decides the destiny of this country. It decides the destiny of the United States. The Chinese economy is growing, not because of fallacy but because of the private sector. I have eight years’ experience with the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association, with Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA), the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda and before that I worked with the civil society in Uganda. 

It saddens me but life after Parliament has to go on. Many times, our brothers and sisters have been in horrible situations after Parliament. It is not that they misused their savings but because the economy is not doing well. I stand here as a private sector lobbyist. I stand here to defend the interests of the importers, the traders, exporters and farmers. Madam Speaker, I am certain that outside Parliament, Members of Parliament are educationists, farmers, importers and exporters. It is saddening when many of our brothers and sisters are in dire straits, clinging on to life, not because it is their choice but because of the bad economy. 

As I speak, we are doing a lot of import trade. I request for one vote for the private sector, one vote for the other hat you wear outside the august House, one vote for the business you do besides being a parliamentarian. 

On record, the EALA strategic plan ends in 2018. What is our input, as Uganda, to this strategic plan? Last week, I was in Nairobi meeting with the manufacturers’ associations in Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. Give me the opportunity to serve my country, give me the opportunity to write a better strategic plan, to grow our investments, our exports and our strengths as an economy. 

As I speak, I have finished the EALA application. I have chosen to use software. There is no reason why a Bill should take ages being drawn. However, my conscience tells me that if it is patented under the names of Ssali Godfrey, I will be seen as greedy. You all recently heard how the name “Uganda Airlines” was patented by an individual. It would be greedy for me to patent the EALA app. in my names, but I have done it because of my interest in EALA and software. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I am willing to hand over the app. to the Office of the Speaker of Parliament or to wherever you will direct me. Why do we need an app.? 

Record has it that a Bill takes over 24 months to be written and finished. India, the ECOWAS and SADC are now using software that was started in Australia on how to develop and finish a Bill. Madam Speaker, I request to hand over this app. to you so that we can save on the time we spend. Many Bills are stuck in our parliaments at national level, and at EALA it gets worse when we are always being consulted. I would like to commit myself to improving competitiveness in doing business. 

Right now in the East African Community, Uganda ranks third, and out of the 190 economies Uganda ranks 122 in doing business. How do we cut on the cost of doing business? How do we cut on the cost of transport from Mombasa? How easy is it to register a company? How easy is it for you to access Umeme? 

I pledge to serve my country by reducing on the cost of doing business. Like I said, outside the august House, you and I wear different hats. I would be happy when you and I are successful out there. Once again, Ssali Godfrey is my name, representing the private sector. 

Madam Speaker, there are issues that I felt should be brought to our attention. Fellow legislators are complaining of counterfeits in pharmaceuticals, electronics, car parts, clothing and everything else. I seek to represent my country and serve as a legislator to expedite the passing of the Anti-Counterfeit Bill. 

We have lost brothers and sisters, your animals are dying, our poultry farms are doing badly because of counterfeits. I know it is business but let business be ethical. I seek to represent ethical business in the country. Right now, the standard gauge railway is coming up; what are we going to export? Ordinarily, we have one East African Community but the competition is in earnest. Kenya is desirous to drive faster and every country seems to be blocking the other. 

We all agreed to have a common external tariff. Madam Speaker, like I said, last week I was in Nairobi. We currently have three tariff bans: the zero on raw materials, the 10 per cent on intermediaries and 25 per cent duty on finished products. It saddens me when what Uganda calls a raw material, other partner states call it an intermediary; what a partner state calls a finished product, the others call a raw material. I seek to introduce a three-ban tariff and if it is not enough, we raise it to a four-ban tariff. 

Madam Speaker, your voters are yearning and the essence is lack of proper jobs. I request to move Bills and motions that will promote manufacturing. Like I said earlier, the strongest economy is based on manufacturing. As a private sector representative and wearing your other hat outside this august House, I humbly request for that opportunity to represent the private sector.

Honourable members, you all have nine votes. I hereby request for one vote for Mr Godfrey Ssali for the private sector, for the – (Candidate timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now invite Ssali Khalid Lule. You have seven minutes.

3.39
MR KHALID SSALI LULE (Independent): Madam Speaker, Members of this Parliament and other distinguished members, I respect you in your own capacities. I am here for a general cause and this cause is beyond me, beyond you and beyond Uganda. It is a cause for East Africans. 

I am standing here for issues that we have to settle and fight together like for a common language, which must be used across East Africa. This language will conduct the economies of the countries at the East African level.

Honourable members, I would like to advocate and request for your support to elect me to join EALA and enable me fight for a common economy. I will also fight for a common jurisdiction where we can institute a common court where we can appeal when we feel we are not satisfied. 

We also need to address the issue of security, which will govern East Africa and protect the entire East African Community. Another major issue, which I will address, is that of democracy. Democracy has not been observed much. I would like to bring it to your attention that all the East African countries should adopt the same term limits if we would like to get the same democracy. Uganda, Burundi and Sudan just ignored it but it should be advocated for from EALA so that Uganda buys the idea as a general cause.

I want to fight for the economy - to stabilise the movement of both goods and people so that people can be free to access everything in East Africa without incurring tariffs. Honourable members, I once again ask for your support and vote. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I now invite candidate Byaruhanga Araali. You have seven minutes.

3.43
MR ROBERT BYARUHANGA TUSIIME (Independent): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am commonly known as “solar man”, a person who has lit the community. I have provided free solar panels in every district. I am contesting on an independent slot.

When I go to Arusha to represent Uganda, I will promote and protect Uganda’s interests in the East African Community. I will sensitise our citizens on the benefits of East African integration. I will also promote the independent relationship of the national and regional assemblies. 

Concerning the customs union, I intend to fasten the clearing of goods at the border because we normally purchase things like cars, which take long to be cleared. On the common market, we want a bloc market so that we can also market our products to developed counties like China and America, among others, when we integrate into East African Community.

On the monetary union, a single currency is necessary and needed in East Africa. This is possible because it has happened before. As such, we have hope for the monetary union to take place in the East African Community as a whole. 

I will also ensure that we support sectors because that is where we boost our GDP to ensure that we grow higher as the East African Community. I will also push further for the integration, although there are a lot of hindrances. However, we will ensure that this integration comes into place. I would like to implement the policy papers and the laws that have been considered but not practised. I will ensure that we implement these laws. 

Concerning youth unemployment, we need to cater for the youth so that they get jobs. This will be one of the issues that will be included on the agenda when I am elected as a representative of EALA. 

I will also look into reducing the cost of trade. We have a problem of roaming charges. When you leave here, honourable members, you are made to pay high roaming charges. Since we are becoming one, these charges should be removed.

In my view, the East African Community is basing on the partner states to raise their budgets but can’t we have our own assets as the East African Community and raise our own budget? This is because it is inconveniencing partner states and yet we would like to gain in the East African Community. As such, it should not be the partner states to raise the budget of the East African Community but they should have investments to cater for the partner states. 

We will also advocate for an East African electoral commission because it is not in place. We need it whenever we have elections as partner states. If Kenya is holding elections, Ugandans should take charge and if we are holding elections in Uganda, our people in the East African Community such as Tanzania should also take charge. I am sorry to say this but the Opposition usually claims that the elections are rigged and the NRM also says that the elections are being rigged. Therefore, if we have an East African electoral commission, I think we shall have better elections in East Africa. 

The East African electoral commission should be put in place in East Africa and if you mandate me, I will advocate for it. I will raise it on the Floor of the House. My fellow East Africans, please mandate me to be your representative in the East African Legislative Assembly because I am available to work with you and the East African Community. 

We have secured peace in East African states like South Sudan and Somalia. However, the question is: Ugandans have taken our soldiers to South Sudan and secured peace there but what are we exporting there to raise our GDP? When you look around, you will find that we only export boda bodas to South Sudan. The Government should come in and support professional exporters to capture the market of South Sudan and Somalia, who we have helped to get peace. 

Thank you very much, honourable members. My fellow East Africans, I am the right man and I know the solution to the problems of the East African Community. If you - (Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now invite candidate Werikhe Wanzala. You have seven minutes. 

3.51
MR GERALD WERIKHE (Independent): Thank you. Madam Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, Leader of the Opposition and Members present. I am glad to be here again. Six years ago, I presented a paper at the induction ceremony of the Ninth Parliament. It is, therefore, my privilege to be here again but this time as a candidate. 

I am Dr Gerald Wanzala Werikhe. I am not a medical doctor but a PhD holder in logistics. As my contribution, I have done a lot of research on the East African transportation network, especially the northern, central and southern corridor.

Honourable members, I have issues that are pertinent to the East African Community and because of time, I am going to focus on those issues. You may need to know where I work currently; I am a visiting lecturer at Dalian Maritime University in China where I did my PhD. I am also a research associate with Africa Leadership Institute. In addition, I am a consultant for CDS Solar Energy Technology Company in East Africa. It is a Chinese company. 

Honourable members, today I am here because of the following issues: Many candidates came here and spoke about markets but they did not tell us how to create markets as a community. In 2013, the East African Community created what we call the East African Commodities Exchange. It was a secondary market where people can supply and sell their commodities. Sometimes the people can issue their products, get receipts and use them for loans. Unfortunately, it is not accessible to the 170 million East Africans today. Therefore, in my efforts as an EALA Member, I am going to push for the strengthening of the East African Commodities Exchange and decentralise it so that it is accessible to the people in the member states.

My second point is about infrastructure. We cannot continue to rely on borrowing and begging from the European Union yet we are talking about Pan-Africanism. If you look at infrastructure in East Africa today, the costs consume 45 per cent to 65 per cent of the products that we import and export, so we cannot compete as a region. 

What do I propose? As a Ugandan representative in EALA, I am going to push for the creation of an East African infrastructure fund, where member states can always contribute in order to make this development sustainable. I am aware that the EAC developed one road that connects Kenya and Tanzania but it was through begging. For how long are we going to beg? These are the challenges that I want to advance in the East African Community. 

Concerning infrastructure, we still complain about the port of Mombasa being congested. It takes 15 days to clear the goods and transport them here and yet in many regions similar to ours, the port services have actually moved to the inland ports. Therefore, I need to push for extended gateways, in collaboration with the neighbouring countries, to ensure that our goods are transported quickly at a less cost. 

Honourable members, I am also proposing energy issues, specifically green energy. We are witnessing climate change today. In fact, our people think that it is God who is sending drought but it is not God. If we do not provide alternative sources of energy, how are we going to survive? We need to develop policy collaborative efforts between universities and state institutions to ensure that we develop green energy for sustainable development. The desire is there, what we need is the policy and legal framework to push this forward.

Honourable members, there is one sector that we have not paid attention to as East Africa and that is the development of maritime transport or inland waterways. We are lucky that we are in the great lakes region of Africa and we know that water transport is the cheapest in terms of cost and safety and it is the best and most comfortable. 

As a priority, I will push for a legal framework on the development of inland waterways because we need to look at the future if we have to take this region forward. When we open up and invest in inland water transport, we are going to open up inaccessible areas, create jobs and also impact on the economic growth of the region. Therefore, honourable members, I seek your mandate to be able to leave this mark in the East African Parliament. 

The other issue is on food and agriculture. When I looked at the reports of the East African Community, I noticed that the sectoral committee on agriculture has tried to advocate for an improved food situation but the situation persists. I looked at the statistics and realised that four out of 10 East Africans are threatened with food insecurity and many are dying of hunger. In Kenya, half of the 47 counties have declared disaster –(Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now invite candidate Jothan Yamureebire. Where is he? I would like to know where he is first. He is not here? Okay, let me invite candidate Yiga Joel Kamoga. You have seven minutes.

3.59
MR JOEL KAMOGA YIGA (Independent): My name is Yiga Joel Kamoga and I hail from Mityana District. Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I believe that I have the capacity to serve the country in the East African Legislative Assembly. 

Given the status quo of the assembly, I believe that we need to put value on the environment as the environment has cross-boundary issues. Recognising the fact that Uganda is a signatory to many protocols and conventions concerning the environment, I believe that since Uganda is an agricultural country, we need to come up at the East African level and put up terms and restrictions on our natural environment resource and the natural resources themselves. 

We can get to the community and require member states to submit environmental sites and natural resources sites so that we can sustain them and retain their usefulness for the future generations. Uganda has been and is still a member of the Ramsar Convention. We submitted seven sites, which have helped in preserving sensitive biological diversity sites that help sustain life. 

I would like to go to EALA and I believe that I will contribute to the suitability of the environment for our business community to transact business in all the member countries. There are so many cases where Ugandans have been denied access to the East African Community market. There is one time when sugar from Kakira was denied market in Kenya. They stopped the supplier, requiring him to prove that the sugar crystals were really from Kakira. By the time they finished the process, the contract had expired and the company lost money. 

We, therefore, need to come up and harmonise the common market principles and regulations at the community level so that every community citizen can move their capital and goods. Uganda has presented a remarkable discipline that allows other member states to bring in their goods but our business people have not been given that conducive environment. 

Political integration and political federation at this level is a value that we cannot hide from at the EAC level. When I am entrusted with this position to represent the country, I will promote the value of presidential term limits on the grounds that one president should not lead for more than two consecutive terms. When someone does not lead for more than two consecutive terms, they can rest and come back after a certain period of time. 

We still have the challenge to deepen the value of our communities moving at the same pace with the leaders and realising and actualising the objectives and aims of the EAC. Many times, it is evident that leaders are at a high level of running the community but the citizens are left behind. Some of them do not know what the community means or how to take opportunities, which come as advantages of the community. Therefore, we need to scale up. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that we need to send members who are compliant with current technology. When you are sent to EALA, it is not for legislation alone. You have to skim the tactics that other countries are using to give them an edge over us so that we import those technologies. For China to develop up to the level it has, it used its representatives to tease out critical technology, bring it home and let things move on. This is what we have to do if Uganda is to catch up. 

Madam Speaker, I believe that we have to strengthen the security system within the EAC so that the challenges that come with opening up boundaries and free movement of people, like sophisticated means of committing crimes and the like, are tamed. If not, we are going to face a situation where we will be confronted with high numbers of people committing serious crimes elsewhere and bringing their crime experience here. (Candidate timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I would like to thank you for your patience, enthusiasm and morale. We have been here for almost six hours. We have 46 candidates. I have now confirmed that candidate Yamureebire withdrew and I am required, under rule 7, to inform the House that the candidate has withdrawn. He is, therefore, not part of this process.

Secondly, honourable members, I think the House may want to look at the issue of the seven minutes. Not everybody used the seven minutes. Actually, the bulk of the candidates used between three and five minutes. We may, therefore, want to look at the duration of the campaigns. It is up to you; you can think about it. 

I think we may also need to address the issue of the dress code. I think one or two candidates were not advised on how to appear before this House but I did not want to disturb them. Maybe in future, we may want to say something about the dress code for the candidates.

Before we finalise the guidelines, honourable members, I would like to inform you that the Uganda Parliament and the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) have organised a seminar for parliaments of Sub-Saharan Africa on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The seminar will start tomorrow and end on 3 March at Hotel Africana. Over 100 Members of Parliament from 23 parliaments have confirmed their attendance and some have already arrived in the country.

We also have six Speakers of national assemblies who are joining us. It will be an opportunity for parliamentarians to explore innovative ways by which they can play an effective role in the SDGs. The seminar participants will examine issues such as climate change, rule of law, democratic governance, financing SDGs, maternal and child health, among others. The climax of the seminar will be the launch of the self-assessment toolkit for Members of Parliament. 

To ensure good local content, I insisted that Ugandan MPs should be chairs of all the sessions. Therefore, hon. Mukitale will chair session one on effective governance; hon. Biyika will chair the session on climate change; hon. Betty Amongi will chair the session on good health and wellbeing all through the SDGs; hon. Syda Bbumba will chair the session on mobilising resources for SDGs; hon. Henry Musasizi will chair the session on reporting from the group work; hon. Raphael Magyezi will chair the session, “Becoming fit for purpose: African Parliaments engage on the SDGs”; and hon. Amos Lugoloobi will chair the session on adoption of the outcome documents and the closing.  Honourable members, please attend that workshop in the morning. 

Just to remind you, honourable members, you have nine votes and not 10. If you tick 10, it will be a spoilt ballot as we shall not know who of the nine you want. Less than nine is also a spoilt ballot. So please ensure that you do the needful because we shall have difficulties in tallying.

Again, just to remind you, the first polling station has names from hon. Ababiku to hon. Alex Byarugaba; the second one from the honourable Col. Byekwaso to hon. Peter Lokeris; the third one from hon. Samson Lokeris to hon. Nyiira Mujumbi; and the last one from hon. Nzoghu to hon. Zaake Francis.

Honourable members, polling will open at 4.20 p.m. and close at 6.20 p.m. I invite you to proceed to the tent at that time and cast your vote. However, do not go away; in case there is a tie, we shall have to return here and vote. You can be in the tent or in your offices but generally within calling distance.

I want to suspend the House until the bell is rung to notify you to come back for the results; so do not go away, honourable members. Thank you very much. The House is suspended.

(The House was suspended at 4.11 p.m.)

(On resumption at 9.53 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for your patience. I would also like to thank members of the public who are still here for keeping vigil while we were doing our work.

I am waiting for an orderly tabulation of the results but in the meantime, I would like to inform you that the Catholic Chaplaincy invites Members of Parliament to mass on Wednesday, 1 March 2017 at the Members’ Lounge at 5.00 p.m. You will receive ashes during that service.

The Anglican Chaplaincy will also hold an Ash Wednesday prayer tomorrow, 1 March 2017 at 1.00 p.m. in the Members Lounge. You are invited to attend the Anglican prayers at 1.00 p.m. and the Catholic mass at 5.00 p.m.

Honourable members, we have been working but some of our colleagues have been studying. I would like to congratulate the honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi who last week received a PhD in Maternal Health. We congratulate and wish him well. (Applause)

Honourable members, we have had an election. We had 46 candidates and you were instructed to select nine. I now want to announce the nine who you have selected to represent you in the East African Legislative Assembly. I will start from the bottom: 

    1. Hon. Okumu Opoka, 274 votes – (Applause) Honourable members, it is 10 o’clock; you can celebrate later in the canteen. Let me do my work.
    2. Hon. Suzan Nakawuki, 298 votes; 
    3. Hon. Fred Mbidde Mukasa, 311 votes; 
    4. Hon. Denis Namara, 329 votes; 
    5. Hon. Mary Mugyenyi 341 votes; 
    6. Hon. George Odongo, 346 votes; 
    7. Hon. Musamali Paul Mwasa, 350 votes; 
    8. Hon. Kasamba Mathias, 359 votes; 
    9. Hon. Akol Rose Okullu, 370 votes.(Applause) 

Let me now invite the Clerk to read the other results. These are mine, the others are hers. (Laughter)

    1. Agaba Martin, 2 votes;
    2. Akwi Ogojo, 13 votes;
    3. Ariong Hellen, 4 votes; 
    4. Basiime Richard, 4 votes;
    5. Bayiga Cissy, 1 vote;
    6. Bwengye Lauben, 9 votes;
    7. Drito Alice, 5 votes;
    8. Ekwau Ibi, 179 votes;
    9. Ibanda Twaha, 4 votes;
    10. Kaluuba Enoch, 0 votes;
    11. Ingrid Turinawe, 25 votes;
    12. Kenyangi Janet, 5 votes;
    13. Luyinda Fred, 0 votes;
    14. Matyoli David Innocent, 6 votes;
    15. Mpiriirwe Rachael, 12 votes;
    16. Muhango Chris, 3 votes; 
    17. Mutyaba Mathew, 0 votes; 
    18. Muyanja Hassan, 7 votes;
    19. Mwambazi Joseph, 3 votes;
    20. Mwambu Herbert, 3 votes;
    21. Mwanje Charles, 4 votes; 
    22. Nalubega Mariam, 74 votes;
    23. Nassanga Jackeline, 2 votes; 
    24. Nyero Francis, 3 votes;
    25. Obua-Ogwal Benson, 37 votes; 
    26. Okwere David Beecham, 4 votes;
    27. Oluma Kennedy, 10 votes; 
    28. Oola Samuel, 6 votes; 
    29. Otim Alfred, 3 votes;
    30. Paito Andrew Mutegi, 13 votes 
    31. Ruhinda Richard, 4 votes
    32. Seruwuge Yasin, 2 votes
    33. Ssali Godfrey, 0 votes
    34. Ssali Khalid Lule, 3 votes 
    35. Tusiime Robert Byaruhanga Araali, 12 votes 
    36. Werikhe Gerald, 5 votes
    37. Yiga Joel, 0 votes

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, under rule 14(1) of Appendix B or our Rules of Procedure, you have received results of all the 46 candidates. I now invoke rule 14(2) of Appendix B and declare the following members duly elected to represent us in the East African Legislative Assembly: hon. Rose Okullu Akol, hon. Mathias Kasamba, hon. Mwasa Musamali, hon. Stephen Odongo, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, hon. Denis Namara, hon. Mukasa Mbidde, hon. Nakawuki Suzan, hon. Okumu Opoka Chris. (Applause)

I direct the Clerk to proceed under rule 15 of Appendix B and cause a publication of those names in the Uganda Gazette and to transmit them expeditiously to the Secretary-General of the East African Community not later than 6 March 2017. 

We would like to thank you very much for the work done. We have deepened democracy. It has taken time but we have been able to conduct this election. I would like to wish good luck to the Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and to remind you that you are representing our country not your parties. All of you are MPs for Uganda and you must speak for Uganda.  (Applause) You do not want me to finish? Let me finish my things and then you can do yours. I would like to wish you well. 

There are areas, which need reforms in the treaty. We hope you can take an interest in them. One of the more difficult areas is the implementation of the laws of the treaty. We hope you can look at that. Otherwise, we wish you well and you can count on this House for support. I think the different shades want to say something, let me invite the Leader of the Opposition.

10.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to congratulate the winners of this election. I wish to most sincerely, on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament, congratulate you as well as the voters for the voting, which has been conducted as well as the outcome.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank, most sincerely, the Members of Parliament who gave my candidate a vote. I would like to thank you for the votes you gave to hon. Ibi Florence. There were over 170 votes and I do not take them for granted. As Forum for Democratic Change, I have only 36 Members of Parliament but for a candidate of FDC to get more than 170 votes, I do not take it for granted. (Applause) I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart and I would like to say that this spirit should continue - the spirit of seeing beyond party affiliation and using the voice of reason.

Madam Speaker, like you have said, a lot needs to be done in regard to harmonising the treaty. We shall come here and ensure that this is done. In the meantime, I would like to say to my colleagues that we shall give you all the support and cooperation that you desire, to ensure that our country performs in regard to widening and deepening the integration and ensuring that as a country, we achieve the dreams that we have in the community. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

10.07
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, and our returning officer for today’s session, I would like to sincerely thank you and your entire team for having organised this election right from the guidelines, the design of the ballot papers and the time you apportioned to our candidates to come and interact with us as their voters. That is the beginning of the problem in any election. If the guidelines and the ballot papers are not clear, you are likely to head nowhere. I would like to sincerely thank you on behalf of the NRM and everybody else.

Secondly, let me take this opportunity to thank the whole House because we have moved as a team. Elections are almost similar but in today’s election, we have not seen people holding each other’s throats. We have been moving and mobilising together. There were people crossing from side to side. We have moved as a team and that is why we have produced a very good team to send to Arusha as Ugandans. (Applause)

Lastly, I would like to congratulate the winners and the losers as well. For somebody to get the courage to come, stand there and address honourable members is not a joke. Madam Speaker, I wish you could give a letter of appreciation to every participant who has taken part in this election. It would be a sign of courage. These are cadres who are coming up because of the good principles and doctrine of the NRM of allowing everyone to come and participate. 

I would like to congratulate the nine who have gone through. Congratulations and thank you for moving together. The team you are seeing up there has moved together; no wonder they have become victorious. I have seen you on many occasions walking and campaigning together. I think as the saying goes, “United we stand, divided we fall”. You stood together and you have become victors. Thank you very much, my secretary-general, for being with me and with all the people. May the good Lord protect you. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, although we are celebrating our victory today, we still have some difficult situations to handle. You all know that hon. Aol’s husband will be buried on Thursday. The bus will be leaving from here at 4.30 a.m. for those who will want to go to Gulu for the burial. 

In addition, we have lost a senior citizen, the late Mr Maumbe Mukhwana. Government has requested me to allow him to be brought here on Thursday as part of an official funeral. I know we will have to divide ourselves between those who will go to support hon. Aol and those who will stay here. Come and we give tribute to Mr Mukhwana. He did very important work for this country in difficult situations. Despite all this, I would like to invite you back to the House at 2.00 p.m. tomorrow as we have some Bills to handle.

Let me also take this opportunity to thank the Clerk and her team. (Applause) Many of you do not know how much work has gone into producing what we have done today. It has been a very long process of reading, consulting and so on. I would like to thank the Clerk and her team as well as the Director for Legal Affairs, who is a “walking library”. We keep him very busy. We would like to thank him and his team. 

You saw the tallying today; it really takes long. I would like to thank the Clerk and her team. They were there talking until they got tired. This is part of the democratic process and I am glad that it is now over. You people, is there anything for us? Canteen? (Laughter)

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 10.13 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 1 March 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)
