Tuesday, 26 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to this sitting and inform you that hon. Nyakikongoro was involved in an accident on Saturday, but she is recovering at Nakasero Hospital. If you get time, please check on her.

The second one is to remind you, honourable members, if you have not filled in the declaration of wealth forms from the IGG, the deadline is 31st March, but you might forget and cause problems for yourselves. So, I want to really appeal to you to do the needful very quickly. My friend Ken “the man”, knows the problems.

I will adjust the Order Paper slightly to allow hon. Nokrach to bring a report which has a bearing on item No.4.

Hon. Muwuma has a burning issue.

2.48
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu South Constituency, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance concerning my constituency which was hit by a disaster in line with hailstorms that affected three schools; Canon Ibula Primary School, St Peter Claver Walugogo Primary School and St Patrick Kigulu Girls Primary School.

I should have used another method of approaching this matter, but this time I wanted to appeal to Parliament to help me such that the people of Kigulu South can feel the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness. For the last seven years I have been in this Parliament, I have never received help from that ministry after being hit several times. I have been writing and fulfilling all the requirements; the CAO and the RDC have been writing and informing this ministry about this problem. For the last seven years, however, we have been unfortunate that Kigulu South has not benefitted from this ministry. We have written, but at times it is taken to be a favour to get some support or relief supplies from the Ministry in charge of Disaster Preparedness.

My humble prayer now is to request the ministry to help me because a three classroom block was blown off leaving children to studyunder trees. Yesterday, they just sat under trees to take lessons. I am praying and requesting Government, most especially the ministries of Education and Disaster Preparedness to come to our rescue –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to thank hon. Muwuma for giving me a chance to give information about my constituency. We had a very bad rainstorm on 20th of February which badly affected three sub-counties. In fact, if someone was flying over my constituency, they would think there was fire burning. Bananas, coffee plantations and cassava were affected. The three sub-counties that were affected were Kigando, Bageza and Nabingola. In total 51 villages have been affected.

I am, therefore, appealing to the Minister of Agriculture and that one of Disaster Preparedness to come to our rescue as people of Kasambya. Government should help us out of this imported poverty from rain.

2.53
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I am seeking clarification from hon. Muwuma; he says for the last seven years, he has been writing to the ministry and he has never received any positive response, not even an acknowledgement and he says the ministry behaves like it is a favour. Can he throw more light on that so that when I am writing to the minister, I have more information? He just said, they always do it as a favour yet this is taxpayers’ money.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muwuma, are you falsely accusing the ministry?

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I should take this as a great opportunity to express my anger even when a leader is not supposed to be angry. I should state that in 2007, my constituency was hit hard in Nakalama sub-county along Tirinyi Road. I wrote to the ministry, but I kept oscillating like a hawker and I would be told to come the next day or the next week. After fulfilling all the requirements that they wanted, I never got help.

Other constituencies that fell victim after mine benefitted from the ministry. That is why I can authoritatively say that it is taken to be a favour. There is the Animal Farm mentality in one way or another. My boss, the Chief Whip, I have no regrets in saying this because I can ably defend and substantiate this matter.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Muwuma for giving way. The issues that my colleague has raised are real. The Ministry of Disaster Preparedness can really be frustrating because this is not the first time and I think we are now raising issues for political expedience.

It happened in Ngora. I was told, “Please go back and let the chairperson of the district disaster management committee write the report.” We did that and submitted reports when there were floods and the roofs of so many schools were blown off. Both ministries of Education and Disaster Preparedness who got the letters could not move an inch up to now.

Many of those schools have made it under very difficult circumstances. Okobe Primary School, for example, is under trees. What you are going through, we have gone through it.

I have literally given up with the Disaster Preparedness ministry because they are not doing anything. (Mr Mallinga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have just entered the Chamber; you have not heard the complaints and now you are raising a point of order? For your information, there is a complaint from Kasambya, where about three sub-counties have been affected, and in Kigulu South.

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I beg to use a few minutes to brief my colleague so that when he answers, he answers comprehensively. You have briefed him about Kigulu South, Kasambya, Ngora and many other places.

Honourable Minister for Disaster Preparedness, apart from you receiving those letters from MPs and district leaders, after fulfilling all the requirements, you make responses selectively and it has been said here that it looks like it is done as a favour. You attend to some and leave out others. So, please, can you make a response, honourable minister?

2.57 
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have stood here several times and guided the honourable Members of Parliament on how to go about passing on the information to us that there is a disaster in their constituency. I have told them that it is the CAO who is the chairperson of the disaster committee in the district. He should be the one to write to the ministry and then we send technical people who will decide what kind of intervention we are going to undertake. But honourable members continue coming here to report disaster.

Today, I was with the honourable member from Mubende – I hope he is the same one - who has again come here; he brought a letter, and I passed it on to the commissioner. We are going to meet as a group and send technical people to all those areas which write to us. I have gone down –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. My heart is bleeding because I have to challenge my senior minister on a point of order. We have been here on the Floor explaining that we have tried whatever it takes - the district accounting officers writing reports and giving us copies that we have to follow up. Still, nothing is given; people have doubts and they are becoming suspicious of this ministry. Is the minister, therefore, in order to keep saying that we have never fulfilled the requirements when we have been reminding him of several submissions made to this effect?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the complaint before you arrived was that there were letters written from the districts to which your ministry has not responded. So, you are out of order.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I was still explaining that when technical people visit the district –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure pursuant to Rule 69(1)(b). After the Rt Hon. Speaker has ruled the honourable member out of order, in terms of procedure, should he continue to pursue a dead end?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, try and address the problems of the Members. They have written; they have followed the instructions; and gone through all the channels; and nothing has been done. That is their complaint.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, there are really two points to that. Number one, we ran out of money; and number two, we send technical staff to these constituencies and they report that some constituencies do not need intervention. These people have existed before without Government intervention.

The purpose of the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness is delineated. We know what it is. Some of the schools are blown down and you come to the Minister of Disaster instead of asking the Minister of Education. People come to us for seeds to plant, which is the work of the Ministry of Agriculture.

We do only two things; intervene as far as emergency feeding is concerned. We shall deliver posho, beans and any other food necessary –

THE SPEAKER: In view of that, can the hon. Mulindwa inform the Minister of Agriculture about what has happened and also hon. Muwuma should additionally inform the Minister of Education about the schools that have been damaged.

3.03
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance following the constitutional court award of Shs 12.9 billion in a constitutional petition. I know it does not fall under the rule of subjudice, and since courts have already pronounced themselves on the matter, and have made a ruling, I beg to proceed by giving a brief background.

On 10th and 11th October, 2011, the Parliament of Uganda debated the state of the oil sector in the country. At the end of the debate, all parties named were given a fair hearing, and several resolutions were passed.

Mr Severino Twinobusingye being unhappy with the resolutions, petitioned the Constitutional Court on 24th October 2011, for the following declarations:

That resolution nine, to the effect that an ad hoc committee of Parliament be set up to investigate claims and allegations of bribery in the sector and report to Parliament within three months, is inconsistent with or in contravention of Article 2, 28(1), (3)(c)and(g), 42, 44(c), 79(3) and 108(a) of the Constitution and is, therefore, null and void.

That resolution nine, enabling Government officials who were named during the debate to step aside from their offices with immediate effect, pending investigations and report by the ad hoc committee of Parliament, is inconsistent and in contravention of the constitutional provisions.

Upon the petition being filed, the Attorney-General then wrote to the Rt Hon. Speaker on the 26th October 2011, seeking instructions to represent Parliament in representative capacity, and this was received by the Speaker. Upon receiving this from the Attorney-General, the Rt Hon. Speaker invited him for a meeting, which the former did not attend but delegated one member of his staff.

The meeting was eventually held on 1st November in the Speaker’s Chambers and was attended by the Administrator-General, the Acting Director, Civil Litigation, Mr Gatungo Daniel, State Attorney on the one hand, and Mr Kalifani Mutebi, Senior Legislative Council on the other hand.

Much later, after the said meeting, the Rt Hon. Speaker was requested by the Attorney-General to document her views and those of Parliament, which she did in a letter dated 23 November 2011. In her letter, she stated: “The Parliament resolutions that were passed on 11th October were binding on the named MPs under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and as such, they were required to step aside until a report from the investigations is presented to Parliament.”

On 6th December 2011, the Attorney-General went ahead to file his answer to the petition clearly disregarding the instructions given to him by the Rt Hon. Speaker and the meetings that had earlier been held. It was observed that the Parliamentary Commission was mandated by Section 6 of the Administration of Parliament Act to ensure the efficient running of Parliament. It is a body corporate by virtue of Section 2 of the same Act with perpetual succession, common seal, powers to sue and be sued.  

It was further observed that the Commission could only be heard if it applied to the Constitutional Court to be joined as a party to the petition, in which case, she would contradict the Attorney-General on Resolution 9. The Commission was, therefore, advised by the Department of Legal and Legislative Services that joinder of parties can be permitted by court where a person’s presence is necessary as a party to enable court to effectively adjudicate upon issues. 

The Commission was further advised that joinder of parties can also be permitted by court where it may promote convenient administration of justice. This position was based and grounded in the law and the various precedents set by the country’s courts. 

Madam Speaker, upon the application being heard, the Constitutional Court on 19 January 2012, ruled against the Parliamentary Commission being joined as a party to the petition - and this we find without going to the merits. As a result, a Notice of Appeal of the ruling was duly filed and served upon the parties on 23rd December 2012. 

Hon. Katuntu, hon. Kyamadidi and hon. Tanna have as a result of their displeasure with the ruling of the Constitutional Court filed application to be joined as parties to the Constitutional Court petition. They have been invited to address court, but even then, nothing much came out of this until 24th December 2012, when the Constitutional Court made a ruling and awarded the complainant or the petitioner, Severino Twinobusingye, a walloping amount of Shs 12.9 billion –(Interjections)- very unprecedented in the country’s history, and as if that was not enough, the matter just took two hours and was concluded. 

Mr Severino Twinobusingye is well-known; he had been appointed as RDC Kabale until the people of Kabale declined his appointment. Now, for the same person to come, and in broad day light, go through judicial gymnastics, is a matter of serious concern to this country.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, his lawyers, Chris Bakiza and John Mary Mugisha to argue that the matter was so complex that it required Shs 20 billion until the Registrar of the Constitutional Court, Mr Erias Kisawuzi said that Shs 20 billion was on the higher side and it could only be Shs 12.9 billion - this is broad day fleecing of the country –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. It was on this very microphone when I said that anything can happen in Uganda. Can you imagine that when you read a policy statement, the Judicial Commission is getting almost Shs 12.9 billion as their annual budget, and yet they can award it to one person as compensation in two hours? (Laughter) 

So, when I was listening to hon. Ssekikubo, I remembered the Judiciary and we have always been complaining about judges getting better pay; there must be a problem. We need to study something about this. Is it connivance between some organs of Government? That is the information I wanted to give. I thank you. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: What I wanted to add is that this is not the first Constitutional Court petition. We have examples; one of us, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi here, took the Attorney-General to court over a constitutional interpretation and was awarded Shs 60 million – [HON. MEMBERS: “Only.”] Hon. Fox Odoi and one James Akampumuza also filed a constitutional petition and they were awarded Shs 55 million. There is even another case of Mr Onyango Obbo and Andrew Mwenda that fetched Shs 60 million. 

Honourable members, to set such Shs 12.9 billion – let us say Shs 13 billion, is very unprecedented and even Members have been taught – hon. Kivumbi is there and he has had his time in court over a constitutional petition. This is setting a bad precedent in that people shall be shying away from seeking constitutional redress. How else can someone go to the Constitutional Court knowing that it can –

THE SPEAKER: You are now arguing. Please conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Indeed one may wonder, what public interest was Severino Twinobusingye protecting in this? He had sought a Constitutional Court interpretation that was refused but apparently, there is a racket and I really do not understand. Whereas others can be said to be having improper motives, but where Shs 13 billion is awarded in broad daylight using the court as a conduit is a matter that cannot be left unchallenged and I demand that Government tells us what is happening. 

How can the simple men and women of this country access the judiciary? How can they access judicial redress if this is how at the end of the day people are going to fleece this country? I suppose it is meant to be shared and there must be some – because we have even heard other stringent and harder challenges in court, but never has there been any matter to say that you are awarding Shs 13 billion out of a two-hour exchange. Moreover, the Attorney-General from the onset had conceded with the grounds of the petitioner. 

Now, even when Parliament applied to be joined, the Attorney-General refused, and this is the outcome of such a matter. Is this country being protected? Can a few people be allowed to fleece this country in broad daylight and turn around and award themselves? –[HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] Yes, I will take one from –

THE SPEAKER: No, Honourable member; I think you have raised a point. Can the Attorney-General explain what is happening?  

3.16
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I first came across that astronomical and unjustified figure by way of taxation in the media. I immediately called the officer who has been handling this matter and was shocked that even the adjudication coming to that amount was in the absence of the Attorney-General’s Office. 

We have done our best as the Attorney-General’s Office to get access to all the necessary records, and we are, as I am speaking, appealing that ridiculous decision -(Applause)- because, nowhere in Uganda, East Africa or even in Africa have I ever heard of abnormal costs awarded to that magnitude. I accept that this is a matter that is in court, but I am equally as concerned as any Member of this august House. I thank you.

MS BAKO: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is nothing to clarify for now. Yes, commissioner. 

DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I was part of this case because I swore an affidavit in defence of the Parliamentary Commission –

THE SPEAKER: Order!

DR BARYOMUNSI: I just want those people to say that the Parliamentary Commission was not satisfied with the ruling made by court and made an attempt to appeal, but the same judicial system frustrated the appeal process. I want the Attorney-General to know that, because it required leave of the same court, which had made the ruling and our attempts were frustrated by the same court. But the clarification that I wanted to –

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable commissioner; I think that you should be clear. We were given a date and when our lawyers went to court, the whole court was absent. They were not there on the day that we were given to hear the application for leave. All of them were not there. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. So, there seems to be collusion amongst some officials within the Judiciary and Government. The clarification I want to seek from the honourable Attorney-General is whether he intends to appeal that decision of awarding those astronomical costs. Do you intend to appeal and how far have you gone with the process?

THE SPEAKER: That is what he said. Honourable members, I think we –

3.18
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I beg the Attorney-General to only tell us when he is going to give further communication to Parliament on the same subject matter so that we can take it as a Government assurance. 

Secondly, I think it is about time we brought a formal motion to debate the conduct of the Prime Minister. We are just not going to keep beating about the bush. This Severino is a decoy who was planted by the Prime Minister to frustrate Parliament, and we have several claims against the same Prime Minister. 

So, we are putting Government on notice that at an appropriate time, we shall bring a formal motion to debate the conduct of the Prime Minister, which includes, but is not limited to this case of Severino, and also the moving of US$ 400,000 from PRDP funds to buy an armoured Land Cruiser and the Mercedes Benz. So, we are putting Government on notice. 

3.19
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to be convinced. Now that the Attorney-General has put our mind to rest that they are aware that there is some kind of fraud associated with this case, can we be told what action the Attorney-General’s Office has taken to deal with the court officials who were involved in this fraud? What action has been taken to discipline these officers so that this does not continue? Can we be assured that some action has been taken? Thank you. 

3.20
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): I wish to state that I did not say that anyone at this moment has been involved in fraud. I have only said that our office finds these costs abnormal and we have taken all the necessary steps to appeal; and no payment is going to be made until that appeal is heard and determined. 

Certainly, if in the process of the appeal we find that certain irregularities point to either fraud or misconduct, we shall take appropriate action. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know there are Members who want to raise one or two other issues but you will do that later. Let us go back to the Order Paper. We will give you time later on. I had allowed hon. Nokrach to bring something which has a bearing on the Local Government Act. Hon. Nokrach, please bring your report. 

3.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr William Nokrach): Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, I present to this House a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010. 

The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010 was brought to this House by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Consequently, the Bill was referred to the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration and subsequent reporting to the House, pursuant to Rule 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The committee received and considered the Bill pursuant to Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and Rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

I am now pleased to present to you the report of the committee on the Bill. 

Methodology

The committee received and examined the Bill in various meetings with stakeholders, including the following:

    1. The National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda.
    2. Uganda National Association of the Blind.
    3. Uganda National Association of the Deaf.
    4. Members of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities.
    5. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.
    6. Uganda National Action on Physical Disability.
    7. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

The committee also benchmarked with the Parliament of Ghana and examined other relevant laws such as the Constitution, the Parliamentary Elections Act, Local Government Act and the National Council for Disability Act. 

Objectives of the Bill

The Bill generally seeks to amend Section 6 of the National Council for Disability Act, 2003 to include the areas where the National Council for Disability is required to assist the Electoral Commission under Section 6(1) in respect of elections of representatives of Persons with Disabilities to Parliament and local government councils. 

Secondly, to introduce new provisions in the Act on elections of representatives of Persons with Disability and schedules to provide for the electoral structure and disability coding.

Background of the Elections of Representatives of Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) to Parliament and Local Government Councils

The current structures for the elections of representatives of PWDs to Parliament and Local Councils

Article 32(1) of the Constitution of Uganda permits the State to take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability, or any other reason created by history, tradition or customs, for the purposes of redressing imbalances which exist against them. It is in this light that Persons with Disabilities are represented in both Parliament and on Local Government Councils. 

From 1996 to date, the Electoral Commission has been conducting elections of representatives of PWDs at various political levels using the structure created by the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda. This is because there is no democratically instituted structure of persons with disabilities other than that of NUDIPU that can be used for free and fair elections.

What is the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDI? 

The National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) is a national umbrella organisation of disabled people in Uganda. It is a non-governmental organisation formed by disabled people in 1987 to be the national voice of Persons with Disability in this country. 

The main objective of NUDIPU is to lobby and advocate for equalisation opportunities and respect of human rights of Persons with Disabilities. 

By 1996, NUDIPU had mobilised disabled persons all over the country and formed structures from the village level to the national level. The structures were democratically put in place through election of leaders by PWDs themselves, conducted by the District Rehabilitation Officers or by the District Community Development Officers accordingly. After the promulgation of the 1995 Uganda Constitution, elections of Members of Parliament and local councillors, who included representatives of PWDs, were conducted. 

Observations and recommendations 

The committee observes that the major concerns raised by various stakeholders is that the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda (NUDIPU) is a non-governmental organisation which may not include all PWDs and, therefore, its structure should not be used for elections of representatives of PWDs to both Parliament and local councils anymore. The committee agreed with the various stakeholders on this. It is, therefore, recommended that the electoral structure proposed in the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be approved by Parliament.

The committee observed that the National Council for Disability as appointed by the minister and district chairpersons under section 7 of the National Council for Disability Act at times comprises persons who are not disabled. It is, therefore, recommended that the National Council for Disability should not participate in the formation of the electoral structure as this would create a conflict of interest. 

The committee observes that as soon as this Bill becomes law, there will be need to harmonise section 118(2) of the Local Government Act and Regulation 10 of the Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Groups) Regulations, 2001 to tally with the proposed provisions in the National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010. In the committee’s interaction with the Ministry Of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, they undertook to do this. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that section 118 of the Local Government Act together with Regulation 10 of the Parliamentary Elections (Special Interest Group) Regulations, 2001, be amended as stated here above.

The committee further observes that during the elections of representatives of Persons with Disabilities, many other people claimed they were disabled and consequently sought to be elected in various elective positions to represent persons with disabilities. In many cases, non-disabled people are appointed by some district councillors as representatives of PWDs at the district service commission because of lack of a clear understanding of who is a disabled person. In this light, there is need to enhance the disability coding and range in order to cater for forms which have not been on the traditional list, like the albinos and the little persons. The committee, therefore, recommends that the disability coding or range be enhanced or improved in order to cater for other forms which have not been on the traditional list like albinos and little persons. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill be passed with amendments. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nokrach, and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Honourable members, I allowed hon. Nokrach to present his report because it has a bearing on the next item. I don’t know; maybe we should finish this before we go to the Local Government Act. 

Any contributions, honourable members?

I will now ask the minister to formally move for the second reading because when the Member came, he said he had a report to give me proposing an amendment. He did not tell me that he actually had a Bill. I am just seeing now that he actually has a Bill. So, if he could move formally since he has presented the report. Move for the second reading and we have a debate. 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR THE ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, before I formally move, I am seeking your guidance. I have just received this report of the committee, and when I received it late this afternoon, I did consult with the stakeholders and the ministry, and we found that the report quite differs from what was agreed upon, and the –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, you rightly guided that the minister responsible for this Bill ought to first move that the Bill be read for the second time and then we would get that report. Now that the report is already with us, you would first move that motion and let the Bill be read for the second time before you can make any comment on the report. I thought you were properly guided, but you have decided to do it the other way round. Can he follow the right procedure? 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please move for the second reading and then you can speak to those issues later. 

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. I wish to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Disability (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It has been seconded. 

MR MADADA: Madam Speaker, the policy and principles of this Bill are:  To amend the National Council for Disability Act, 2003; and to streamline the elections of Persons with Disability to Parliament and local government councils. 

The objects of the Bill is are:

a) 	Amend section 6 of the National Council for Disability Act, 2003 to include the areas where the National Council for Disability is required to assist the Electoral Commission under section 6(i) in respect to elections of representatives of Persons of Disability to Parliament and local government councils; and

b) 	To introduce new provisions in the Act on elections of representatives of Persons with Disability as schedules providing for the electoral structure and disability coding. 

I beg to move.

3.35
REV. PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the presenter for this report. I also want to thank NUDIPU for the work it has been doing for the past years, but as has been said, we should appreciate that somehow things were not going on well according to the way members were being selected to participate in the elections. 

I am also of the view that we need to use government structures to be able to streamline this. 

In the past elections, we witnessed situations where people with bald heads would participate in these elections claiming that they were disabled –(Laughter)– those who had lost teeth were also saying, “I don’t have this lower jaw, and I look to be disabled”; those claiming impotence, even when it could not be proved; and even those who had minor accidents. 

I strongly recommend that we support this committee in this arrangement so that we can have genuine persons with disability, who can be brought on board through our Government structures, and who could come and participate in this arrangement. And we should also be able to prove, for example, when someone says “I am impotent”, how do we know it? –(Laughter)– we have little time and I want to participate in this arrangement. Thank you. (Laughter)

3.38
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Nokrach together with the committee for this report. Before I went to medical school, I had worked in Ntungamo, and there was a problem. A certain woman stood on a ticket of People with Disabilities and she claimed to be having a disability in the private parts. (Laughter) It became a problem because nobody could examine her. Eventually, she ended up becoming a member of that council and yet she was not disabled at all. (Laughter) So, I believe that there should be criteria for determining –(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo, for giving way. Since you are a medical doctor and you were examining this particular person whose claim was that she was impotent, in your wisdom as a doctor, was that inability or disability?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, my colleague for asking. I have told you that before I became a doctor I was teaching in Ntungamo and this lady claimed that she was disabled, just because she wanted to take the slot for the Persons with Disabilities. And because she knew, she had to change and say, “I have a disability, but somewhere in the private parts.” And, therefore, she took a slot meant for the people with disabilities, and up to now it still hurts me for somebody who is normal to claim to be disabled in order to benefit from facilities meant for people with disabilities. That is why I support hon. Nokrach’s recommendation that there should be a criterion for establishing who is and who is not disabled. 

There are some people who tend to claim to be disabled and yet they are not and they point to certain parts that are very difficult to verify and examine. That is why I thank the committee, and I have a conviction that we should make sure that we make a decision that will enable people who are clearly disabled to present themselves rather than those who are normal taking their slots. Thank you.

3.40
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for their good report and I hope the minister is not going to derail us, because he had begun on a note where he apparently said he was not comfortable with the report. But the ministry is part of the stakeholders that interacted with the committee. So, I hope you were able to give your views; and this seems to be a straightforward report and Bill.

Madam Speaker, the law provides for the definition of disability – where one should have a deformity that makes one dysfunctional and fail to perform normal or ordinary functions. Now, on page 4, I see that the committee is suggesting that the definition be expanded to include categories like albinos and little persons. I hope you will go further to provide a sufficient definition of what a little person is. 

For example, in my constituency, I have pygmies; they are little people, but they are able to perform all the functions. So, would they be categorised as disabled? So, I just want the committee chairperson and his members to clarify and provide definitions. Otherwise, like my colleagues have said, during elections, many members of the society usually want to abuse that right by claiming to be having a disability in order to take up these slots, when in actual sense they do not have a disability. They eventually end up taking slots which would have gone to the people who are genuinely disabled. Thank you.

3.43
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague, hon. Nokrach, for bringing these amendments. I think it has been long overdue. The disabled group is among the interest groups and when you go to the local governments, the women and youth have got councils and yet this group does not have. No wonder some people have been making claims – like hon. Bitekyerezo is saying. This is a true story, where someone made a claim and was elected for a period of five years. This is because there is no written description of what a disabled person is – apart from looking at obvious signs of disability on the body. Some people have as a result taken it as a joke and that is why even a person with ulcers claims to be disabled and contests. (Laughter) Yes, it has happened during elections. 

The other thing is that it seems to be starting at the higher level. I thank the President for considering disabled people when making appointments, but if we had eople with disabilities, why not pick one of them to be a minister and represent –(Applause)- yes! 

Madam Speaker, if I have ever suffered from a certain sickness and you come to tell me that you are suffering from the same sickness, I will know the pain you are going through. But if I have never had that experience, you will be telling me, but it will be more of a story. So I think it is high time we also thought of having someone with a disability to be a minister. Maybe this kind of argument about people claiming to be disabled will not arise then.

Having said that, this morning, a group of people from a local newspaper called Entatsi published, on the first page, my picture and that of another Member of Parliament and said that I had eaten money from Government when I signed the attendance register and left without attending plenary. And yet, Madam Speaker, I attend plenary religiously, and even during your roll call, I was present and stood here to respond. So, I do not know how you can protect us because these –(Member timed out.)

3.47
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for the report. NUDIPU is doing a lot for this country and they have branches in most of the districts in the country. However, NUDIPU does not have branches in all the districts of this country. I would appeal to the Government to give enough support to NUDIPU so that they can extend to the rest of the districts where their services have not reached, because the presence of NUDIPU in the districts will help disabled persons to protect the resources that the government sends to the district.

For example, the ministry sends some little money to support disabled persons in the districts, but in most cases, this money ends up in the hands of the people who are not disabled. It is stolen by the officers in the district. But if there is a body that protects the disabled in the districts like an association of disabled persons in every district, that would help a lot. 

I request the government to give more support to NUDIPU so that they can support all the districts and extend their services to all the districts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.48
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the good report and seek clarification from him. I had a friend who got an accident in 2010, and one of his legs was cut off. In 2011, he went to be nominated as a district councillor for the disabled. However, he was rejected, yet the man was already disabled. I do not know why he was rejected. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to get a clear definition of a person with disabilities. When we are defining a person with disability, I really feel that the definition should cater for those who were recently disabled and maybe in the future. You never know what will happen.

Assuming a Member of Parliament gets an accident and becomes disabled, the law should allow that person to compete as a Member of Parliament for disabilities. So, we need a very clear definition of a person with disabilities. 

THE SPEAKER: By the way, honourable members, the issue hon. Olanya is raising is not very far-fetched. In the Sixth Parliament, we had hon. Kiggundu here. One day he left here to go to Kyotera, got an accident, and he became an invalid. Even as we speak now,he is still an invalid. I am saying that it can happen.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, that boy was rejected from being nominated as a district councillor, and I do not know why he was rejected.

THE SPEAKER: I am just saying that what you are saying is possible. I am supporting what you are saying.

3.51
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I first want to thank the honourable member who brought the report. The issue of disability is very contentious in elections. I would have thought the disabled people are allowed to elect their own leaders without interference from other political parties, but you find disabled people being pulled by even able bodied people in political parties. It happened in my district and it is very distressing.

I want to support what hon. Chris Baryomunsi said regarding the definition of a disabled person. A person can have a temporary disability and a permanent one. Here I think we are talking about permanent disability. We should then determine whether somebody qualifies for permanent disability.

In the West, where we can pick a leaf, it is the medical people who should determine this, and I would call upon the disability groups to start a way of registering their own members through medical reports so that they know who has been medically declared permanently disabled, so that those are the people who can be registered as their members.

Normally, we have physical disability and mental disability. When one is mentally disabled, I do not think they can represent anybody. We can have other forms of disability like the visually impaired, those with hearing impairment and speech impairment, and those are the key areas that we look at.

Again, these people must be allowed to determine their destiny, to represent themselves rather than getting able bodies who have very little interest or who do not even have anybody in their family who is disabled. They would just be there hindering the voices of the disabled. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.53
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened very attentively to my colleagues, hon. Bakaluba and hon. Bitekyerezo, and I got the impression that they would want us to exclude a substantial fraction of people who qualify to be called disabled persons; impotent people and persons who suffer from frigidity.

Frigidity and impotence are certainly tenets of disability whichever way you look at it. It is the inability to perform a function that would ordinarily be performed by a normal person or a person who is not disabled.

Madam Speaker, as a lawyer, you know that impotence and frigidity can be proved. You prove it by applying for the examination of the organs of procreation. That is settled law. If we leave out this particular sector of our people, we shall be discriminating against them and they are the only disabled people I know that have been discriminated against even at law.

If you are impotent, you cannot keep a wife and it is grounds for divorce. If you are frigid, you cannot keep a husband; and it is grounds for divorce. So, we discriminate against them every other day and this must stop.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Odoi, how does impotence stop you from doing your work?

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, procreation is a function of every able bodied human being, and if you fail to procreate, you will be failing in a very critical aspect of normal life. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are taking it too far.

3.55
MR STEPHEN CHEBROT (NRM, Tingey County, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, I think there is a paradox in the law we are trying to pass. I have a disability on my right leg, but I have not gone to stand as a Member representing people with disabilities, although I am disabled. My right leg is shorter than the - so it is my choice. I represent the people of Tingey not people with disabilities. It is my choice - I do not accept that I am disabled. The moment you accept that you are disabled, then you can go and stand as a member for people with disabilities. Thank you.

3.57
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin from where my colleague has ended. Our colleagues, the disabled, have the opportunity and chance to stand for all other elective posts, and we have many here who have stood - who never opted for the other option. They are here. I believe that it is normal for someone who is disabled to run for any office of his or her own choice.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification because we must walk the talk. When I look at the composition of this committee, I wonder whether this committee is undersubscribed because we have 11 members only. I would like to know whether we are only 11 on this committee. When you look at this composition it is sending a bad message. Why is this committee undersubscribed when we have many committees that are oversubscribed? 

If we are to handle issues of our colleagues, the disabled, definitely we must involve ourselves in areas that we feel are the ones that our colleagues get access to services. But when you look at this committee - because Gender and Labour is a committee which is handling the disabled - and you have only 11 members. Out of these 11 members, it is good that we have hon. Nokrach, who is disabled, to lead this committee and the Vice-Chairperson is hon. Margaret Baba Diri, who is also disabled. But how about the rest of the Members?

I would request, Madam Speaker, that if this committee is undersubscribed, we must, as a matter of urgency, ensure that the committees that are oversubscribed, release their members to go to these committees either with your -(Interruption)- yes please.

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you very much for giving me way, honourable member. There are some Members who were serving on this committee, but they decided to leave. We need to find out why they decided to leave this committee. It appears to be marginalised, and I think you are right.

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I will request your office to handle this matter with urgency.

THE SPEAKER: I think I will ask the whips to assist us on this because we are going to reconstitute the committees for the new session. This is really embarrassing. There is also another committee which is undersubscribed. So, the whips of NRM, DP, FDC and UPC, now it is your responsibility to ensure that Members are here.

Honourable members, I want to adjourn the debate on this one so that we can go to the main Bill and then come back and complete it after the local government, because we have now understood the issues which hon. Nokrach wanted to raise. Is that okay? So, we defer further debate until tomorrow when we shall go to committee stage. Now, let us revert to local government.

MS SSENTONGO: I appreciate that in your communication, you amended the Order Paper, but there was an item that has been skipped, and that is the petition. When are we going to handle that?

THE SPEAKER: We shall do it. Let us go to the local government.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT)(NO.2) BILL, 2012

4.03
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Local Governments (Amendment) (NO.2) Bill, 2012” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of Works and the Government Chief Whip.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, the fundamental objective of this Bill is to seek the support and approval of this Government to look into ways of reducing the cost of holding Local Council I and Local Council II elections. 

Honourable members, you will recall that Government was prepared to hold the local council elections alongside the Presidential and Parliamentary elections in 2011, but we got a bill of Shs 120 billion from the Electoral Commission to hold those elections going by the current provisions of the law. That bill, in the assessment of Cabinet, was not affordable and, therefore, Cabinet decided to propose changes in the law which would have the effect of reducing the cost of holding Local Council elections. 

The areas of cost which we propose to cut or dispense with are four. The first area is the area of transmission of voters’ registers to political parties and organisations. Section 18(A) of the Electoral Commission Act and Section 106 of the Local Government Act require that both electronic and hard copy copies of the voters register be transmitted to all registered political parties in the country. At the moment we have 38 registered political parties in the country and if we were to transmit hard and soft copies to all these political parties, that alone would cost the Electoral Commission Shs 252 million.

Because of that, since most of the headquarters of the registered political parties are in Kampala and we are sure computers are everywhere these days, we, therefore, propose that instead of being required to submit hard copies, the Electoral Commission transmits soft copies and then the parties themselves could submit hardcopies to their branches countrywide. 

The second area of cost-cutting is the requirement to publish voters’ registers and polling stations. Section 33 of the Electoral Commission Act requires the Electoral Commission to publish voters’ registers and polling stations both in the Gazette and in the print media. The print media is very expensive, as you know, Madam Speaker. If we were to do this, we would spend in the region of more than Shs 7 billion. 

We, therefore, propose that the Electoral Commission publishes the voters’ roll and polling stations in the Gazette, and in addition to the Gazette, copies of the Gazette should be availed to all notice boards of sub-counties and parishes for the voters to check and raise objections to the tribunals where they wish.

The third area of cost-cutting is the appointment of tribunals for purposes of holding village and parish elections. Under Section 159 of the Local Governments Act, the composition of the tribunal members includes all registered voters resident in the village. They are the ones supposed to handle complaints which are lodged on the eligibility or the non-eligibility of persons to vote during the display of the voters’ register. 

If we were to pay the standard remuneration which is paid to tribunal members as set by the Electoral Commission of Shs 5,000 per member, this would cost us Shs 75 billion for the whole country. The proposal here is that instead of using all residents as members of the tribunal, a tribunal of five members be appointed by the Electoral Commission through the returning officer of every district; five members at a parish to listen to complaints that will come from the villages. We think that a five-member tribunal at the parish is well placed in terms of proximity and in terms of efficiency to listen and dispose of complaints which will come from the villages. That will cut the cost quite tremendously.

Lastly, we propose that instead of using the photo-bearing register, because we have them at the polling stations, the polling stations for purposes of holding LC I elections will be the villages. So, the current polling stations as we know them now will not be the polling stations for purposes of holding local council elections because we have polling stations at the moment which combine two or three or even four villages. 

So, in order to prepare a register for LC I elections, you will have to review the current photo-bearing registers which we have and, therefore, if you have to maintain the photos in the register, then you have to incur a new cost of printing new photos and printing new registers. 

So, we propose that for purposes of having a register for local council elections, the Electoral Commission be permitted by this House to have text registers which will bear the names, the dates of birth and all the details of the individual - (Interjections)- I am making my proposal. Time for debate will come - and the possibility of identifying each other is very high because people live together in the same village. 

So, if we used the text-bearing registers, we expect to cut the cost by about Shs 400 million. The purpose of this Bill mainly is to enable the Electoral Commission to hold local council elections and to do that, we have to cut the areas of expenditure and if the proposals I am making are adopted by this House, we should be able to hold a cheap, free and fair election using about Shs 40 billion instead of the Shs 120 billion, which was proposed by the Electoral Commission according to the law as it is today.

The final proposal which is not related to elections is that, we propose that the Local Council IV at the county level be abolished. The reason for this proposal is that, at the moment, we have 169 counties and 111 of those counties have already become districts. We have a balance of 58 counties which are not districts. We also have proposals for districts which are already before this House. If those are adopted, the number of counties which are not districts will tremendously reduce. 

So, our view is that the current Local Council IVs are first of all redundant, because we have district councils at the county level in districts where counties are also districts. We also think that they do not have any more useful purpose to serve. So, our proposal is that we wind them up. 

But I would like to clarify that the amendment that we are making does not abolish the county as a unit. What we are proposing to abolish are the councils because the county is still relevant in the Constitution as a basis for creating a constituency. Counties are also relevant in some areas of Uganda where they have kingdoms and other traditional institutions. So, the intention in this proposal is not to abolish the county, but the intention is to wind up the councils which are based at the constituency level and at the county level.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. I now invite the chair of the committee to give a report.

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Florence Kintu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee of Public Service and Local Government sat to discuss the Amendment (No.2) Bill of the Local Government of 2012. Allow me to lay on Table the minutes of that meeting.

Madam Speaker, allow me to present a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Local Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012.

Introduction

The Local Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012 was read for the first time on 3 July 2012, and in accordance with rule 147 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda,  the bill was referred to the Sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government for consideration.

Below is the report of the committee on the Bill.

Methodology

In considering the Bill, the Committee on Public Service and Local Government held meetings with the Ministry of Local Government and the Electoral Commission; it reviewed the relevant literature, namely, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, the Local Governments Act Cap. 243, and the Electoral Commission Act Cap. 140.

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to amend the Local Government Cap. 243 and in particular, abolish county councils; provide for the transmission of only the electronic version of the voters’ register to registered political parties and organisations for LC I and II elections; provide for publication in the gazette of polling stations and the posting of the relevant parts of the voters’ registers on notice boards in every parish; provide for appointment of tribunals for village and parish elections; and provide for any other related matters.

These were the observations and recommendations from the committee.

Abolition of county councils

The committee observed that:

(a) 	The Local Government Act Cap. 243, section 45, provides for the creation of administrative units at county level among others in the rural areas. The county councils consist of all members of the sub-county executive committees in the county. The functions of the county council include: Monitoring the delivery of services by structures at county level such as health centre IVs; drawing the attention of the district chairperson; the Chief Administrative Officer and the Assistant Chief Administrative Officer at county level to any matters that arouse the councillor’s concern or interest; advising the area Member of Parliament on all matters pertaining to the county; resolving problems or disputes referred to it by relevant sub-county councils and those identified at the county level; assist in the maintenance of law, order and security in the county; and carrying out any other function that may be assigned by the district council and/or any other function conferred by law or incidental to the above functions.

(b) 	In reality, the county councils are no longer functional. Their mandate and roles are being dispensed by the district and sub-county local governments.

County councils are poorly facilitated. Every county council is supposed to receive five percent of the locally generated revenue of the sub-counties in the county. However, the local revenues of the sub-counties have dwindled significantly and a consequently, the county councils have not had sufficient resources to deliver on their mandate. 

Whereas there are 169 counties in Uganda, most of them have already attained district status. At the moment, there are 111 districts. With the addition of the proposed 25 new districts, the total number of districts may soon come to more than 136. This leaves only 33 counties that are not districts.  

Recommendations 

    1. To abolish county councils in Uganda and amend the Local Government Act accordingly. For avoidance of doubt, the abolition does not apply to municipal councils.

    2. Make all counties districts so that the district councils assume the responsibility of the few remaining laws of the county councils. (Applause)

    3. Re-define the functions and roles of districts and their entitlements, including representation in Parliament and administrative structures.

    4. The five percent that sub-counties have been remitting to the county councils should be retained by the sub-counties.

    5. Government recalls the Regional Tier Bill with a view of reviewing it to create stronger regional governments to unite the small districts created into more meaningful local governments that have bigger roles, functions and powers as we implement Article 178 of the Constitution. 

Transmission of the voters’ register to political parties

The committee observed that, at the moment, the law, Local Government Act, sections 106 and 161 as amended, and the Electoral Commission Act, Section 18(A) requires the Electoral Commission to avail copies of voters’ registers for local council elections to be used on polling day to all registered political parties participating in the elections two weeks before polling day. The registers are to be both in electronic version and hard copy, meaning paper copies. The updated paper copy of the register should contain photographs of all the voters.

It is expensive to give each of the 38 registered political parties and organisations both an electronic version and hard copy of the voters’ register for local council elections.

It is necessary to reduce costs to make it possible and affordable to conduct the local council elections and in particular, to dispense with the hard copies of voters’ registers that bear photographs of all voters. 

The political parties and organisations have the responsibility of making copies of the official registers to their field offices as to their capacity and requirement.

Recommendation 

The Electoral Commission should transmit only the electronic version of the voters’ register in the case of elections of the village and parish councils to all registered political parties participating in the election.

Publication of voters’ register and polling stations

The committee observed that the law 4(2)(a) above, makes it mandatory for the Electoral Commission to publish in the Gazette and the print media, polling stations and the list of places at which voters’ registers are required to be displayed. Compliance with this provision makes the elections expensive and burdensome to the taxpayers. 

Recommendation 

The Electoral Commission should publish the list of polling stations for local council elections only in the Gazette and should post relevant parts of the voters’ register on notice boards in every parish.

Appointment of tribunals for village and parish elections 

(a) 	The committee observes that at present, the Local Governments Act, Section 159(D) as amended, is to the effect that all registered voters in the village comprise the tribunal to determine objections under Section 25(v) of the Electoral Commission Act, Cap. 140. 

(b) 	Implementation of the above provision makes determination of objections expensive, unmanageable and unaffordable.

(c) 	There is need to determine a reasonable and manageable number of persons to constitute a village-parish tribunal for purposes of dispensing justice in the electoral-related objectives.

(d) 	In the current situation, members of the tribunal are likely to have a conflict of interest since they have an interest in the matter to be decided upon, particularly if they themselves or persons they support are standing for elections.

Recommendation 

The Electoral Commission should appoint a tribunal at every parish consisting of five members to handle complaints related to elections in the parish and villages in the respective parish.

Other related matters

(a)	Local council courts

In view of the fact that the country has returned to a multiparty political dispensation, the committee recommends that the judicial function of the local council courts be reviewed so as to ensure their impartiality and fairness.

Recommendation 

Election of women councils is long overdue. The committee recommends that arrangements be made to have the women councils elected at the same time as the local council elections. (Applause) 

Urban council elections in KCCA

The Kampala Capital City Authority Act provides for street committees, village urban councils and ward urban councils. The people of Kampala have a right to choose their leaders just like in any other area of Uganda.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that Government provides electoral procedures for Kampala City and that Kampala should go to the polls at the same time with the rest of the country.

Conclusion
Local Councils are a key structure in the governance and democratisation of Uganda. The last local council elections took place more than 10 years ago. The people have been eagerly waiting for the opportunity to exercise their mandate to elect leaders at village and parish levels.

The proposals in the Local Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012 are meant to make it easy and affordable for Government to conduct these elections. The changes in the election process for the village and parish councils make it imperative for the Electoral Commission to ensure that adequate sensitisation of the public is conducted and on time, to avoid unnecessary mistakes.

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government commends Government for tabling the Local Government (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2012 for Parliament’s consideration and wishes to submit these recommendations for approval of Parliament. 

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government comprises 17 Members. Out of 17 Members, 13 signed, one is sick. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on Table. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and the committee. You have heard the proposals. Hon. Otto, three minutes, hon. Amongi, three minutes; honourable members, we only have thirty minutes. 

4.27
MR SAMUEL ODONG-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee chairperson for bringing a very good report. I would confidently support 95 percent of her submissions. I also want to thank the minister for being very clear and elaborate this time, unlike the time we were talking about the bicycles. (Laughter)

Having said that, if these amendments are adopted, I am reliably informed that it will cost Shs 48 billion to carry out the LC elections countrywide as opposed to Shs 120 billion in the current legal regime. But Shs 48 billion in my view is a lot of money –(Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that actually, the effect of this Bill is to reduce the cost of elections from Shs 120 billion to only Shs 38 billion. And that within the budget for this year, the Electoral Commission has Shs 19 billion; so the balance which would be required for a supplementary budget would be Shs 19 billion and we would have these elections. 

The Minister for Local Government has already assured us that they are ready to hold this election even this year if the Shs 19 billion could be provided. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the point I wanted to raise is, even if you elect these people next year, for how long will they stay in office? [HON. MEMBER: “Five years.”] I am one of the leaders who think that we should have a general debate on how long the tenure of an elected leader should be. A Member of Parliament, has five years. Before you have even learnt the Rules of Procedures, other people are already consulting –(Laughter)– on how to replace you. 

If we are going to spend Shs 48 billion in an election and after five years we spend another Shs 48 billion, yet my health centre in Awele needs only Shs 13 million for drugs, then we may have to start thinking of having the terms for all elected leaders go to seven or eight years so that we save revenue for this country. We do not have to learn from other new countries like Rwanda; we have powers to make that law. At an appropriate time, we will need to revisit that debate because we cannot keep –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, I seek for your protection. I am saying that at an appropriate time, this Parliament should revisit the issue of how many years an elected leader should stay in office. To me, five years is very little time and it is very expensive to hold elections every five years. And I put the Government on notice that a motion may come at an appropriate time. 

Madam Speaker, on page five, the committee says, “To make it mandatory for the Electoral Commission to publish in the gazette and print media a list of voters”. The committee is saying, “Let the Electoral Commission publish in the public gazette and print media the list of polling stations and they do not publish at the parish level. I am of the view that it should be the reverse. 

Someone from my village in Polachin will not read the print media and will not even know there is a gazette. So, maybe we abolish the print media and the gazette and find mechanisms of sending that list to the villages where they need them. And in case the lists are very expensive, then it is about time we started saying there should be lining up for LC I and LC II elections –(Laughter)– because we cannot continue like this. We mobilise people to line up and elect their leaders, and we forget about secret ballot for LC I. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you can remember that it is one of the parties in this country that took the Government to court for trying to use the lining up method and insisted that we must have secret ballot –(Interjections)– yes, that is the party I belong to and I am glad you have come round. 

4.33
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam County South): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this amendment and the report. As you are aware, we passed here the Domestic Violence Act, and one of the conditions in the Act is that the first court of instance where women can report cases of domestic violence is the local council court; yet many people had come out to legally contest the election of local council people; that they had not been elected and ,therefore, existed illegally. 

There are many other laws in this country that point to local councils as the court of first instance. Therefore, electing them now is paramount to operationalise the legality of this Act, which we have already passed. 

Madam Speaker, I have noted in the report of the committee the fact that they would like the village and parish tribunals to be appointed by the Electoral Commission, and at the same time, they are saying that there is no money and yet there are so many villages and parishes. I would like to know why the committee feels that the Electoral Commission would be the best place to appoint five people from all the villages and parishes in this country for the tribunal instead of –(Interruption)– honourable minister, it is on page 6 of the report of the committee. In recommendation eight, they are saying the Electoral Commission should appoint a tribunal at every parish consisting of five members to handle complaints relating to elections. 

I would rather we leave the law as it is under the Local Government Act, section 159, and the Electoral Commission Act Cap. 140. There, it is the people of that area that constitute the tribunal; the registered voters. Now, you say the Electoral Commission should appoint five people and your argument is that if you make the registered voters on the village to constitute that, they will have conflict of interest. But is the Electoral Commission going to invent these five people from some other parish or village?  

The law already spells out that the legally registered people should constitute those tribunals and I think we should leave them to do so, because the Electoral Commission cannot invent five people from outside the village or parish. Unless you state clearly that they will appoint from outside the parish or the village. 

Number two, funding of the political parties; the committee recommends that it will be very expensive for registers to be delivered to political parties and they want the current law amended. My proposal is that let the current law exist –(Interjections)– but only give the political parties registers where they have nominated candidates –(Interjections)– no, it is not saying that; it says that they will only give an electronic version of the register to political parties. But the Electoral Commission can come up and say that you have a printed register, but we do not know this register and yet the list of the voters keeps changing. If it is updated and you had transmitted an electronic version, it is printed by political parties and it is not signed or endorsed by the Electoral Commission, it will be problematic. 

Is it possible for the Electoral Commission to give registers to political parties that have candidates in that particular area only, instead of transmitting the electronic version and it is at leisure for you to print and use? I will take information from the honourable. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Latif Ssebagala, hon. Lubogo and hon. Anywarach and then I go this side. 

4.36
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On page 7, the committee has advised the Government in their recommendation that, “The committee recommends that Government should provide electoral procedures for Kampala City and that Kampala should go to the polls at the same time with the rest of the country.” I wanted clarification, where this implies that in Kampala we are not going to have elections until the next elections.

The reason as to why I am asking this is because the crime rate in Kampala is rising simply because of lack of LCs or urban councils. What we are getting in Kampala is that people organise themselves and say they are the leaders even when they have never been elected by the village people. So, I am requesting that if the KCCA Act is silent or we cannot use it currently as it is, then we can use the Local Government Act and then carry out elections like in other parts of the country.

Secondly, I will request the honourable minister - because he was telling us that in order to reduce the costs, we should do away with photo registers. I think that we can have both. We can have the photo registers because the registers are already there and the reason that the minister was advancing that some polling stations may have an LC 1 whereby the electoral centres of the polling stations could extend to other villages is not practical. For example, in Kampala here, all LC 1 villages are polling stations. I also believe that even in other areas, you may have LC 1s as villages where there are two or three polling stations, but within that very village. 

So, I believe that we can use the same register where there are photos and then we carry out the elections instead of saying that we should have only names because people will come in their own way and then they claim to be village mates. So, I believe that we can still use the Electoral Commission voters’ register to carry out the LC elections –(Member timed out.)

4.41
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank you chair for the report. I rise up to support the report with some changes that I would want to propose.

On page 4, recommendation (1), the committee proposes that sub-county councils in Uganda should be abolished –

THE SPEAKER: County.

MR LUBOGO: I mean county councils in Uganda should be abolished with justifications given. I have observed the function of LC IV and the LC II parish councils, and find that their functioning is almost the same as if both of them are sleeping partners in Government. And if you are talking about saving the taxpayer from a lot of costs, I would suggest that it would be important for us to also consider abolishing LC IIs so that we stick to LC I, LC III and LC V and we reduce the costs, accordingly. 

Secondly, on recommendation (ii), the committee is suggesting that all counties should be turned into districts. But the minister has just proposed to us why we need to maintain the counties and he gave reasons that even for purposes of demarcation of constituencies, we will need the counties. Today, we have 58 counties that are not yet districts, and I am wondering what kind of precedence we are setting if we are to turn every county into a district. [MR OLANYA: “Information.”] Okay.

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Olanya.

MR OLANYA: I thank my colleague for giving way. The information that I want to give is that now there are other people who still need counties to be created in their areas. I am now wondering what will happen to the new counties that will be created. Shall they all automatically become districts?  

MR LUBOGO: I thank you for the information.

THE SPEAKER: Order.

MR LUBOGO: And I was actually coming to that because in my district, we have submitted a proposal for a new county because Kaliro District is one county and we want to have another county there; and what I am looking at is the precedent that we are setting by saying that let counties become districts. We are likely to find a problem with this later when we get these other counties saying that after all it was agreed some time back that counties should become districts, and we may find that we are engrossed in this kind of confusion of having districts every other day. 

I am dissatisfied with what the committee is stating on the first line on page 6 about saving taxpayers of costs because of the registers. But then, if you are talking about reducing costs, in the transmission of the register information, you cannot talk about that without talking about the costs that are involved in the creation of districts -(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on two points. 

The first is that I want to thank the committee for doing a good job. However, I think it is a well-known fact either by custom or usage that even constitutionally, in Uganda, we have Independence. So, I stand here for the rights of the marginalised people or people who will be suffering the heavy forces of the injustices of primary elections of all these political parties and would want to contest independently. 

So, if we say as it is on page 2 that, “Provide for the transmission of only the electronic version of the voters register to registered political parties and organisations for LC I and LC II elections,” what if some people or candidates decide to stand as independents? We should provide for them here that where there are also independents, electronic versions be sent to them. 

Now, it would be better –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, am I protected?

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Allow hon. Anywarach to address his issue. 

I would think that where a political organisation is not represented in the election of the Local Councils I and II, instead of sending an electronic version of the register to such an organisation which is not even participating in the election – whether it is in coalition or not, it would be useless. We rather provide for the people who are standing and especially the Independents – if they are there, they should receive the electronic version. I know people who are still enjoying the benefits of parties will not support this, but the Independents will clap for this. (Applause)

On page 4, I listened to the minister attentively making a very erroneous contradiction, that with a legal eye like mine I would not just leave unchallenged. He said they are not abolishing the counties, but they are abolishing the county council. But if you read in black and white where he rightly says that there are 169 counties, of which 111 are already districts, leaving about 33 which are still counties with 25 new districts also in waiting. Therefore, in forming a district from a county, you are actually killing a county. So, we are legislating to even kill the council and also the counties. That is why now –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR ANYWARACH: I would also think that to refer to institutions or structures as sub-counties may now be useless. We should legislate to give new names to sub-counties because there are no counties now. 

Finally, there are counties which are also districts at the same time; and we have people who are longing to be divided into counties such that we elect Members of Parliament. For example – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that Aruu County is a one-county district. I am the MP of Aruu County, but there is a Woman MP who says she is the Woman MP of – (Interjections)– she is the Woman MP of Pader District and yet in Pader District, there is only one county called Aruu. So, if one is a visitor, they may think we are from different places and yet we are from the same place. (Laughter)

MR ANYWARACH: To conclude, therefore, I would think that let us leave Pi as Pi; let us leave a county as county. If we are abolishing county councils, the justification should not be that already counties have evolved into districts and there is now no need to even worry about having county councils. That is a wrong justification. (Member timed out.) 

4.50
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for coming up with this report. Aware of the fact that we have taken time without having these LC I s elected, it has created a very big gap. Realising the importance of the LC Is and their responsibilities, it is very important that we have them elected by supporting this report. 

I also strongly support hon. Odonga Otto who proposed that we should come up with an amendment of having these elections by lining up. (Applause)

Also, aware of the fact that the essence of decentralisation was to bring services nearer to the people, the committee came up with a recommendation that we should have all these remaining counties turned into districts. I support this recommendation because almost in every term in Parliament, Government submits a list of counties to be turned into districts. 

If we happen to pass this report and have all the remaining counties turned into districts, I think it will also help Government to plan properly. It will also help the National Planning Authority to plan for the number of districts that Uganda will have created. 

The recommendation that county councils be removed – I think these county councils have been playing the role of district councils because there has been duplication of work and roles, and of so many activities. You could not differentiate the jurisdiction of a district chairperson and that of an LC IV chairperson. So, I strongly support the recommendation to scrap them. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.53	
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for their report. I am very happy, especially to know that it is possible to hold our LC I elections at a cheaper cost. Because the reasons we have been giving to the population is that we do not have money. Now that I hear it is possible, it is very good news. Because in the LC Is now, we have double LC I chairmen; we have a chairman with an old stamp and we have a chairman who won the elections. So, there is a lot of confusion going on at our LC I level -(Interjections)- I am sorry, I mean those who won the primary elections. I am qualifying it. Thank you. 

There is a lot of confusion going on at the LC I level and the sooner we hold these elections the better. 

I would not like to support the elections by lining up because I think Uganda is democratically mature to have elections in secrecy. So, we still need the secret ballot, and that is what I propose. 

I also support the proposal that county councils be abolished. But I would also like to add to recommendation four, on page 4; the five percent that sub-counties have been remitting to the county councils should be retained by the sub-counties. 

I would like to add that we need an audit done on these county councils. They have been receiving this money, but there is no work to prove that this money has been spent. In our audit regime, we do not have any audit reports to do with county councils. Somebody has been enjoying this money without any accountability. It is very important that an audit is carried out in these county councils. 

Finally, we need to have women councils in place because as we talk, many women councillors have been performing their duties illegally. We need them in our structures because they have been performing without a mandate. I would support that we concurrently have these elections as we hold the LC I elections. 

Madam Speaker, finally, it is very important that we look at issues concerning the districts. It would look preposterous that every county turns into a district simply because right now our concern is expenditure, and administrative costs of what we have now. I do not imagine what it would be –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MRS BOONA: I am wondering, if now we are saying we do not have enough money to meet our administrative costs, I do not know where we would get the money to make every county a district and, therefore, have the money to meet those administrative costs. 

Those are my submissions, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

4.57
MS EVELYN KAABUULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get a legal interpretation from the minister about the position of the LCIs currently. I know that their term of office ended sometime back, yet they have been operating to date. What does that mean legally, because we are using the LCIs to sign legal documents? Aren’t we going to have problems in future when these documents or when the people who are using these documents are taken to court? I request the minister to give a legal interpretation about the work of the LCIs before they are elected. 

Secondly, we all know that we are operating with a limited resource envelope. If we could get means to expand the resource envelope, I would support the point of creating more districts. However, what I would like to ask is: what is the purpose of creating districts? Is it political or is it to deliver services to the people? If it is to deliver services to the people, how are we getting the services? The services come through a resource envelope which is limited. So, if the resource envelope is limited and you want to create more districts, how are we going to manage to be able to – (Interjection) – I know we want more districts and I would support it if they are going to be efficient and effective, but if they are not, let us not create districts for the sake of creating them. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MS KAABULE: Recommendation No. 3 is about redefining the functions and roles of districts. I would like the committee to give us a redefinition because (ii) has been left hanging. They have given suggestions of how they want the functions and roles of the district to be redefined but the statement is left hanging.  (Member timed out.)

5.00
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to associate myself with recommendation No.2, that we should make all counties districts. 

Well aware that I come from a border constituency that neighbours Kenya, I know that they have already done this; every constituency which is a county is a district. Bunyala Constituency, Budalangi Constituency are districts, Samia is already a district also. So, it would not be unique if we had all our counties elevated to district status and the question of districts is closed. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank the honourable member for giving way. In Kenya, the system is a little different from Uganda. In Kenya, a county is bigger than a district and counties have got districts; they have got a county then under the county they have districts. In Uganda, it is the other way round whereby a district is bigger and the counties are smaller. 

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, honourable minister, for that information but the information you have given is incorrect according to the current Constitution. Before the enactment of the new Constitution, they had every constituency elevated to district status. They are reversing according to the new Constitution. That statement you are giving is according to the current Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, another observation is that women councils and youth councils are long overdue. So, we should move very quickly and have these councils put in place. 

Finally, elections for LCI are long overdue. In some places, you may write a letter and it is stamped “chairman” but it is rejected. They want you to go and get a letter written by the LCI chairperson. They are only playing with words but these people are the same. An LCI chairman and a chairperson LCI are the same people who have expired. I feel we should move very fast and support a supplementary budget and we have these people elected through secret ballot. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.03
MR JOHN KAMARA NIZEYIMANA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know that we have spent very many years without holding LCI elections. Many chairpersons and their executives have since died and posts are vacant. Most of the villages lack order; you will find cases have not been judged, and we have confusion where people are even grabbing land because they do not have any person to guide them. The local councils at village level are where democracy must be based. This is the new creator of democracy, so we must emphasise democracy so that in future, we get clear and proper elections. 

In support of those who proposed lining up, these people in the villages clearly know themselves and their villages and they are even organised; they can line up and we will avoid unnecessary costs that we may incur when we go with ballot papers. I think this is going to even emphasise transparency at the village level. When they start lining up and they know that they are voting the right person, I do not see any reason why we should carry ballot boxes for people who already know each other.

I do not see any reason to oppose creation of new districts. This is simply because when we create more districts, we will bring equitable development in these areas. We clearly know that when we are budgeting, we consider districts, and the more districts we have in different areas the more we shall bring services nearer to the people and resources will be allocated to those districts directly. When we consider districts, all these areas are going to be equitably developed, people are going to govern themselves and, therefore, democracy will be enhanced in Uganda. 

I support lining up, I support new districts and I support elections so that we get proper governance. I thank you, Madam Speaker.   

5.06
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to support the motion but I have a few observations and comments to make. 

I would have wanted the minister to clearly define what a district should be. If today we adopt the proposal that each county be made a district - I come from a county where we have three constituencies and - (Interjections) – Yes, it has - Busongora North, Busongora South and Kasese Municipality; that is one county.  Madam Speaker, protect me as I make my point.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he knows what he is talking about; let him explain.

MR MBAHIMBA: So, this is one county of Kasese with three constituencies, but I have seen cases where one constituency makes a district. This is why I would be very happy for the minister to clearly define what a district should be - in terms of population and constituencies - before we say that each county should become a district.

Secondly, since this is a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, I want to say that I have seen an error where there is a subcounty chief and a county chief, who is the ACAO, but both are identified as “Assistant Chief Administrative Officers”. However, if you looked at the area they cover, the subcounty is smaller than a county. I want this to be restructured such that if a subcounty chief is a senior assistant secretary, then a county chief should be a deputy CAO.

Madam Speaker, I have seen a lacuna in this law. The promotion of subcounty chiefs is limited. While personnel officers easily become deputy CAOs because they attain a principal level, the county chief remains at county level. This needs to be restructured so that people can get a direct way of promotion.

Madam Speaker, the other thing I wish to talk about is the queuing during voting. I represent an urban area where some of the men have many homes around these villages. Therefore, when we want them to line up, a man will wish to line up in every village. If these queues do not happen at the same hour, one man will have to run from one village to another to vote for the LCI chairperson. (Laughter)  As a representative of an urban area, this is not practical. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just use half a minute to conclude.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to ask the Minister to define a division in a municipal council. According to my understanding, a division is a town council but of recent, I saw a different plan where town councils, which are autonomous in their areas, were given road equipment while divisions were not catered for and yet they have a similar definition. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbahimba, I want you to explain to us. During the census exercise, you are required to be counted only in one place, would that polygamous man go at midnight to one home to be counted and then at 3.00 a.m. to another home and by 9 o’clock he will be counted somewhere else? (Laughter)

5.10
DR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas I support the amendment Bill, in the medium and long term we should be looking at amending the Constitution to remove the provision of secret ballot at village level because we cannot talk about lining up unless we amend that Article. 

We also need to look at the rationale of having multiparty elections at village level; does it create harmony? Does it promote good governance? We have situations like in Ghana, where multiparty elections stop at maybe district level and above. At the village level, people should not have multiparty elections that are going to cause divisions. Just because of the urgency, the need to have security in the villages, we can pass this Bill – (Interjections) - I will not take the information; let me just conclude. So, in the long – (Ms Alaso rose_) Okay. (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Tumwesigye for letting me provide this information to the House. Part of the debate has already been overtaken by events and actually, we in the FDC went to court over the same argument. That is why court said that if we had decided to go multiparty, we should do it all the way. It is actually a settled matter as far as the courts of Uganda are concerned and we amended the Act to suit it. That is why we are now at this level.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you for that information but of course, courts pass judgement according to the laws of the nation and yet Parliament makes laws. So, we can make appropriate laws which courts will then follow. (Applause) Nonetheless, I want to point out that there is no need for multiparty elections at the village level for purposes of creating harmony.  

The second comment I wish to make is on the LCI chairpersons. Currently, it is the LCI chairperson who appoints his or her committee after being elected. If that person is a thief, he or she will appoint fellow thieves to the executive committee. You will find the whole village held at ransom by people who collude. By making sure that we can have lining up, we can have each position elected at village level rather than have the LCI chairperson appointing cohorts to the executive committee.

I will end with a comment on the abolition of counties; I support this. We already have this experience in Bushenyi District where Greater Bushenyi had five counties and all of them were chopped into districts. Now, we are living happily and we are enjoying it. However, I wish to add that if we are to do that, people should not create counties as a way of creating constituencies because that is where the problem is. We should have counties and if we need to have constituencies, we should follow the right procedure to have them. So, in this case – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude in half a minute.

DR TUMWESIGYE: In this case, what would happen is that we would need to look at the former counties, which existed in the 1995 Constitution, and make them districts. So, subsequent counties, which were in lieu of constituencies, are then abolished but we maintain constituencies as they are. (Interjections) No, you still maintain women district representatives. 

That would maintain a manageable number of counties, which would become districts. We would then re-centralise some of the functions like secondary education, tender boards and district service commissions at regional level or regional tier level. That would maintain service delivery at the district. We would have women representatives at districts but then get redundant commissions which are at district level to go to regional tier level.  

5.15
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am somewhat happy that we are at par at last. I commend the chairperson and committee for the work well done. I feel this is going to answer a number of our issues, especially those of us who come from very big constituencies. 

Kibaale District is comprised of 2,320 villages, five constituencies, four town councils, 11 town boards and the population is beyond one million. Service delivery has been a very big challenge. Therefore, I feel that the earlier we pass this, the better for us, especially for the people of Kibaale. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MS NABBANJA: I request Members to listen to me because I have been listening to others attentively. In Kibaale, you cannot talk of UPE; it is not there because the number of teachers is not commensurate to the number of schools we have. We have 626 schools with one DEO and one inspector of schools. They cannot inspect. Our children have been getting what you usually see in the papers.
Sometime back, we brought a petition here. We, the Members from Kibaale District, petitioned Parliament and Madam Speaker, you ruled and said since the report for the creation of Kagadi and Kakumiro was supposed to have started this year, it should come in a week’s time. I am here begging my colleagues and the chairperson, why don’t you bring this report now? When I heard my colleague from Luuka - it has just been created - and she is here because - (Laughter) - As you are aware, she is here because of the creation of a district in Luuka. Honourable members, - (Interruption) 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you very much for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that when the government is giving, say road equipment, Luuka will get one piece of equipment, Kibaale will get one, Ntungamo will get one. So, really, what is the rationale of making all counties districts?

MS NABBANJA: I fear that she is taking part of my time. Madam Speaker, what she has said is a reality. With 4,400 kilometres of road, we got one piece of equipment in Kibaale. The situation in Kibaale is pathetic. You are aware - (Interruption)

DR OMONA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I am giving the honourable colleague here is that this criteria of creating districts may not summarily end the questions of the new districts. This is equated to bringing services close to the people, to improve the services to the people. I want to say that we may make all these counties districts but the needs may still arise. 

The point here is the question of Kibaale, which I have taken my own trouble to tour. I want to say that if there is any district that must be split in this country, it should be Kibaale among others. Yes, I know Kalaki is another but there are councillors in Kibaale who spend two days travelling for a council meeting in town. Kibaale had got a district but I still believe that even if we give all counties district status, there may still arise other needs to create other districts out of this. Bugangaizi, for example, is about 1675 kilometres; it is very big compared to some of these districts that we have. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this may not necessarily solve the question of districts. We may have other criteria for creating districts like needs, area of land and population and not just counties. Thank you, honourable colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, hon. Nabbanja.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I request that you give me one minute.

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, the council of Kibaale District is comprised of 72 councillors, so you can imagine a councillor getting an opportunity to debate. Madam Speaker, you have been there and remember you also promised these people. (Laughter) Can I move a motion now? (Laughter) I request that the chairperson of the local government committee comes up with the report. She was supposed to bring this report in two weeks’ time. 

Madam Speaker, I know we can ask urgent questions. Suppose you allow me to ask this one?

THE SPEAKER: You have to give me notice.

MS NABBANJA: There are those that are supposed to be asked under rule 39; I am supposed to use that rule to ask an urgent question. Can I ask, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You will ask on Thursday. Honourable members, I just want to confirm that I told the people of Kagadi and Kakumiro that I understood their request because I had driven there and I saw the roads. I said, “I have understood your need for a district”, but the giving is for the minister.

5.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Listening to what colleagues are saying, I do not know whether my friend, the Minister of Local Government, is not concerned that the submissions of the honourable members is an indictment on you that you have created districts without a uniform basis. (Mr Mwesige rose_) Before I make my point, what do you seek clarification on?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Speaker, I seek the indulgence of my colleague, hon. Katuntu. I wanted to correct the assertion that the Minister of Local Government has created districts. The districts are actually created by the Parliament in which he sits.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, when you say that, you are now throwing the fire onto the Speaker. People will think that it is Parliament, which wakes up and says, “We are giving you this.” You are the ones who request. The request comes from you. Yes, the request comes from Government.

MR KATUNTU: I think the bigger point to be made, Madam Speaker, and I hope the Minister of Local Government takes it in good faith, is that we have had haphazard creation of districts or administrative units without regard to maybe a standard geographical size, a standard population or standard infrastructure. In the process, and because we wanted to achieve some short political gain, even deserving cases like the one being talked about by my sister from Kibaale have not got the districts and you have just small areas turned into districts.

The honourable minister should go back to the drawing board such that every Ugandan knows that to qualify to be a district, this is the basis, and then you will not even have pressure on yourself. It is within your own interest, but you wake up, you come here - All these motions for a resolution of Parliament to create new districts are your own resolutions; they do not originate from this House but from your ministry. So, my point is - (Mr Ssemugaba rose_) - You know I would allow all the information but the time might not - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have stood up on a point of order. Hon. Katuntu has asserted that Government or the minister is creating districts haphazardly whereas it is we on the ground who request for these districts. We have subcounty council resolutions and even village and county resolutions; the minister brings them to Parliament, Parliament discusses, they go to the committee and we finally pass those resolutions and create the districts. Therefore, is hon. Abdu Katuntu in order to assert that districts are created haphazardly? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Katuntu is saying is that there are areas that have requested and have not been responded to like Kagadi, Obongi, Tororo. There are those. 

MR KATUNTU: I think the point has been made. What we would be asking the minister - [Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa: “Point of order.”]- I am yet to talk about fish. (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order because the honourable member on the Floor, who is an upright learned fellow, is insinuating that when Government brings in requests, Parliament has nothing to do but to rubberstamp, and therefore, our hands are tied. So, he is saying the creation of districts is the responsibility of the Minister of Local Government or Government but not Parliament. 

Is he in order to insinuate that when a request is made, Parliament has no chance to refuse but to rubberstamp and yet we have seen situations where Members move resolutions and they are rejected by Parliament? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what needs to be very clear is that Parliament does not initiate proposals; it responds to the proposals brought by the government. I do not think this Parliament has ever sat to propose; we respond to your proposals. Yes.

MR KATUNTU: I think, honourable members, we are missing out on the wider picture, and the wider picture is that we need to have a standard formula upon which we create new districts. That is it. I realise the problem of the Executive; they want us to share the blame. If that is what you think makes you comfortable, yes, even Parliament is partly to blame but- (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank hon. Katuntu. The information I want to give hon. Katuntu and the whole House to prove that Government does not have a formula for creation of districts is that over the last seven years, there was an abnormal district called Maracha-Terego. (Laughter) At the end of the day, because of what Government wanted to do, matters ended up in courts of law. 

The courts pronounced themselves very well to say, “Look, if there is an issue of two counties that have been made into a district, they can be the only people to take their destiny in terms of determining where their headquarters should be.” Now, because of political overtones from Government, people were not allowed to follow the law. The issue of population, the issue of county sizes was not taken into account. So, the information is that it is true Government does not have a parameter that it uses when it is giving out districts.

MR KATUNTU: I think that point is well made. My colleague, honourable minister, may take note. 

I would like to go to the report on page 4, recommendations 1 and 2. Creation of districts is provided for under the Constitution. If we do resolve like we are resolving now, first of all, will the minister be bound by this resolution? Will we, Parliament, be bound by our own resolution? Will we, therefore, have created new districts? These particular resolutions have got constitutional problems. I think we need to handle them differently. 

Secondly, the amendment of this Bill is okay but it does not address the bigger problems within local governments. Honourable minister, really, in my view, when you read these recommendations, the committee is saying, “look here, there is a very big problem in the way we have structured our local governments; it has to be looked at again.” There is this issue that hon. Odonga Otto is raising, that you have got a county as a district, in that county there is a district council but in that district there is also a county council. So, you have some districts with county councils and then there are districts with several county councils. It does not make sense. 

You need to go back to reorganise local governments like indeed the Kenyans have done. The Kenyans have now come up with 47 counties which ordinarily we used to have in this country as provinces. Those who are old enough to have known what provinces are, like my elder, hon. Stephen Mallinga - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are having problems in managing these local governments. They are not viable. I used to be chairperson of the Local Governments Accounts Committee; there is no district in this country I never reached, but they do not have money. A lot of money is sometimes sent to those districts but they have mismanaged it and so on. 

It is time to think about administrative levels at a higher level, for example, provinces or regions, and then you form very strong bigger governments that can deliver services to the people. This populism should end - this one hon. Ssemugabi is talking about. You see, our people will ask for all sorts of things including tax exemption, will we accept because the local people have said, “exempt us from tax”? 

As leaders, we need to do what is right for this country. If a sub-county comes and says, “We want a county because we want to have an MP”, you do not say “Government’s hands are tied”. We will be absconding from our responsibility as leaders in this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  
 
5.35
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have to support the recommendations in this report halfway. First and foremost, I am support the election of LCIs and LCIIs to be carried out as soon as possible, but they should be carried out through the secret ballot as stipulated in the Constitution, Article 68(1), that voting should be by secret ballot.

Also, the photographs of voters should be on the voters’ registers. I do not support the Minister’s recommendation that photos should not be on the voters’ register. What is important here is what we call good governance and democracy where everyone will be satisfied in a modern way.

I also do not support these recommendations they have made, from one to whatever. Actually, they should be revisited and reviewed because if you look at recommendation No. 2, for example, you are making all counties districts. Does this mean that if a county is constituted tomorrow, then it will automatically be a district? Are we changing names from a county to a district? If a sub-county becomes a county, does this mean that it automatically becomes a district? 

Recommendation No. 3 is about redefining the functions and roles of the districts. Are we changing the structures of governance of districts? If so, this committee should have made proposals, whether we are saying RDCs are abolished or one RDC will be governing about three districts. Which is which? We cannot pass such a recommendation in such a situation.

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time that these recommendations are revisited and then brought back to Parliament for proper discussion and recommendation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, how many of the recommendations form part of the amendments? None, I think. I do not think they form part of the proposed amendments.

5.38
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start with the issue of elections of LCI and then the women councils. This is a constitutional requirement. If a Member of Parliament is thrown out of Parliament, even if they have one year left, the Electoral Commission will move very fast to conduct an election. I wonder why for all this time, the Electoral Commission has been complaining that Government has not provided money, procedures have not been right. 

We are only lucky that these people did not think of going to court. Otherwise, if anybody had gone to court, then we would be subjected to pay them because we would have failed to fulfil our responsibility of ensuring that elections are conducted. So, whether it is very expensive, whether it is going to be done when we have two years left, I think we should move ahead and provide funds so that elections are conducted because there are a lot of problems that are going on in the villages.

I agree with Members that you find the chairperson is dead, the vice is dead and then you find somebody or so many people masquerading as chairpersons of LCI and even the women councils. They have a very big role to play in ensuring that government programmes are implemented at the grassroots. So, I think we should move ahead and ensure that elections are done and money is provided.

About lining up, I think we should move away from this local means of conducting elections. We have brought in UPE, the law is even different, and we still want to say, “for you LCs, you line up”! At the end of the day, there would be confusion and hatred in the village. Let people vote secretly, whoever wins, wins. After all, with multiparty we are going to create more problems for the people in the village. So, I would think that the proposal of lining up should not be taken up by Parliament. 

Secondly, the committee has made a recommendation here that the appointment of LC courts should be revisited. I want to support this because the persons put as LC court members are appointed by the political leaders who are elected under multiparty elections. So, they end up rewarding people who are supposed to preside over very serious issues on land, conflicts in homes etc. They are appointed politically at a local level and they think it is a political reward and they defy the interests of the people who work well with the chairperson. I think this would not help the people of the villages to sort out their problems. 

I would think another means of appointing these people, of putting these people in positions as LC courts, should be devised. Otherwise, it does not help to solve their problems on the ground. (Member timed out)

5.41
MS ANIFA KAWOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. 

I want to move to recommendation No. 2, on creation of districts. As the Committee on Equal Opportunities, we have had a chance to travel to the western, eastern, central and northern regions’ local governments looking at performance of new districts vis-à-vis old districts. Our report is ready, but I would not want to indulge into that until the report is presented. 

However, I want to say that in principle, what the committee is trying to do was to bring it to the attention of this Parliament that there is need for this Parliament to put in place mechanisms to have a formula for creation of districts; other than where there is political agitation, where it is to settle politicking and where there are ethnic conflicts, which are happening everywhere. It is true that some of the districts are very big, they have their different features and different requirements, but if we generalise and say every county should become a district, then we shall be missing a point. 

When we put funding into consideration, even the existing ones are not funded at all. The infrastructure at these already existing districts is poor; some are under trees and you will find that we cannot do much until somebody says we must ensure that there is enough funding so that we finance the existing ones. 

There are 25 districts that we sent to the committee from this House; we should consider those ones first and then we go again, within the constitutional requirements - You may have a county, but it does not necessarily mean that services are being delivered. So when we say that we are creating new districts to bring services nearer to the people, it may be true in some circumstances but in some other areas, no. 

I would recommend that as Parliament, we have a formula on how we should create more districts. I have no problem if they are created for affirmative action or space for people like us, so that one county goes there, another one goes there and we create a constituency; but how are we going to cater for equal opportunities for this one? 

Recommendation No. 5, Government recalls the regional tier Bill, with a view of reviewing it to create stronger regional governments. This, to me, is highly recommended. It is overdue. In Buganda region, for example, our requirements are to federate. The Constitution redeemed us, and what we want is a federal arrangement in Buganda. (Laughter) (Member timed out.)

5.45
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I come to speak on recommendation No. 2. To me, Government should streamline and come up with a formula on the creation of districts. For those members who have been submitting that districts are created due to people’s demands - bringing services closer to the people - I can give an example of a parent. Children will always have demands but at times some of the demands are not important and you must see through them.

Madam Speaker, I keep wondering because there was the local government committee report and it had recommended two positions. One position was that the smaller districts get merged to create bigger ones. I wondered, when I read this report, what happened to that recommendation? Why didn’t this committee look at that recommendation? There are also the one-county districts, which are very many. The recommendation was that these one-county districts get merged to create one bigger district, of course, taking into account the cost of running these districts. 

Most of these districts are crying. All of you know that in the local government, a district is given about 17 per cent of its budget and it cannot run. They are crippled, they are crumbling- (interjections)-, the services, the institutions, the infrastructure is not there and here we are saying that each county should become a district. Where is the money going to come from? 

Of course, there are even those smaller districts, which do not know how to utilise the money and at the end of the day, all the money is returned to the Consolidated Fund. Is that what we must legislate as Members of Parliament, as Parliament? So, we need a formula which we can be very proud of where we will say, “We passed this law and the law has translated into good results.” This is what we should stand for.

Madam Speaker, on recommendation No. 5, Government should expedite creation of the regional tier because we need stronger administrative units. Actually, all these questions and the hullabaloo of the creation of smaller districts would not be there if we had these stronger regional tiers as administrative units. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, because this matter is important, we have gone beyond the 30 minutes. We have actually taken one and a half hours. This is a Bill of 10 clauses. I want to move that we go to the committee stage. So, I want to put the question that the Bill be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (No. 2) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment to the long title. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not yet there. 

MS KINTU: On clause 1, the committee amends section 41, subsection (1) (a) of the principal Act by deleting the word, “the county”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment.

In clause 1(2), insert after the word, “county” the following words for clarity: “this shall not affect municipalities.” The justification is that municipalities are commonly known as LC IV level, which is the same as county, but this particular Bill affects the rural counties only.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, whereas the minister and the chairperson are making proposals, the justification was that most districts are one-county districts. But if you went to some districts like Tororo where we have two counties, our county councillors are still very relevant to us. Therefore, like you are making an exception for municipalities, you need to make an exception for those districts that are composed of more than one county like Tororo, so that you do not disadvantage us. Those who have one-county districts, the county council and the district council are one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, are they two constituencies or two counties? I want to hear from Tororo.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, there is Tororo County and then West Budama County in this case. Therefore, we have two county councils and then a municipality. Therefore, you will disadvantage us. Like where hon. Nabbanja comes from, they have more than one county. Now, you are deleting county councils on assumption that the same district council will be working, but it only applies to cases where you have one county council. Therefore, if you are making exceptions for the municipality, make exceptions for us who have more than one county.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like hon. Ekanya to clarify to us where the district councillors come from, those elected district councillors. Do they come from different places or from the same counties? So, I presume that all these counties send their councillors to the district. I do not see the justification of his point.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I want to seek further clarification on the basis of this justification. I would like to know whether by this amendment, we are actually elevating LC IV councils, ordinarily known as municipalities, to a county or to a district. What would they be? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought the municipalities were not affected by this amendment.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, that is the very reason I rise up to seek clarification. What would be the status of a municipality vis-à-vis a county and without a council – Madam Chair, this could be a very relevant explanation too. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Explain to the Members.

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, municipalities are not affected by this arrangement. They are not affected at all.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, my question is: can you have Parliament without MPs? Can you have a district without a district council? You are now leaving us to have a county, like Tororo County, without the county council. What is that body called? (Interjections) The county councils are composed of subcounty councillors and their work is clear. The argument-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya, I think you arrived after the rationale had been given. Yes, Minister, can you give the rationale.
 
MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson-(Interjections)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members!

MR MWESIGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In addition to the fact that many counties have now been transformed into districts-(Interjections) - There were counties even before the LC system came. So, even without the county council IV, you can have a county. 

West Budama County is a constituency. Tororo County is a constituency. So, it has a purpose to serve. The members of Tororo district council come from subcounties; they are elected by subcounties. So, if you want coordination of the affairs of Tororo County and West Budama County, that coordination can effectively be done by the district council. So, really, to have redundant structures, which no longer serve any purpose just because they must be there would not make sense at all.

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking from the minister is: what has he planned to do with Assistant Chief Administrative Officers (ACAOs) who are manning the counties in the case of districts with more than one county? Also, what is the minister going to do with those districts with one county, because they have been there? Does he want to tell us that we are going to abolish that position in the technical staff? That is the clarification I want to get.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think the minister was clear; he is not abolishing the county. What he is abolishing is the county council composed of LC II – that grouping of the LC III and the Ssaza, but the Ssaza is there.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chairperson, I brought this up because when you look at that particular office, of recent it has almost been redundant. 

I want to give a situation of a one-county district. In a one-county district, you have a situation where you have a chief administrator, he has a deputy and you have an assistant chief administrative officer, who is also supposed to be manning the county. That county is also the district, and we have the district chief administrative officer in that district who has a deputy. Now, what is the role of the assistant chief administrative officer who mans the county and yet that county is also the district? The assistant chief administrative officer, who is charged with the county which is also a district, almost has no work; in fact, he has no work. What would that assistant chief administrative officer be doing in a one-county district? So, I think the minister should come out clearly on this.

MR MWESIGE: The distinguished member for Serere has been Chairman LC V, so he knows how administration in the district works. An assistant chief administrative officer is not a county chief; he is an assistant chief administrative officer – (Interjections) – Yes, there is a deputy, but there are also assistants who can be assigned various tasks at the headquarters or in the field. So, you can have an assistant chief administrative officer even in a one-county district because assistant chief administrative officers assist the CAO in the performance of his or her duties. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think what hon. Ochola was asking is: where you have a one-county district, you have the CAO who is in charge of the district, you have the deputy who is in charge of a district, then you have the assistants and the one in charge of the county. What is that county person doing? 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Chairperson, I think we have a problem of nomenclature. When you hear of the word “subcounty”, you understand that “sub” means part of a county. You add up subcounties to make a county as an administrative unit. The problem we have here is that powers of administration have been shifted from the county to the subcounty, and the county is left without any administrative functions but the name “county” still exists and people use it. 

I will give an example. We like telling people that I come from Obongi County. In the past, Obongi County was an administrative unit but today, we just use the name but the administrative function is lost. So, to me, the word “county” should be removed from our vocabulary. You also have to change that word “subcounty” because now what will subcounties be part of if the counties no longer exist? Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe it is poor English Language because in my language, a subcounty is a gombolola and the county is a ssaza. They are completely different. 

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chairperson, the minister is just trying to run away from the point I am making. (Interjections) Honourable members, when you were speaking, I did not heckle you. 

I am very clear on what I am saying. I am looking at a one-county district. The assistant chief administrative officer is at the rank of senior assistant secretary, which all the subcounty chiefs are. Now you have a county which is one district, with a chief administrative officer manning the whole district, and that district is a county, and then we have the deputy chief administrative officer – (Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. You see, I am getting confused. Somebody says, one-county district. When it becomes a district, it ceases to be a county – (Interjections) – You cannot be a county and a district at the same time. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe, we are using the wrong words. If I am to look at Namutumba, hon. Isiko is the Member for Busiki County, hon. Mutyabule is the Member for Namutumba District. Hon. Odonga Otto is the Member for Aruu County and Oketayot is the Member for Pader District. 

MS OTENGO: Madam Chairperson, I want to clarify that there are constituencies, which are within one county. I will give you an example. We have the county of Oyam, which is also a district, but we have the constituencies of Oyam North and Oyam South. We have Aleptong District, but we have the constituencies of Ajuri and Moroto and they are also counties. Oyam North and Oyam South are in one county but Ajuri and Moroto are in two counties but in one district. Thank you.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chairperson, the situation I am trying to bring out – I want to give a typical example of Bukedea District. Bukedea as a district has one Member of Parliament who represents the county and that county is called Bukedea, then it has a Woman Member of Parliament representing Bukedea District and there is no other Member of Parliament. So, it is a one-county district. I hope I am clear on that. 

My question is: how can we have a chief administrative officer running the district of Bukedea and a deputy chief administrative officer also running the same district and then we also have an assistant chief administrative officer, who is supposed to be running the county? What responsibility will that one have? (Interjections) I think –  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, honourable members. I think you are diverting the debate. The debate is about the council not the county. It is also not about appointing assistant CAOs or deputy CAOs. Let us get to the real issues, the county council, the grouping of LCs - that is the council. That is what the minister is talking about. 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I totally agree with you, the debate is about abolishing the county council. However, that is why we are asking the Minister of Local Government, who is a lawyer - When the subcounty councillors are elected, they automatically constitute the council for the county. They only need to elect the leadership in that case –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order.

MR EKANYA: So, the minister needs to go back – (Interjections) – Yes! You may –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Please, listen to one another.

MR EKANYA: When the subcounty councillors are elected, they become automatic council of a county and that is the law. They only need to elect the executive of the county and the chairperson. That is the law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is the position? We want to move from this matter.
 
MR MWESIGE: Well, the position has been that when executive committees of subcounties are formed – (Interjections) - executive and not councillors - they merge up to the county and elect from amongst themselves two people, the chairperson and the vice-chairperson. That is the position now. Now, we are saying that these councils have not been working and reason is because many of the counties, anyway, have become districts. Actually, the districts now occupy the premises of the former counties and they sit in the same premises. There is a district council drawn from all parts of the old county. So, if you are talking about representation, the entire old county, which has now become a district, is really represented. 

If you do your research, all Members of Parliament here represent constituencies or counties. If you do your homework, you will realise that most of these LCIV councils have not really been meeting; one, because of facilitation and two, because they have been subsumed into district councils. So, if hon. Ekanya can allow, Tororo District will still be functional and effective even without LCIV councils. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, on clause 6 (b), the committee proposes to insert after “nomination” the following words: “but in any case, not later than two weeks before polling day.” The justification is: to provide a deadline for the Electoral Commission to transmit an electronic copy of the voters register to the political parties. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 6 (1) (a), the committee proposes that, “Notwithstanding Section 18 (a) of the Electoral Commission Act-
    (a) The Electoral Commission shall not be required to provide paper copies of the voters register to registered political parties and organisations in the case of local council elections.”

I wish to propose an amendment to delete the word “not” and to insert immediately after “organisations” the words “for areas that the political parties have nominated candidates only.” Therefore, it should read, “The Electoral Commission shall be required to provide paper copies of the voters register to registered political parties and organisations for areas that they have nominated candidates only.” 

The justification is that most of these political parties will, if you have transmitted soft copies, print and leave them at the headquarters. In most circumstances like in this last election, it was the MPs who had to keep picking and running with them to their constituencies because most of them do not have enough staffing including the ruling party. If you leave this provision that political parties shall not be given paper registers, it will now bring the burden back to us, Members of Parliament, to now go to our headquarters, ask them to print, run with them to our constituency, photocopy and give those people who are standing.

My proposal would, therefore, ensure that paper copies are given to political parties for only constituencies where they have registered nominated candidates. At least then if you have nominated candidates, picking and ferrying will not be so much of a burden to us who are elected leaders, and most of the local councillors will look at us, Members of Parliament, to ensure that we provide them with registers, educate them and do all that. 

I also propose that we have authenticated copies from the Electoral Commission. If you have a soft copy as a political party and it is altered, and you carry it to a polling station and then start saying that it is not the official one as it is not tallying with the correct registered voters, then you will have a problem. So, let us have an official register from the Electoral Commission for only the places where political parties have nominated candidates. I beg to move. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I just want to submit in support of the proposed amendment but to also argue that it is not that the parties do not want to make these voters registers. This House passed an amendment to the Political Parties Organisations Act providing for public funding to political parties. As we talk now, Government has not honoured that commitment and the political parties do not have enough money to produce registers. Since Government finds reservation in giving money to the political parties, then Government should ensure that they produce the register.

The second reason I would like to submit to support my colleague, hon. Betty Amongi, is that in the last election we were given soft copies. I personally took the initiative to ensure that all our branches in the country had copies of the register but our members were arrested. Many of them were arrested by the GISO’s, the DISO’s and whoever. They argued that they were carrying a fake register. I remember having to call – (Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: I thank you. The information I want to provide to hon. Alaso and this House is that when you go to the Electoral Commission to get a soft copy, that soft copy bears no picture and they will tell you that the soft copy that they are giving must not have a picture and the system does not allow. 

The other related information is that when you get a soft copy, the arrangement of the voters does not tally or correlate with the arrangement in the hard copies provided. So, it appears totally different.

MS ALASO: I would like to appreciate my honourable colleague for that submission. So, we took a lot of time making calls to the Electoral Commission and asking them if they could rescue our agents. The Electoral Commission said that there was no way they could verify whether our agents were carrying a fake register or they were carrying their register. That is the reason we need an authentic register from the Electoral Commission. 

Lastly, I have already argued about costs but let me submit. The worry of the minister about 38 political parties is, in my view, unfounded. The Electoral Commission knows who in this country is alive and well as a political party. They have a criterion in which you submit your annual returns every year. Those 38 political parties, some of them briefcase parties, do not all submit annual returns. We could actually put it in law and say for a party that has not submitted annual returns for the last five years - unfortunately, we might catch a big party in this country - (Laughter)- but we could put it in an amendment – (Interruption)-

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, the information that I want to give to hon. Alaso and this House is that in Uganda, we only have one political party, called the Forum for Democratic Change, that has lived up to what she has said. Therefore, it means that NRM-O should not be deserving in this perspective, and should be dissolved because it has not done its work. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, the Electoral Commission of Uganda knows that not all the 38 exist in reality. So, they could approach it that way and say, “since you have not been making returns for the last five years, we even do not know your physical address, we cannot send to you.” I am sure those non-existent political parties will not put pressure on the EC because they are not even existent. 

I would like to pray that based on that, we support hon. Betty Amongi’s amendment. We get a hard copy as political parties and if they want to verify and reduce the number, let them go on the path of returns and they will eliminate some of them.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, in the meeting of minds between hon. Tanna and I, I need to submit that on clause 6(b), anything to do with “political party” must be deleted; we should only say “nominated candidate”. So, the nominated candidate under a party will be taken care of by that party and if the nominated candidate is an independent, then that will be the saving clause for the independents. 

My justification is Article 72(4), which says, “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or political party”. 

If we purport to legislate here and only look at the interests of political parties, then we are leaving independents more endangered. If we cannot delete “parties”, I propose that we at least add “and/or any nominated candidate”. That will help us. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Anywarach, are you saying that if I fail to file my returns, I can benefit from the law by registering as a candidate and I still get the information?

MR ANYWARACH: No. This amendment I am suggesting is to cure the defect of leaving out an independent candidate who stands in the election of LCI or LCII –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you should use the word “independent” but if you say “any candidate”, it means even those who have failed to file their returns will now benefit from the law because they are candidates. 

MR ANYWARACH: I concede, with your guidance. Thank you very much.
 
MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that after “political parties” we add “or an independent nominated candidate”.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, under normal circumstances, we would have no problem transmitting hard copies to political parties but the reason we have come to you, honourable members, is to understand that the cost for this would be high. I did explain that for hard copies alone to 38 political parties, because that is what the law requires us to do, we would need Shs 252 million. If you add the amendment colleagues are proposing of every independent candidate in Uganda getting a hard copy – (interjections) - yes, they are moving that amendment - the expenditure would be astronomical. 

I would not mind independents getting electronic copies because that is easy. If you go to your e-mails, it would be easy for the Electoral Commission to send a copy of the register to everybody.

THE CHAIRPERSON: By the way, honourable members, you are dealing with local government elections, not presidential elections. We are looking at the LCIs. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Chairperson, I think when compared to the substance that is supposed to be delivered on paper, the substance is more important than the worry about costs. We need to think about printing a copy. We have Uganda Bookshop where we buy documents, where we buy copies of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. If you are not given a copy from Parliament and you need a Constitution, you buy one from that bookshop. What about a situation where the government, in the capacity of the Electoral Commission, produces a copy and if you want it, you pay for it? Will you not be able to raise the money which the government fears to provide to produce these copies? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should be realistic when legislating. I want to give you an example. In the Seventh Parliament, we enacted the Land Act and we said there would be tribunals at every parish, but we failed even to set them up at every parish. Now, if you are going to tell me that 70,000 villages, and each one has an independent candidate, and the Electoral Commission must now send a register to each of the 70,000 independent candidates in LCI, is that being realistic, honourable members? 

MR FUNGAROO: The point I was trying to make was that the candidates will have the benefit of the information but the government will have run away from the problem of costs. We cannot run away from shouldering the cost of producing these documents. Every candidate, whether running for Member of Parliament or councillor or President, pays some money before you are nominated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: LCI?

MR FUNGAROO: They can pay.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I know the environment surrounding elections in Uganda and people are suspicious whenever we have elections. However, we must be realistic. We are talking about LCI elections. Even where political parties are given these hard copies, some of them might even find it very difficult to dispatch them to those villages. Even where you send an electronic copy, in this Uganda of ours, you might find that some of these contenders, the candidates, might not have access to a computer or Internet where they can print these copies. So, what I wish to urge Members is that we should fight vote rigging but not tie ourselves into laws that will make an election impossible. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us have the final one from hon. Tanna and we move.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, if the general consensus from the chair and the honourable minister and our colleagues seems to be that it could be very difficult for the Electoral Commission to deliver a register for my particular village to me as an independent candidate, then this House passed what we called the Electronic Signature Bill to avert that problem. I personally faced that problem. I went to the Electoral Commission, paid a fee and was given a CD of the register in my area. When I gave my agents these registers, they were seized and put in prison. 

So, I would like to emphasise that we put it in this law that the Electoral Commission must come up with an electronic signature so that when they submit, the Electoral Commission will have a signature which can be read using the electronic gadgets that shall be availed at the District Registrar’s Office. This is because we need to do something to authenticate these papers and protect our people. Why are we running away from the problem of costs? Democracy has never been cheap.

MR EKANYA: Honourable colleagues, I would like to ask hon. Tanna whether the provision in the memorandum is not adequate. There is a provision here about notice boards in the parishes where the register will be displayed. I think for a very serious candidate, whether you belong to a party or you are an independent, you have to go to the notice board of the parish – (Interjections) - But this is a register. So, is this not adequate, my brother?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the concerns of hon. Tanna but I want to suggest that we should separate administrative arrangements from the law itself. There are very many things which we would like to put in place but I do not think we will put them in the law. I think what he is requesting, like the signature from the Electoral Commission, can be done administratively for the good of all of us. The nation we are legislating for is born at the grassroots. If it were for Members of Parliament and presidential elections, some of these things would be possible but we are looking at villages. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, there was an amendment by hon. Amongi. What do you think of hon. Amongi’s amendment?

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, hon. Amongi’s amendment would still not substantially help in reducing the cost. What hon. Ekanya said is very important – (Interjections) – Yes, this is my opinion. I am giving my opinion. It is very important because before any election, including LCI elections, there will be a display of the voters’ register. So, when we say we are sending electronic copies to parties, this does not take away the legal requirements of the Electoral Commission to send hard copies of registers to all polling stations including villages. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the display is a different matter from the register. When a register is displayed, you can go and even add your name if your name was not there or if it was spelt wrongly, and then they will bring it back and they will tell you about the period within which to display. After the display, they will come back and compile a register. 

My amendment is dealing with an authentic register from the Electoral Commission, judging from our experience where you are given an electronic copy, you print and go with it and it is officially rejected. What we want here is to address the substance of an official authenticated register. Whether you say you provide one copy or two copies to political parties, it should be authenticated from the Electoral Commission and a political party can go with it to a polling station and they will not be turned away, saying that it is not an official register. So, even electronically, it can be authenticated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what hon. Amongi is suggesting is that for every village, the Electoral Commission should sign say village 1, village 2, village 3, village 4, village 5, village 6 -

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the authentication can be that when they are transmitting the register to the political parties, there can be an electronic signature on the register of each copy to one political party and then the political parties will have the liberty to photocopy it and transmit to their people. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me understand. When sending to the party, they are sending the register for the whole of Oyam; so, how do you deal with the question of village 1, village 2 and village 3 in Oyam? That is what I want to know because the other one is for the whole constituency. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, an electronic signature is just something that you can put on each of the registers. So, it is not something very difficult. With the electronic signature, to sign on each register, you just keep copying to each register. 

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give my colleagues is that an authenticated copy does not have to be in hard copy. It can actually be electronic and for that, I would not see any problem. Moreover, the copy on the parish notice board would be a hard copy and it would certainly be authenticated from the Electoral Commission. So, I do not see any problem, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR MWESIGE: What we concede to, Madam Chairperson, is the proposal which was made by hon. Tanna about the electronic signature authenticating the electronic version of the register to be transmitted to political parties. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, with your permission, I have now realised that I am the only one from a real village because I do not understand what you are talking about. (Laughter)  Those signatures of yours, those CDs of yours and the electronic copy; in the village where I come from, you can actually even be killed, that you want to rig elections. 

The reality is, we are talking of 70,000 villages for heaven’s sake, why would we need these registers in these villages? These villagers know themselves. If we are planning to reduce costs, we really need - I have even departed from my earlier approach of lining up - we need something simple to allow people elect their leaders. These things of electronic copies, whether the copy is signed or not, the Police will still intercept you and by the time the Police release you, the elections will be over. So, we should do something else to stop that problem of the Police intercepting the Opposition candidates. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to put the question that clause 6 be amended –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make a further amendment. Clause 6 (c) says that photos are not allowed. We all come from villages. On the register, your name and the village that you come from is included. There is no reason why you should remove a photo because already the photo is in the database. What the Electoral Commission should do is to sort names according to villages. If you came to my village, for example, and you searched for my name, it would appear together with others. That is why we are saying that the picture should be there.

Secondly, in many villages, we have similar names; for example, you can get 10 people named Nandala in one village. So, how will you know which one to choose if the picture is missing? It is a serious matter. You cannot say that you know all of them; let us be realistic. 

The most important issue is that currently, everyone in the register has their picture in the database. If you went there to sort names according to people’s villages, the village will appear with your picture and your name. So, why do you now want to remove the picture? What is the purpose when they are already in the system?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please, respond.

MR MWESIGE: Madam Chairperson, the requirements for registration for presidential and parliamentary elections are that the voter must have been born or is a resident in the place he or she wants to vote from. So, the qualifications are birth and residence. You may not be residing in Sironko but you were born there; so, you can register in that village. 

For purposes of LCI elections, the qualification is residence only. So, even if you were born in Sironko village but you no longer reside there, you do not qualify to be a registered voter in that village. What that means is that you cannot automatically use the photos in the register which has been designed for purposes of presidential and parliamentary elections to apply to LCI elections. You will have to do it all over again. That is the expense we want to avoid. 

So, we are proposing that since village mates know each other because they have grown together and live together, let the Electoral Commission be allowed to register the voters using a text register, where the particulars of the voters are captured. In any case, residents of that village have the chance, during display, to raise objections. Otherwise, if we do it by photo-bearing register, then we will go over it again and the expense will be astronomical.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you may have to cater for those who arrived in that village yesterday.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are just becoming lazy. These pictures are already in existence. Even if you decide to tell me that you register from where you are resident, like where I am in Kyambogo, they will just key in my name and age and my picture will appear. You can be sure of that, and we have proved it. So, even if we went by pictures, the problem maybe would be in urban centres where people from different regions reside. However, for the majority of the people we are talking about, if you talking about 70,000 villages, about 65,000 are the villages and their pictures are already in place. 

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, hon. Mafabi, for giving way. As I understand it and after consultations here, I asked, are we going to use the old Electoral Commission register? The answer is “No, we are not going to use it.” That means that the villages are going to register their voters now. If we say elections should be held tomorrow, they will register today and vote tomorrow. So, the issue of the old register already being there - We are not going to use the old register. That is the information I want to give.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by hon. Tanna and the committee chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, in clause 7 (a)- 
(a)	Amend section 159A (b) of the principal Act by inserting between the word “tribunal” and “to determine” the following words: “comprising of the chairperson and four other members”. The justification is: to provide for the appointment of the chairperson and members of the tribunal.

(b) 	Insert a new paragraph (e) to read as follows: “The tribunal shall be at parish level”. The justification is: to place the tribunal only at parish level and with an affordable number of five members. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for the Electoral Commission to be the one to choose the five members. The argument of deleting the current clause, which constitutes the electorate to be the tribunal, is that they are composed of voters who might have interests. I want the committee chair to tell us how the Electoral Commission will choose the five; are they going to be from the same parish or from another parish? 

The argument you gave in your earlier submission is that the current law makes them to be composed of the electorate of that area, thus making them influenced. However, the five you are now talking about, are they still going to come from the same parish? If they are from the same parish, are they going to be the electorate from that area or from another place? Please, give me that clarification before I propose an amendment.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My question is: Would this tribunal, made up of only five members, belong to one party or not? Suppose they belong to the same party, shall we have a credible tribunal?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, please, clarify. 

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, the five members will be from the same parish and the Electoral Commission will be mandated to play that role because it has a returning officer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, please give the rationale.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The tribunal is part of the Electoral Commission structure because the role of the tribunal is actually to adjudicate over complaints arising out of the voters’ register, and the Electoral Commission itself also sometimes acts as a tribunal. 

The basic requirement is that this tribunal must be non-partisan. It is just like we have presiding officers appointed by the Electoral Commission, based in the parishes. They are voters in a parish but the criterion is that these people must not be partisan. Now, who determines whether they are partisan or not? It is the Electoral Commission in recruiting them. So, the answer is that the five will come from the same parish but the qualification must be that they should not be partisan. 

The alternative is to follow the law as it is. The law requires that all residents of the village will constitute the tribunal. However, we are saying that if you have to pay each member of the village as a member of the tribunal, you would be required to pay Shs 5,000 to each member. This would translate into Shs 75 billion, which money we cannot afford. Besides, it is not easy to tell – (interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I agree with the principle that these officers of the tribunal work for the Electoral Commission. However, I think the important thing, which we can maybe do to improve that situation, is to put in place an appeals procedure, just like we do for electoral officials. If anybody is not satisfied – This is because it is very difficult to get nonpartisan people because many people are partisan anyway. So, there should be an appeal procedure. If any candidate has reason to object or is not satisfied with the participation of any of the tribunal members, he can lodge an appeal and then the Electoral Commission can take action and replace that person.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Had you provided for an appeal process in the original law? There was no appeal?

MR MWESIGE: I would have no objection, Madam Chairperson, with appeal; it is really a constitutional-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Appeal to the parish or sub-county?

MR MWESIGE: To the sub-county presiding officer, the returning officer or Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRPERSON: My villager in Bulambuti to come to appeal here at Jinja Road?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, if I got hon. Tashobya well, the appeal he is talking about is if you have a complaint regarding a member being put on the tribunal. Otherwise, issues of appeal are a question of law. Everyone knows where to go. So, for people who may fear the tribunal, their decision can be challenged. You follow the normal procedures. What hon. Tashobya is asking, in case they put you on the tribunal and I know you are my sworn enemy, what should I do? I think that is what he is asking. Otherwise, the other appeal is a question of law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You appeal to the presiding officer of the sub-county?

MR MWESIGE: I am advised, Madam Chairperson, that there is a sub-county returning officer to whom you can appeal.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I still want further clarification on the tribunals. I do not know whether the five members shall apply and then they will be interviewed on that basis. In a real sense, I do not know how the Electoral Commission will assess that this particular person is nonpartisan. Will they apply to the Electoral Commission, will they be interviewed and will there be conditions that such a person should not subscribe to a particular party?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know we are talking about the Electoral Commission, which has got officers, a returning officer in the district and in the subcounty. Those are the Electoral Commission there. They do not have to reach Kampala. They will be handled by the Electoral Commission in the subcounty. The supervisors are there.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking this clarification because I do not remember whether we catered for female representation on the tribunal because we have unique problems as ladies especially regarding elections. I want to request my minister to put that into consideration.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, the women also live in that village. Does the minister have an objection?

MR MWESIGE: I have no objection, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we go to the title, hon. Nokrach had said that his report affects this Bill but I did not see the specific amendment he wanted to enter here. So, I do not know whether we should give opportunity to them to finish tomorrow and then we conclude this, because they thought there was something they needed to add to this Bill. 

MS SSENTONGO: As a member of the Committee on Gender, I can report that the amendment is in regard to the election of people with disabilities. The chairperson has just informed us as members of the committee that tomorrow, we are going to meet the minister responsible to harmonise the situation so that we can come back to the Floor.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is also the question of Kampala. Minister, I do not know how you are going to respond to the issue of Kampala and the elections. There was concern that they are not going to elect at the same time because they are under a different law. I do not know when you propose to address them.

MR MWESIGE: Well, the Electoral Commission is supposed to make regulations specifically for elections in Kampala. That is a different regime, which I cannot deal with in this Bill and I am not the Minister for Kampala.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but it was in the report of the committee. There are proposals that Kampala should vote at the same time as the rest. 

MR MWESIGE: Yes, that is true but we could adopt this and then the Minister for Kampala comes with his or her Bill, the ministry in charge of women councils comes with his or her Bill and the minister responsible for disabilities comes with his or her Bill. I do not think that should hold the Local Government (Amendment) Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are saying that even the disability issues should remain in their Bill?

MR MWESIGE: We can look at the disability issues. I do not know whether they would affect the Local Government Act but if they want to discuss with us tomorrow, I am willing to listen to them but I do not think we can include KCCA issues in this Bill. However, I will meet the representatives of persons with disabilities and we harmonise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, the information I want to give the minister is that the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, section 4(4), provides that where the Act is silent about any particular matter, Kampala Capital City Authority is supposed to borrow from the Local Governments Act. So, I do not agree with him that we cannot address issues of elections in Kampala under the amendments we are working on right now. This is because – (interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, and thank you, honourable member. The law says we borrow from the local governments and that means we will borrow the procedure from the Local Governments Act, but that does not mean that you transfer the elections of Kampala to the Local Governments Act.

The Title
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MS KINTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that the long title is amended by deleting the words “of the paper copy”. The justification is: to avoid repetition as the clause covers the electronic version of the voters’ register and this provides clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the long title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The long title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled “the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2012” and adopted the Bill with amendments. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.57
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: No, we said we would not do the third reading today because we are waiting for the disability issue. We shall conclude it tomorrow, after you have had a meeting with them. You said you are meeting the disability team tomorrow. So, we can take the third reading tomorrow.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I want to first thank Members for co-operating on such a sensitive Bill because we have been under pressure for LCI elections countrywide. 

I thought that now that we are going to tell our people that we have passed the law, probably the Minister should come out clearly on the issue of the bicycles, - (laughter) - whether they will be given to the new people after the elections or the old ones and when. We want an unequivocal statement from the minister so that we can tell our people what will happen together with the date of the elections. Madam Speaker, with your assistance -

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As representatives of the people of Kampala City, we are also under pressure. I would request that you direct the Minister in charge of Kampala to make a statement on the same on Thursday so that we know where we are, as Members of Parliament representing Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have heard the need for exercising democracy not only in Uganda but also in Kampala.

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Madam Speaker. I will cause a meeting tomorrow between my colleague, the Minister for Kampala, and I. We should come with a harmonised position tomorrow afternoon. The same will apply for my colleagues, persons with disabilities. 

On bicycles, we have procured bicycles through 54 districts and the procurement process is in advanced stages. This is using the money which was left, the US$ 2.5 million. The 54 districts have been chosen on the basis of hard-to-reach areas. That list can be availed to this Parliament through the Committee on Local Governments. For the balance of the 57 districts, Government has taken a decision to avail money to procure for them in the next financial year because we are now working on the budget for the next financial year.  

Madam Speaker, you ruled here before that when bicycles are bought, they will be given to the existing local council officials. This is the ruling you gave. I do not want to interfere with your ruling. I undertake to follow that ruling.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I gave that ruling because in my interactions with the people there, they are really expecting their bicycles - the existing LCs. I think for the future, we must provide these ones also but the ones who are there are really expecting these bicycles. For the new ones, he will budget. I think he will budget for the new ones. So, we defer the conclusion of this matter to tomorrow.

PETITION BY THE UGANDA PASSENGERS PROTECTION ASSOCIATION

7.02
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers' Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

The humble petition of the Uganda Passengers Protection Association presented by hon. Nabulya Theopista Ssentongo, Workers’ Representative, states that: 

1. 	The subject matter of this petition is the current situation in the public transport as a result of the suspension of the operations of Pioneer Easy Buses by Uganda Revenue Authority on 14 February 2013.

2. 	The petitioners belong to an umbrella body called Uganda Passengers Protection Association, which was formed as a civil society organisation in 2006 for preserving and protecting the rights of all the passengers in the public transport, to lobby and advocate for good policies in public transport, and to promote the welfare and safety of all passengers;

3. –”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you do not have to read it all. Read the source and the prayers.

MS SSENTONGO: Wherefore, by this petition, your humble petitioners pray that Parliament resolves that- 

1. 	Government comes up with necessary incentives, conducive policy and a legal framework on infrastructure, and partners with the private sector to provide good and affordable transport. 

2. 	Government increases the number of buses in the city in order to decongest the city and enable it to attain the status of a well-managed modern city with world class metropolitan services.

3. 	Government, through the Ministry of Finance, fulfils its obligation in concession agreements granting Pioneer Easy Buses and other players in public transport financial guarantees, tax waivers and allows them to execute direct lending agreements with suppliers of the buses.

4. 	The Ministry of Works and Transport provides good roads in the capital city to ensure efficient bus operations with exclusive bus routes and lanes to enable effective operations of buses.

5. 	Government arbitrates between Uganda Revenue Authority and Pioneer Easy Bus to enable the buses resume services. 

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

I beg to move and I also request you to allow me to lay the petition on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Theopista Ssentongo. The petition is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The petition on Pioneer Easy Buses was handled and just only few weeks ago, a report was submitted and resolutions were taken by this Parliament. I think we are now facing a situation of the Executive not implementing the resolutions of Parliament, and we need to stop going round in circles. 

One, we made a resolution that Government should address the issue of taxes and the payments to the respective local governments. That is in that report. Two, we said the minister should immediately cause a meeting between KCCA, the bus company and the local governments. Three, we said the minister should proceed to renew the contracts according to terms they will negotiate. 

I can only see that in this particular meeting, all we need to do is to cause the Minister for Kampala to submit a report on the actions taken on the recommendations and resolutions made; and secondly, also to explain why URA has come out with a ban on the buses irrespective of the resolutions of Parliament. 

My submission is in terms of procedure. If we now resubmit to another committee, we shall simply be going round in circles. This matter was handled and resolutions were taken. I think we now need the Executive to implement. I wish to submit.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will study our resolutions in relation to the prayers and I will take a decision tomorrow. I want to thank you very much for the work done. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.
 
(The House rose at 7.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
