

Friday, 1 February 2019

Parliament met at 11.09 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s sitting and I thank you for responding to the invitation. I have interrupted your weekend because we were in danger of breaching the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. That is why I called you this morning so that we fulfil our obligations. I hope not to keep you for very long. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 –2023/2024

11.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Years 2019/2020 - 2023/2024.

We are moving in accordance with the provisions of Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, sections 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rules 143 and 144 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. Under these rules, committees are mandated, among other things, to consider, discuss and review the Budget Framework Papers and through the Committee on Budget, present a report to the House for approval by 1 February of each year.

In compliance with the above provisions, I beg to present a report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for the Fiscal Years 2019/2020 - 2023/2024 for consideration and approval by the august House as required by section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 144(3).

Madam Speaker, we beg the indulgence of the House. We worked under extreme pressure to deliver this report. We actually received reports of the sectoral committees the day before yesterday. Therefore, we had to work overnight to deliver this report. I would like to beg that in future, the sectoral committees should abide by the rules and deliver their reports to the Committee on Budget by 20th January. 

Otherwise, we have a report, which I am not sure we thoroughly edited but we had to comply with the law and deliver this report today. Therefore, just bear with us for any shortcomings. 
Madam Speaker, on 19 December, 2018, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development complied with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, by laying at the Table the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2019/2020 – 2023/2024 together with the relevant Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance.

We are presenting this report in two parts. Part one covers the Government’s medium-term macro-economic outlook, medium-term fiscal framework, policy measures, indicative revenue framework and sectoral allocations. I will limit my presentation to part one only. 

Part two is on the sectoral committee’s observations and recommendations. I will not present this but it is an integral part of this report. Any Member would be free to use it.

The methodology is clearly laid out on page 2.

Section 4 lays out the legal compliance of the Budget Framework Paper. The compliance level has to be assessed against the requirements specified in section 9 and the format prescribed under Schedule 3 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. This assessment has to be done because it is a legal provision. 

The results of that assessment are shown and we can clearly see that the ministry is past most of them, save for the one on National Budget Framework Paper consistency with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. They do not seem to be performing well and that is largely about the performance of Government in terms of the fiscal balance, which is not likely to hit the target of three per cent of the GDP by 2020/2021. According to their own statement, they are only likely to hit that target by 2023. Other than that, they have passed the rest and I think when a student scores 90 per cent, it is a distinction.

On paragraph 11, it is observed that there is continued non-reporting of current and future employment. We note on that same table that they did not report on employment and unemployment forecast data, a factor that renders manpower planning and development difficult. The committee recommends that the ministry is directed by the House to provide regular employment figures as required by law.

I will move to paragraph 16, where the committee also observes that while Financial Year 2019/2020 is the last year of implementing the National Development Plan II (NDP II), most of the core projects identified in the plan have not been implemented. National Planning Authority indicated, in their report last financial year, that most of the projects were performing below NDP II schedule while others had failed to completely kick off. 

Out of the total 39 core projects in NDP II, only two projects (5.2 per cent) were being implemented on schedule, while seven projects (35.9 per cent) were being implemented but below schedule. A total of 17.9 per cent were still under preparatory stage and the remaining 28.2 per cent had not yet started.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the implementation schedule for core projects should be brought back on course and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be reminded that the inconsistencies witnessed as above are in material breach of the law because the law talks about consistency of the NDP and the budget.

Budget Framework Paper Performance Indicators

In section six, we talk about the National Budget Framework Paper performance indicators and it is a serious problem. On paragraph 18, we observed that Uganda has developed a national standard indicator framework to track progress towards attainment of middle-income status by 2020. An effective programme-based budgeting arranges the Budget around a set of programme and objectives that are clear and specific. The indicators and targets must also be concrete, realistic and have credible baselines and timelines.

However, critical analysis of the outcome indicators contained in the Budget Framework Paper across all sectors indicate pronounced inconsistencies. For instance, page xiii of the National Budget Framework Paper indicates that the fiscal deficit, as percentage of GDP, will reduce to 5.1 per cent by 2020/2021. However, page 145 of the same National Budget Framework Paper indicates that fiscal deficit, as percentage of GDP, will reduce to 3 per cent by 2020/2021. 

In addition, it is extremely difficult to link the National Budget Framework Paper of Financial Year 2018/2019 and that proposed for Financial Year 2019/2020. The key performance indicators are completely different and keep changing hence making it almost impossible to track progress. 

It is the view of the committee that these indicators cannot be sustainably relied upon and as such, value for money cannot be easily ascertained.

The committee recommends that Government undertakes a thorough review of the performance indicators with a view to generating consensus and maintaining consistency over the medium term.

In the Financial Year 2018/2019, the Committee on Budget raised a concern on the missing link between input, outputs and outcomes under the Programme Based Budgeting structure used to present the National Budget Framework Paper. In this regard, the committee recommended that to maintain the linkage between the activities, inputs, outputs and outcomes, the minister shall, in future, be required to lay on the Table all 17 sectors Budget Framework Papers alongside the National Budget Framework Paper. However, during the laying of the current Budget Framework Paper, only 10 of the 17 sectors Budget Framework Papers were laid.
The committee recommends that the next Budget Framework Paper must comply with these requirements. The Committee on Budget will undertake a rapid preliminary assessment of compliance following the tabling of the National Budget Framework Paper and will advise the House whether to proceed with consideration of the document in its present form. 

Gender and Equity Responsiveness

Section 9(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides that, “The Minister responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall, in consultation with Equal Opportunities Commission issue a certificate-

    a) Certifying that the National Budget Framework Paper is gender and equity responsive; and
    b) Specifying measures undertaken to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and marginalised groups.”

In fulfilment of the requirements of section 9(6), the National Budget Framework Paper was assessed and the overall compliance with gender and equity requirements has stagnated at its 2018/2019 level of 61 per cent.

The Committee also assessed 18 sectoral Budget Framework Papers, out of which 16 passed the assessment and two failed. The two sectors whose Budget Framework Papers were non-compliant with gender and equity requirements were Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which scored 32 per cent and Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, that scored 45 per cent, according to the certificates laid on this Table.

I have indicated the trends in gender performance by sector in table three.

The committee further observed that whereas the Gender and Equity Compliance requirement is by law, there appears to be no sanctions in place for non-compliance and this may explain the lack of effort by some institutions to improve on their compliance leve1s.

The committee further observes that the certificate is silent about measures undertaken to equalise opportunities for women, men, persons with disabilities and other marginalised groups as required by section 9(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

This poor performance in Gender and Equity Compliance may constrain the country's progress towards achieving Sustainable Development Goal no.5 on gender equality and no.10 on reduced inequalities. 

The Equal Opportunities Commission and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure greater compliance and performance based on benchmark indicators, which are regularly updated. In addition, Parliament should not approve budgets for non-compliant institutions.

Submission of Approved Budget Framework Paper

The committee observed that section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 mandates Parliament to approve the Budget Framework Paper. In addition, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires alignment of the approved Budget Framework Paper with the annual budget as per section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. However, without laying an approved National Budget Framework Paper on the Table, it is difficult to ascertain the alignment of the approved National Budget Framework Paper with the annual budget. 

In other words, what we are saying is, what is laid here is actually a draft National Budget Framework Paper. Upon going through this process, we expect a final National Budget Framework Paper. The practice has been that after we have approved, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes and we never get to see them laying on the Table the final document and so, we do not get an official record of the final National Budget Framework Paper.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should lay at the Table an approved National Budget Framework Paper indicating how the recommendations of Parliament were addressed. This will improve monitoring consistency of the National Budget Framework Paper with the annual budget as required under section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Medium Term Macroeconomic Forecast

The macro-economic forecast outlook has been premised on both the macro-economic policy framework and economic growth strategies for the Financial Year 2019/2020 and medium term. 

The overall macro-economic framework aims at achieving accelerated and inclusive growth, low and stable inflation and promotion of a competitive exchange rate as well as building on external foreign reserves to cushion the country, in the event of external shocks. Consequently, the growth strategy for Financial Year 2019/2020 and the medium term aims at focusing on policies and interventions that will promote inclusive growth and private sector investment growth and development.

In Table 4, we present the forecast of the selected macro-economic indicators for the Financial Year 2019/2020 and medium term. The macro-economic indicators are clearly identified in terms of the real GDP growth, headline inflation, core inflation, broad money, M3/GDP ratio and credit to private sector. Those are the indicators, which have been forecast from 2016-2017 to 2022-2023.

The GDP growth projections for next Financial Year 2019/2020 by International Monetary Fund envisaged the economy growing at the same pace projected for Financial Year 20l8/2019; at 6 per cent. This is lower than the National Budget Framework Paper projections of 6.2 per cent and the NDP target of 6.8 per cent for Financial Year 2019/2020.

On page 11, you can see the graph indicating the GDP growth rates projected by Budget Framework Paper, IMF, and the NDP II. The curves on top are the NDP II projections of GDP growth. The curve in the middle is IMF and the curves below are the National Budget Framework Paper projections. You can clearly see that our targets for GDP growth are below the NDP projections. 

The slower than anticipated GDP growth in the NDP has been attributed to the unfavourable climate change conditions, which have led to prolonged droughts as well as intermittent rainfall patterns, a slower than expected private sector credit growth, slower than anticipated investment and developments in the productive sectors of the economy, slower than anticipated pace in the execution of public infrastructure investment projects, disruption to trade due to regional instability and the slower economic growth in the larger part of the NDP II period, especially during Financial Years 2016/2017 and 2017/2018. 

We made some statements on the state of the economy in paragraph 37, which we think are very important. 

Arising from the country’s sustained investment in peace, security and infrastructure, the economy has continued to grow. The economy expanded by 6.1 per cent in the Financial Year 2017/2018, which is higher than the 5.8 per cent that was projected in the Budget estimates for the same year. Also, this was an increase from the 3.9 per cent recorded in Financial Year 2016/2017.

The rebounding of economic growth has been attributed mainly to increased private sector activities, significant growth in services sector, recovery in agriculture from previous drought and positive economic growth. The committee recommends that these growth drivers need to be strengthened and harnessed by the Government to maintain a good economic growth trajectory. For example, private sector growth in industry would immediately bring about an organised service Industrial Park. The country should look beyond Namanve Industrial Park and hasten the process of innovatively acquiring and constructing other industrial parks to shorten the gestation period that investors spend on acquiring land and constructing new factory buildings. 

Government should acquire land in Buikwe, Mpigi, Kayunga and Wakiso while it is still affordable to do so for investors that prefer to locate their factories near Kampala. These parks plus other up country parks can be constructed under force account using new equipment acquired by the works sector. The same should be emulated by the Water and Energy Sectors coordinated by the ministry in charge of investment. 

In other words, we are saying that the Government already has the assets they can use to open industrial parks but somehow, in one way or the other, they find it very expensive to do so.  What is happening now is that investors have started encroaching on all wetlands. You find them on all wetlands on Bombo Road. They have also covered all the wetlands on Jinja Road because of lack of industrial parks. We have said that these industries are the growth drivers of this economy. However, we are not planning for them and that is the problem we are highlighting. 

In addition, the Agricultural Sector, being one of the key drivers, showed great improvement, mainly due to good weather that year. This growth driver is the most critical in guaranteeing sustainable economic growth. In order to mitigate the risks associated with drought, the committee proposes that it would be necessary to invest more heavily in water for production, particularly focused on irrigation using renewable energy sources. 

Current efforts by Government are still very narrow and have not generated the required impact. The committee proposes that the provision for water for production should continue to be coordinated by both Ministries of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Water and Environment. The task is big and requires combined effort and expertise. 

Private sector credits, though still low, improved in 2017/2018, registering a growth rate of 10.6 per cent compared to 5.3 per cent recorded in the previous financial year. Average lending rates also reduced to 20.3 per cent in the previous financial year. The rates are still high by any standard and will continue to require Government intervention to reduce the cost of borrowing to more affordable levels, particularly for long term capital. 

Largely missing in the National Budget Framework Paper are proposals of reforming the pension sector and in addition, reviewing restrictions on the National Social Security Fund Act. The National Budget Frame work Paper should provide for pension sector-wide reforms that are key to the development of the capital markets and boosting national savings to provide finance for long term investment. Indeed, with weak private sector credit and lack of long term investment financing, reforming the pension sector is an issue of national concern. We must remember that the Bill on reforming the sector was withdrawn by the minister. 

The Budget Strategy and Priorities for Financial Year 2019/2020

The strategy is anchored on NDP II and the NRM manifesto that aim to take Uganda into modernity through job creation and inclusive development. The theme of this Budget is the same as the theme of the previous budget, which is, “Industrialisation for Job Creation and Shared Prosperity”. The Budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 will put emphasis on the following sector priorities: 

    1. Harnessing key growth sector of agriculture and agro-industry, tourism, oil, gas and minerals.
    2. Enhancing private sector growth and development.
    3. Promoting human capital development.
    4. Strengthening public sector investment.
    5. Improving governance and sustaining security.
    6. Developing a financing framework anchored on an effective domestic revenue strategy and responsive debt management.

The committee applauds Government for a well thought out strategy that, in theory, emphasises sectors with the greatest potential for generating employment, economic growth and prosperity. The committee has observed that a number of these good interventions have not been adequately and financially supported. The following examples have been cited:

(i) 	The upgrade and renovation of key tourism infrastructure, including airfields and priority roads is identified as a key intervention in the National Budget Framework Paper, page xxvi. However, no funding has been provided. Annex 1 presents the current status and development plans for regional airports in Uganda. The regional airports identified are Arua, Kasese, Gulu, Kidepo, Kisoro, Pakuba, Jinja and Tororo. The cost of developing each of these airports is identified in the annex.

Growth in tourism in Uganda will remain a good dream for as long as this infrastructure has not been developed. The committee recommends a phased financing model, particularly through external borrowing, to develop regional airports. It is these regional airports that will help Uganda attract the quality tourists, ease movement in the country and promote the EAC tourism circuit. Uganda Airlines would have a strong asset to leverage its operations. 

(ii) 	Under the same intervention in (i) above, Government prioritises tourism roads. In annex 2, the committee presents a list and status of the tourism roads to Uganda’s major tourism sites. However, almost none of these roads are reflected in the funding framework provided by the BFP.

The committee strongly recommends that in determining the roads for upgrading from gravel to bitumen, the roads on this list should be given first priority. Parliament should direct the Minister of Works and Transport to develop an implementation plan for this purpose. We are saying it is no use to say that tourism is our biggest earner and yet, we do not want to invest money there. If we want to get more money, we have to invest money there.

(iii) 	Regarding the intervention on investment infrastructure needed by the private sector, the National Budget Framework Paper proposes continued construction of industrial parks starting with Namanve Industrial Park. However, the financing for Namanve is not identified with any Vote in the National Budget Framework Paper despite Parliament having approved a loan for the project. 

The committee recommends that the National Budget Framework Paper should incorporate a budget for Namanve development and resources to acquire land, at least for one industrial park within the vicinity of Kampala to avoid the worsening trend of encroachment on wetlands by large manufacturers.

Therefore, what we are saying is that we have a good budget strategy. However, this strategy is not translated in terms of resource allocation. Therefore, you have a nice strategy; a nice mugole but who is not going to deliver babies. That is the dilemma we are in.

Therefore, the list of sectoral interventions in the National Budget Framework Paper, from page xxiii to page xxxi, is largely a wish list without a very credible funding architecture to ensure implementation. 

To demonstrate the necessary commitment for implementation, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development formulates a matrix identifying the proposed interventions, with the resources available, in a multi-year funding framework. Given the importance attached to this matter, the committee proposes that the ministry lays on the Table the said multi-year funding framework before the end of March 2O19 for debate by Parliament. That is before they lay the annual budget estimates in April.

Resource Envelope for Financial Year 2019/2020

The estimated resource envelope is projected at Shs 34,304.7 billion, as disaggregated in table 5. Noteworthy is the substantial reduction in domestic borrowing and the ministry should be applauded for that, from Shs 1,785.4 billion in Financial Year 2018/2019 to Shs 534.9 billion in the Financial Year 2019/2020. This is a welcome move, particularly in safeguarding the private sector from the crowding out effect in the money market and ensuring that the debt burden remains sustainable.

Therefore, Table 5 is a very important table because it gives us the resource envelope and the domestic revenues. You can see that they are growing from Shs 16,358.8 billion to 18,375 billion. 

Petroleum Fund 

Government does not plan to draw any money from the Petroleum Fund. Budget support has increased slightly and domestic borrowing has reduced, as indicated.

Project support and external financing has remained almost stable. Domestic refinancing has got worse, from Shs 5,271.5 billion to Shs 6,020 billion and Appropriation-in-Aid remains Shs 1 trillion and we have some issues there.

Regarding external debt repayment, the amount is reducing as you can see. Project support in form of external financing is expected at Shs 7,734.5 billion. Domestic refinancing and domestic arrears provision has increased from Shs 380 billion to Shs 600 billion. Interest payments for this year are projected to increase from Shs 2,514.1 billion to Shs 2,913.6 billion.

The estimated domestic revenue for Financial Year 2O19/2020 is Shs 18.3 trillion, of which Shs 17.855 trillion is tax revenue and Shs 521 billion is non-tax revenue. Uganda's tax effort has not been matching the economic growth over the last few years as the tax collection growth has largely been stagnant. 

In the previous financial year, there were significant revenue shortfalls.

Tax revenue collections during Financial Year 2017/2018 totalled to Shs 14.5 trillion compared to the target of Shs 15 trillion, registering a shortfall of Shs 555.5 billion. Thus, the tax to GDP ratio only increased modestly from 13.6 per cent in Financial Year 2016/2017 to 13.8 per cent in Financial Year 2O17/2018. 

Uganda's revenue collections are trailing most peer countries including Kenya, Ethiopia, Rwanda and Burundi as well as the Sub-Saharan average of 15.8 per cent. Therefore, in terms of tax revenue collections, we are performing very poorly when compared with our peers and the Sub-Saharan average.

Government will be required to implement a robust revenue mobilisation strategy to improve revenue collection. The failures in our revenue efforts have significantly overstretched the country's capacity to service debts and to limit the available discretionary resources meant to finance the Medium Term Expenditure Framework.  The committee recommends a value for money audit on URA to ascertain the causes for the shortcomings.

While the NDP II proposed leveraging Public Private Partnership (PPP) financing as an alternative source of funding the Budget, the National Budget Framework Paper does not provide for modalities to build capacity for adequate structuring of PPP projects in the country. As a result, the passage of the Public Private Partnership Act, 2015 has not helped much in leveraging this opportunity. 

The committee recommends that the PPP Unit in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should formulate a strategy for awakening PPP opportunities as a measure to reduce dependence on public borrowing and enhancing service delivery.

Section 30 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires all Government entities to deposit all their revenues into the Consolidated Fund. However, because this provision has not been enforced by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, many parastatals have not been compliant. Implementation of this provision has the potential for drastically increasing Appropriation-in-Aid inflows and enhancing accountability. In this regard, Parliament should direct the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to enforce this provision.

Off Budget resources

The committee noted that on top of the resources appropriated by Parliament, a number of Government institutions were receiving off-Budget resources, which never get known to Parliament for appropriation. This act offends the Constitution, particularly Article 156 (2), it distorts resource allocation and the basis for accountability approved by Parliament. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development prepares guidelines for accessing and utilising any off-Budget resources for appropriate supplementary appropriation. Any violation of these guidelines will be reported by the Auditor-General during the auditing of the final accounts of the relevant institutions.

As at end June 2018, Uganda's total public debt stock, both domestic and external, amounted to $ 10.74 billion, equivalent to Shs 41,326 billion. This is equivalent to 41.5 per cent of GDP of which domestic debt accounts for 13.3 per cent and external debt is 28.2 per cent.

Uganda's debt position is steadily approaching the set nominal debt to GDP ratio of 50 per cent. Given the numerous development needs, the committee is concerned about the worsening debt situation and implores the Government to urgently attain commitments towards debt sustainability including:

    1. Improving the country’s export earnings and import substitution.
    2. Improving execution rate of projects for timely returns.
    3. Increasing domestic revenues to reduce reliance on debt.
    4. Mobilising Uganda’s population to enhance production as Government provides better post-harvest measures and ensures marketing.

Worsening State of Tax Arrears

The committee observes that the stock of tax arrears is steadily growing from Shs 1.005 trillion in Financial Year 2O13/2014 to Shs 2.671 trillion in Financial Year 20l7/2018, which is a growth of about 165.7 per cent. 

As a percentage of GDP, the stock of tax arrears is now reported at 2.6 per cent as at the end of Financial Year 2017/2018. 

It should also be noted that as at end of the Financial Year 2Ol7/2018, the stock of non-Government tax arrears was reported at Shs 2,478.44 billion - Non-Government includes the private companies; Government arrears at Shs 77.57 bi11ion and custom tax arrears at Shs 115.05 bi11ion.

This is a worrying trend given the fact that Uganda's tax effort, as measured by the tax to GDP ratio has stagnated at about 14 per cent. According to Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), the accumulation of tax arrears has been caused by failure of Government to pay suppliers of goods and services. There are also instances where URA is directed to release goods before taxes are paid. Shs 2.6 trillion is a colossal sum of money, which, if paid, would significantly reduce the stress on our national Budget.

The committee therefore recommends that the Speaker directs a relevant committee of Parliament to investigate this matter and present a report.

Government Expenditure

Government expenditure (excluding domestic debt re-financing) will amount to Shs 27,06l billion in the Financial Year 2O19/2020.

I will go to the recommendations. The committee recommends that other than reducing development expenditure, as infrastructure projects get completed over the medium-term, the same resources should be allocated to the productive sectors, which have, for a long time, been marginalised. The shift in resources could be directed towards projects such as irrigation infrastructure, animal breeding to improve the national herd, tourism infrastructure, aquaculture infrastructure and development, industrial parks and science and technology parks that would facilitate foreign technology transfer. This is what would help to ensure a higher return on investment on the existing road infrastructure where the country has, over the years, invested huge sums of money to ease debt servicing. 

Budget Deficit

I will go to paragraph 63. The overall fiscal deficit is projected to contract marginally by Shs 1.042 billion from Shs 7,428 billion in Financial Year 20l8/2019 to Shs 6.382 bi11ion equivalent to 5.2 per cent of GDP. This reduction will be on account of Government accomplishing some of its huge infrastructure investments like Karuma and Isimba. The fiscal deficit is expected to gradually reduce throughout the medium term, declining to three per cent in the Financial Year 2023/2024.

The fiscal deficit projection of 5.2 per cent of GDP by Financial Year 2019/2020 is above the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility (CFR) and East African Community (EAC) monetary convergence criteria of three per cent of GDP. Government will have to adopt austerity measures to minimise resource wastage as well as promoting efficient use of resources in order to meet the CFR and EAC monetary criteria threshold on fiscal deficit. 

Unemployment

On unemployment, we already mentioned that this matter is not being reported on but we would like to make recommendations.

The committee recommends that Government should:

    i) Consider measures for restoring skill-based training institutions that deliver technicians and other factory workers in a bid to attract new manufacturing industries in Uganda. You remember that we lost some of those technical institutions.
    ii)  Set up at least five regional centres of excellence for Business, Technical and Vocational Training (BTVET) in central, northern, eastern, southern and western regions. These would be easier to equip and manage. The centres will greatly contribute to the transformation of the informal sector into a highly productive formal sector. 
    iii)  Establish a national skills inventory that should be complemented by a comprehensive curriculum reform to address the skills mismatch.

Fiscal Risks and Mitigation Measures

These are all identified on pages 20 and 21. 

Natural Disasters

On natural disasters, I will just point out that drought, landslides and floods are relatively common occurrences in Uganda. Such events pose risks to economic growth and social welfare and can have significant consequences on the national budget in the form of unplanned or emergency spending. To mitigate this risk, Government has provided Shs 163.5 billion for the Contingency Fund to cater for such unforeseen events. 

In section 18, we present the Sector Medium Term Expenditure Framework allocations for the Financial Year 2O18/2019. In Table 6, we can look at the budget allocations by budget category. We note that recurrent expenditure is increasing by 1.2 per cent from Shs 9,615.59 billion to Shs 9,731.06 billion. That covers wage and non-wage.

Development expenditure is reducing slightly from Shs 12,963 billion to Shs 12,899.91 billion; a reduction of 0.5 per cent.

The domestic arrears provision is all there, gratuity provisions and provision for shortfalls in salaries and treasury operations are all indicated. The figure for treasury operations is worsening, with an increase of 10 per cent.

Budget Allocations by Sector 

These are clearly laid out in Table 7 on page 24. You can critically look at the amount that we approved in the Financial Year 2018/2019 and the amounts that are proposed to the Financial Year 2019/2020 and their share to the total Budget as well as the year to year growth. In some instances, the growth is positive and in others, it is negative as a per centage of GDP. That important table continues to page 25.

We have already mentioned the sector priorities but we would like to do an analysis of the budget allocations and emerging issues as summarised in the following sections, which we thought was very important.

On Works and Transport, the total sector budget, excluding arrears and Aid-in-Appropriation, is increasing by 11 per cent from Shs 4,786.6 billion approved in 2018/2019, to Shs 5,316 billion projected in Financial Year 20l9/2020 - an increment of Shs 530.23 billion. This allocation will increase the share of the budget from 15.3 per cent in Financial Year 2018/2019 to 16.5 per cent in 20l9/2020. 

This increment in works and transport is mainly attributed to budget increments towards the ministry and in particular towards transport services and infrastructure programmes. 

The increase in the programme is mainly driven by two projects - development of Hoima Airport and the Uganda National Airline Project that are projected to increase from Shs 176.3 billion and Shs 129.5 billion, approved in Financial Year 2018/19, to Shs 531.4 billion and Shs 429.2 billion, respectively.

Emerging issues

Although the Standard Gauge Railway project is one of the core NDP II projects, the allocation to this project is declining, questioning its prioritisation. While Government secures funds for financing the project, there is need to acquire land to minimise future obligations on the land that has already been valued and there are no plans to change the route. 

Secondly, the budget allocated to road maintenance can only finance 25 per cent of the road maintenance backlog, which currently stands at Shs 3.148 trillion, in Financial Year 2019/2020, leaving 75 per cent unmet. This implies that there is a need to urgently fund road maintenance given the projected road development programmes in the medium term. 

According to the Annual Budget Performance Report, UNRA had the highest unspent budget amounting to Shs 450 billion. Specifically, the Hoima-Wanseko, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit, the Kampala Flyover, North-Eastern-Road-Corridor Asset Management Project and Rukungiri-Kihihi-Ishasha-Kanungu Road projects had the highest unspent balances under external financing. In addition, a number of NDP II core infrastructure projects were lagging behind in performance by the end of Financial Year 20l7/2018.

Education

The sector budget is estimated to reduce by 2 per cent in the coming financial year. It should be noted that the education sectoral share to the National Budget has been reducing from 14.6 per cent, in Financial Year 20l2/2013, up to date where it is at 10.5 per cent.

The emerging issues are presented in the table that follows. I will not go through those details but it is all very useful reading material. The key highlights are also at page 30; these highlights are about budget execution.

The health sector

I present the various issues regarding the health sector, and agriculture also on page 32. I have already talked a lot about tourism, energy and minerals, water and environment on page 36. Now that takes me to the conclusion of this report at page 37. It is a long conclusion; you will have to bear with me.

Government economic forecast suggests that the economy is projected to rebound to grow at an average of 6.40 per cent over the medium term. However, challenges and risks remain. Focus on promoting growth through planned infrastructure and oil sector investments is welcome but emphasis on the sound and steadfast implementation of policies and reforms is important to foster inclusive and stronger growth. 

Inclusive growth challenges can be identified with dismal projected growth in agriculture (where the majority of the population is employed) of 3.8 per cent, compared to 5.6 per cent for industry and 7.8 per cent for services during the Financial Year 20l9/2020.

It is important to strengthen fiscal policy implementation. While Government intends to increase revenue mobilisation over the medium term, there is notable under execution of externally financed investment budget as evidenced with the 10.87 per cent performance in the first quarter of Financial Year 2018/2019 due to poor project readiness for implementation. This could undermine growth prospects.

The tight current expenditure projections that will average 10.5 per cent of GDP, over the medium term, will require strong spending controls and efficiency gains to avoid the needs for unnecessary supplementary budgets or renewed arrears. This also calls for stronger efforts to improve arrears monitoring and the adoption of a comprehensive arrears clearance and prevention strategy.
Madam Speaker, allow me move to the last concluding remark at page 173 before I close my submission. As I read this conclusion, it is important to note again that the rest of the pages are the sectoral observations and recommendations for the consideration by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

In conclusion, the committee has identified some policy gaps and has made numerous recommendations, which would require being incorporated to generate a revised final Budget Framework Paper, particularly reflecting observations and recommendations of Part 1 of this report and taking cognisance of the recommendations in Part 2.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 144(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee requests Parliament that the proposed National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2019/2020 to Financial Year 2023/2024 be approved with the proposed amendments. 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Budget committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2019/2020 to Financial Year 2023/2024.
I beg to lay.

I also beg to lay on Table the committee minutes and the committee reports presentations duly signed as received from the various Sessional Committees of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the committee. We would like to thank you for the hard work notwithstanding the delays in receiving the sector reports. I understand there is a minority report, not so? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Indeed, it is true. I received communication from hon. Muwanga Kivumbi that he has a minority report. 

Further, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development responded to some issues, which we raised about the Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF) and many others. Unfortunately, I have just received it; so, it has not been captured in the main document.

I beg to lay their response. Thank you very much.

12.10
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. From the outset, I would like to appreciate the narrowing gap in the position that is incorporated within the main report.

The Opposition raised critical concerns through hon. Niwagaba on this Floor and later on by the Leader of the Opposition. I would like to note that majority of the issues were taken up by the committee and were positively considered and they formed part of the main report. I hope and pray that this trend continues. 

The reason we have come up with a minority report – we are three - is that some issues need to be clearly elucidated because they impair the critical path of our country and they are very definitive on what Uganda is and what it will be today, tomorrow and for our children. 

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will avoid going through the introduction; I will go straight to the dissenting areas.

Huge recurrent expenditure

It is worrying to note that the projected domestic revenue (tax and non-tax revenue) cannot adequately meet Government’s recurrent expenditure i.e. wage and non-wage recurrent such as fuel, workshops, advertising and rent, among others.

The total recurrent expenditure is expected to be Shs 19.31 trillion while the projected revenue is supposed to be Shs 18.37 trillion. This translates into Shs 939 billion as a gap between the expected revenue and the recurrent expenditure. 

Madam Speaker, this story is very definitive to the way this country runs. Honourable members, I know you all have your iPads; so, I invite you to go to Annex 2 of the main Budget Framework Paper for everyone to see the gravity of this issue. 

Wages are supposed to be Shs 4.3 trillion. Recurrent expenditure is supposed to be Shs 15 trillion while domestic development expenditure is a mere Shs 5 trillion and the rest of the expenditure for development, which is Shs 7 trillion is supposed to come from development partners in form of loans. This means that the only money available for service delivery out of this budget is a mere Shs 5 trillion but from this money, you cannot even trace it within our own revenue because we consume all the money that we collect and leave a deficit. 

To compound this problem further, as I will explain later, the Shs 7 trillion development expenditure is also compounded by lack of corresponding commitment by Government for co-funding, which amounts to Shs 4.3 trillion. Much as we are going to borrow Shs 7 trillion, Shs 1.5 trillion which is co-founding from Government, is not provided. 

Madam Speaker, we rearranged this table to reflect this need for everyone to know what the huge pushers are for Government’s recurrent expenditure. 

The first is interest payment, which now takes 63.6 per cent of our recurrent expenditure. This equals to Shs 9 trillion. 

As we speak, interest payments are equal to Shs 9 trillion, which is 63 per cent of our recurrent expenditure or Shs 15 trillion.

The next pusher is the accountability sector, which goes up Shs 800 billion. There is security, works and infrastructure, public administration, education, the Justice, Law and Order sector, health, public sector management and the Legislature. 

From that point, it is where the big story starts –

    1. Agriculture, which is a mere 1 per cent;
    2. Energy and Mineral Development which is 0.7 per cent; 
    3. Water and Environment is 0.3 per cent; 
    4. Science and Technology is 0.2 per cent; 
    5. ICT and National Guidance is 0.2 per cent; and
    6. Tourism at 0.2 per cent.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the big issue in this analysis is that if you took the accountability budget alone, you can finance the entire budget from agriculture down to tourism. 

If you were to make the Parliament leaner and smaller – we are told that this Parliament is supposed to increase by some 50 Members - where do you get the resources? Therefore, as we speak about unemployment and all other contending issues, this is where the problem is. We are consuming all the money. 

We, therefore, recommend that we restructure Government by minimising recurrent expenditure pushers such as reduction of the size of Cabinet, administration centres, size of Parliament, privileges to political leaders and donations, among others. This will ensure that sufficient resources are geared towards service delivery.

Misrepresentation of Sector Allocations

Madam Speaker, the Budget Framework Paper represents allocations to sectors based on a Shs 25.4 trillion, which translates to 70 per cent of the total proposed annual budget of Shs 34.3 trillion. This does not reflect the true budget share allocation and gives wrong reflections, particularly of debt obligation. 

It has been established that the debt obligation, interest payment, external debt management and domestic refinancing, that will be due in the next budget, will total to Shs 19.58 trillion. That translates to 27 per cent of the proposed annual budget of Shs 34 trillion as indicated in Table 2, hence debt obligation takes the greatest share of the budget compared to sector allocations.

Interestingly, the individual allocations of reflected memo items in the National Budget Framework Paper like external debt repayments, domestic refinancing, domestic arrears and Appropriation-in-Aid are higher than the sectors of legislature, social development, science, technology and innovation, lands, housing and urban development; trade and industry, ICT,  national guidance and tourism. 

Madam Speaker, this table is also very critical. When you look at what they call “memo items”, you will see that there are shortfalls in salaries, pensions and gratuity. How do you come up with a budget where you are not going to meet people’s salaries? This is critical because when you go to the sector analysis, some of those whose salaries have not been met are the people who have been recruited in local defence; the 24,000 LDUs that have been recruited in urban Kampala at the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs but there is no money for them. That is the same story that happened to crime preventers. Consequently, crime preventers became criminals and the security of the country was impaired. We are repeating the same mistake.

To us, this is very critical - and the elderly people. If you cannot pay them their gratuity – these are statutory obligations. That is why we came up with this table to reemphasise that this budget still has a lot of critical issues that we can meet.           

Escalating Debt Burden

Although there is compliance to the debt limits set in the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility, the present value of gross public debt is gradually rising to a threshold of 50 per cent; we are nearly there. It rose from 27.1 per cent, in Financial Year 2016/2017, to 30 per cent in Financial Year 2017/2018 and is now projected to be 41 per cent as of December 2018. It was estimated at Shs 42 trillion of which Shs 28.5 trillion was external debt and Shs l3.5 trillion was domestic debt as at 30 June 2018. This is not improvement; it is a deteriorating trend that is merely compliant but not admirable. 

The Government says it is complying with the threshold of 50 per cent but is it an admirable trend? Is it the normal trend? Should our economy be moving in that critical path? Are we headed in the right direction because soon or later our capacity to borrow is going to be expanded?

Madam Speaker, the problem relates to gaps in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. In future, there may be need to come here and amend it. Government has used a very good avenue, which the framers created to say if one has monetary issues, they can borrow through treasury bills and bonds. What is happening is that the exception is becoming the rule and the rule is becoming the exception. 

They are borrowing without any limitation because conditions to those borrowings are not laid before Parliament. While with any other loan terms and conditions are laid before Parliament, the one for treasury operations are not laid. A mere motion is moved – they just come here and move a motion to borrow, we approve the motion without ever going into the intricacies of the terms and conditions thereof.    

Domestic Refinancing 

Domestic refinancing amounting to Shs 6.02 trillion is a loan in the meaning of section 32(2), (4)and (5) of the Public Finance Management Act. However, over the years, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not been laying terms and conditions before Parliament for them to be enforceable by a resolution. This is violation of Article 59(3)(a) of the Constitution and Section 36(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Furthermore, domestic refinancing is the main driver for the domestic debt stock that is gradually growing to unsustainable levels rising from Shs 1l.6l trillion, in the financial year 20l5/2016, to Shs l2.06 trillion, in Financial Year 2016/2017 and to Shs 13.55 trillion in Financial Year 2017/2018. 

Government has failed to present a clear plan on how it intends to reverse the trend in each financial year and interest payments are made for less than 50 per cent of the existing domestic debt stock. 

Madam Speaker, this is a critical matter in our estimates. When you ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development whether he has any plan whatsoever on how to go about clearing the domestic debt other than rolling it over every year, they do not know. They have no clue and are only waiting for oil money; that when it comes they will be able to sort this. 

However, all they know is to borrow. After all if you borrow today, next year, you will go back and borrow from hon. Amos Lugoloobi and pay hon. Irene Muloni. The next time you will go to borrow from hon. Irene Muloni and pay hon. David Bahati and the trend continues. The effect is the interest rate has reached nearly Shs 3 trillion, which is the second expenditure on our sector allocations and it is the first call –(Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for attempting to present the minority report. By the time I rose, the honourable member was debating rather than presenting the report. Are we proceeding correctly to continue listening to him when he is supposed to be presenting the report? 

THE SPEAKER: How will he present without speaking? 

MR KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are only recommending that terms and conditions of the Shs 2.6 trillion be laid before Parliament. The Shs 6 trillion that we borrow every year as a domestic rollover - I know hon. David Bahati will come here and move a motion. It is high time that terms and conditions for our children that may bear this burden in future be laid before this Parliament to know exactly how Uganda will go about it one day. 

We are sure that with foreign loans – the amortisation plan is very clear. You are sure that in every financial year, you harmonise with this amount of money. However, for this domestic debt, there is no clear path. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the Member is supposed to present the minority report – the report that has been uploaded on our iPads. Is the Member in order to continue debating his own report as we listen to him?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please concentrate on the report, which you have distributed to the Members.

MR MWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I know why the honourable wants me to stick to the report. 

Misalignment with NDP

There continues to exist a misalignment in the planning for the nation, particularly at the ministries, departments and agencies (MDAs) level that are charged with policy direction and supervision. Out of the 135 MDAs, only 89 had development plans aligned lo the National Development Plan while 18 had unaligned plans, 18 had draft plans and l0 had no plans.

It has been established that to date, institutions such as the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the Uganda Tourism Board, the Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre, Uganda Hotels, the Tourism Training Institute, the Uganda Export Promotions Board and the Uganda Development Corporation had no strategic plans. Surprisingly, these and other institutions that lack strategic plans were allocated ceilings in the National Budget Framework Paper. 

This is contrary to section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. Hence, allocated funds will be geared towards non-priority items, for they are not aligned to the National Development Plan in terms of time and allocations.

The lack of alignment is responsible for delayed implementation of the 39 core projects in NDP II. Only two projects (5.2 per cent) were being implemented on project schedule, while seven projects (35.9 per cent) were being implemented but below schedule. A total of 17.9 per cent were still under preparatory stages and the remaining 23.2 per cent had not yet been started. 

The affected projects include the Agriculture Cluster Development Project, Enhancing Food Security through Increased Rice Production in Eastern Uganda as well as the Regional Pastoral Livelihood Development Project.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should table by 15 February 2019 a list of all ministries, departments and agencies whose development plans are not aligned to the National Development Plan. The annual budgets of the listed ministries, departments and agencies that lack strategic plans aligned to the National Development Plan should not be submitted to Parliament before complying with Section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management, Act 2015.

Inadequate Counterpart funding

It is a requirement for the Government to commit counterpart funding before a loan is processed by Parliament. However, it has been established that projects are being delayed due to Government's failure to provide counterpart funding. The counterpart funding gap for the next financial year amounts to Shs 1.3 trillion. 

This is responsible for delayed implementation of NDP II core projects such as the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR), Kampala-Jinja Expressway, Kampala-Bombo Expressway, Kampala-Southern Bypass, upgrading of Kapchorwa-Suam road, Rwekunye-Apac-Lira-Kitgum-Musingo Road, Albertine region airport and the oil roads. 

In other instances, the country has had grants withdrawn due to Government's failure to provide counterpart funding. For instance, JICA withdrew its grant for the health sector due to breach of contract terms. This led to delayed completion of Busolwe and Kowolo hospitals.

Madam Speaker, in the table below, I have put the agency and category of core funding that they require. Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) does not have Shs 280 billion as core funding for the roads. The Ministry of Works and Transport lacks Shs 550 billion as core funding. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals lacks Shs 199 billion. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development lacks Shs 70 billion. The Ministry of Health lacks Shs 32 billion, while the Ministry of Local Government lacks Shs 11 billion. This amounts to Shs 1.6 trillion that we need for core funding but is not factored in the budget.

Therefore, we recommend that Parliament should not consider new loan requests before Government satisfies that it has provided counterpart funding for all ongoing projects.

Detrimental Policy Reversals

Madam Speaker, of late the Government is geared towards undertaking numerous policy reversals. Key in the reversals proposed in the new financial year is the merging of the allocations of the Youth Livelihood Project fund and te NAADS/Operation Wealth Creation into a consolidated fund of Shs 316.65 Billion. 

Critical to note is the resultant allocation of Shs 130 billion to youth programmes under State House. The committee was informed that this is meant to facilitate the President with adequate funds to reach out to the youth. This amounts to duplication of Government programmes within State House. More still, the money will be spent as political gifts.

Madam Speaker, I would like to note that here, we concur with the majority report that this money should not be moved.

Absence of Petroleum Revenue Policy
I will not elaborate on this. The minister is here and I think as a country, we need this policy laid before Parliament.

Inadequate Gender and Equity Assessment

The main report was very categorical on that and I will leave it out.

Defaulting  Subscriptions to International Bodies

Madam Speaker, in the National Budget Framework Paper, the Government proposes to support private sector benefits through market access in trading blocs to which the country has subscribed. However, it should be noted that Uganda has for years been a subscription defaulter in most organisations in which she has subscribed. For instance, without considering the year 2018, as of April 2018, Uganda was in a sanction bracket being demanded an outstanding amount of $2.8 million (Shs 10.5 billion) that had accumulated as contribution to the COMESA Secretariat and the COMESA Court of Justice

Uganda has over the years also defaulted on subscriptions to international organisations such as Preferential Trade Area (PTA) Bank, the East African Development Bank and African Development Bank, among others. Besides being an embarrassment to the nation, failure to pay subscriptions poses a risk of suspension and loss of membership benefits. Without increased allocation towards subscription, the proposed strategy of accessing regional markets is untenable. The Government should table all outstanding subscriptions within a month so as to guide appropriations of the annual budget.

Misleading Undertakings

The Government indicates in the National Budget Framework Paper that it intends to enhance pay of public servants so as to improve their moral and subsequently service delivery. However, it was noted that no additional allocations are expected in next financial year’s budget for, the wage bill has been maintained at the same level like in last year’s budget, which is 4.4 trillion.

Therefore, it is not possible for Government to undertake any salary enhancement. As a consequence, it is perceived that Parliament is responsible for failing to provide adequate resources for salary enhancement yet there are no allocations whatsoever.

Madam Speaker, Government should therefore, withdraw its undertaking of enhancing pay for public servants since it has no corresponding resource allocations nor has it provided the required budget. 

Inadequate Distribution of Tractors

Government proposes to procure 100 tractors in the next financial year under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. However, it does not indicate which regions are going to benefit from the procurement. In the financial years 2016, 2017 and 2018, 150 tractors were procured and distributed in Ankole sub-region in the districts of Mitooma, Sheema, Ssembabule, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Ntungamo and Kiruhura. 

Madam Speaker, this raises equity concerns. As we allocate money for this, the criteria of selecting which areas are going to benefit should clearly be spelt out. Otherwise, in the previous financial years, 150 of the tractors went to those districts. Therefore, the proposed procurement of 100 tractors should be allocated funds pending the tabling of a distribution list by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Thermal Generators

As I conclude, on the issue of thermal generators presently, Uganda has excess power but it continues to pay for expensive thermal power. The reason given is that we need the necessary power mix. Shillings 6.8 billion is required in this financial year and yet the buyout of private sector interests particularly Jacobsen only requires $ 8.8 million, which is about Shs 35 billion for Government to own the facility.

Madam Speaker, instead of looking for Shs 35 billion to pay off, we are going to pay Shs 66.8 billion as rent. This is a gross loss of money. We, therefore, urge Government to clear the outstanding debt of Shs 35 billion in the coming financial year, contrary to its proposed plan of continued payment of capacity charges of $ 4.9 billion, which is about Shs 17.6 billion.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore Members to support the minority report and I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Members, for the minority report. I have a few questions to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

In the Ninth Parliament, when we were working on the National Development Plan, we included a number of tourism roads but I do not see them here; we included Kaliiro-Nawayikoke-Irundu-Kagulu. This road was approved in the Ninth Parliament. We also included Kamuli-Bugaya-Kitukiro-Kagulu Road. However, what I see here are the same roads. I would like to know what happened since we approved the plan here in the Ninth Parliament.

Honourable minister, why are you unwilling to make regulations for the Road Fund? These regulations have been in existence for the more than 10 years. What happened to the Tree Fund? I really do not know whether you are taking the issues of the environment seriously. This time we want to see the final National Budget Framework Paper before you proceed with your budget. Thank you. 

Members, you are free to contribute - (Mr Bahati rose­_)-honourable minister, I think you should first listen to the Members before you can make your submissions.

12.44
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the last financial year, Government signed an agreement with the public service unions. Among others, the parties agreed that salary enhancement would be carried out in phases.

Although it was unfair approach since others would be earning more than others, the workers agreed. However, I am now surprised that on Page 6 of the report, Government has only allocated Shs 4.2 billion, which is the same amount for the current financial year.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that Parliament demands that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development looks for funds to factor in the salary enhancement. Otherwise, as it is, the salary enhancement is supposed to be carried up to 2023. If we miss this year, it will cause conflict among workers.

Madam Speaker, we agreed to sign that document because we wanted peace in the work areas and ensure that our people do not go on uncalled-for strikes. However, now that it is not catered for here, I would like to request Parliament to demand that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development looks for funds to cater for this issue. Thank you.

12.46
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened clearly to hon. Lugoloobi when he was presenting. However, I think it is the obligation of the Government of Uganda to construct Seed Secondary Schools in sub counties without any.

However, in the budget, there is no money allocated for that item. I would have loved the Budget committee to tell us what they considered to leave that item out.

Secondly, there is also an issue of upgrading health centre IIs to health centre IIIs. It was an item in the budget of 2018/2019 but it did not surface. Again it has not surfaced in the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020. We would like to request the Committee on Budget to tell us why they did not consider upgrading the health center IIs to health centre III’s

Lastly, I have a concern about equipping technical institutes in this country. There is unfairness in equipping these technical institutes. When you go to Arua and Gulu technical institutes, they are fully equipped; they have motor vehicle engines especially for those pursing mechanical engineering but when you go to Nakasongola Technical Institute and others, they are in total mess.

Madam Speaker, we want equity. If these technical institutes are to be equipped, they should be supported equally. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

12.47
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, BWAMBA COUNTY, BUNDIBUGYO): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the Budget Committee.

Madam Speaker, I note that in the critical sectors of education and health, there is a proposal to keep the budget of the wage bill stagnant and yet we have been talking year in year out about the inadequacy of the critical staff in Education and Health sectors. We must ensure that money is put aside to recruit these critical staff.
 
Madam Speaker, under the agriculture sector, I would like to associate myself with the recommendation of the committee on their proposal to cut the budget of NAADS by 60 per cent and put this money, which is equivalent to Shs 150 billion, to State House for youth programmes. Although the intention is good, there is a challenge of selection of the youth programme to support in this country. State House supports youth programmes in Kampala - some of us who come from the rural areas have not seen this support yet our youth also demand to benefit from the programme. 

So, unless we are assured that we are all going to benefit –because we also have youth in our constituencies; the youth aren’t only in Kampala.

THE SPEAKER: No, we should not even entertain it.

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, under the social development sector, I have looked at the report and the entire Budget Framework Paper (BFP) and I would like to agree with the recommendation – (Member timed out.)

12.49
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is more of a procedure. On 25 September 2018, hon. Moses Kahima, Member of Parliament for Ruhaama County raised an issue to be clarified by Government about failure to start up town councils and sub-counties. This issue was referred to our committee. We interrogated it and came up with a report. We expected this report to be debated before the Budget Framework Paper. Unfortunately, it has not been put on the Order Paper. 

When you look at the National Budget – 

THE SPEAKER: Did you submit it? 

MR ONZIMA: Yes, it was submitted. In our interaction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they said this issue was going to be put in the National Budget Framework so that Members could debate and take a decision on it but it isn’t in here.  

When we interfaced with the Ministry of Local Government, we had captured it as one of the emerging issues under the ministry but because it was not on the National Budget Framework Paper, it has also not been captured here. 

Many of these town councils and sub-counties, which were created, were officially opened. If we continue keeping them like this without full operationalization - I do not know what would be the impact because it has caused a lot of anxiety among the Members. 

Therefore, I seek a procedural guidance on this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue. Three of my sub-county chairpersons have written to me complaining that they are being evicted from where they are to establish their offices elsewhere. So, where are the new sub-counties going to be? Are they going to be supported to establish their headquarters? One sub-county is in a health centre and they have been asked to leave. My gombolola has become part of a town and they have been told to move somewhere else.

12.52
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the two reports. For me, I would like to appreciate the funding that has been provided to support the Rural Electrification Programme under the Rural Electrification Agency and especially the accelerated verification programme.

I am also aware that the ministry recently launched the free connection policy, which is a good one. My key concern here is that the cost of electricity is too high. The cost per kilowatts remains high and every other day, it is being revised upward. As a result, some of the small industries in the villages which are dealing in agro-processing are closing. My concern is whether the ministry has something they are working on to see the reduction of the unit cost of electricity in this country.

The second issue is in the area of health. I happened to come from Kamwenge, which is a big district with three constituencies. However, we do not have a district hospital. A quick look at the Budget Framework Paper, our proposed district hospital is listed among the unfunded priorities. I have seen the budget of the Ministry of Health has been cut by Shs 31 billion. So, I am wondering whether the ministry is concerned about health services in some of these –(Member timed out.)

12.54
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening to the chairperson’s presentation of the BFP. I have also taken time to read the BFP but I have not seen anything related to the new administrative units. I would like to emphasise the point raised by hon. Onzima. I come from Ruhaama Constituency, which I believe is the biggest constituency by its size. Initially, we were eight sub-counties; today, we are 13 lower local governments including four town councils and a sub-county. 

The people in the new town councils, however, are not accessing any Government services. When you go to the district, they will say they have been given a town council status. When you come to the ministry, they say the town councils cannot be operationalised for lack of funds. To my surprise, the people in this new local government composed about 40 per cent of the population of the constituency. 

Now, it is my humble submission that this Parliament and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development consider allocating money from the available funds such that my people in Ruhaama can also benefit. It is not their mistake to be demarcated into new lower governments. However, if we continue marginalising these people, then we shall not be delivering services to them. That is my submission.

12.56
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee on Budget for a job well done. I would like to congratulate the NRM Government for the sustained investment in peace, security and infrastructure that has led to increased economic growth of 6.2 per cent above the estimate of 5.8 per cent.

However, there are great concerns like the inconsistency in the performance indicators, meaning they cannot be relied upon. So, we cannot adequately assess value for money that we appropriate. This is unacceptable. So, I would like to concur with the committee’s recommendation that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reviews these indicators. 

Madam Speaker, the fact that there are no specific measures to equalise opportunities for women and other vulnerable persons without sanctions is unacceptable. I would like to concur with the committee that we should not pass the budget unless the department do – first of all, there should be sanctions and the department that do not perform accordingly should not have their budget passed. 

Reducing the budget for the key sectors of education and health, which are primary movers for sustained economic growth, is also unacceptable. The planned upgrade of health centre IIs to health centre IIIs comes with infrastructural investment and increased recruitment. We have been crying about the need to increase midwives and their pay for them to be able to perform; if we cannot utilise the funding on the development, let us channel it to wages so that we can have improved health services. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I am wondering what the Government is going to report at the United Nations in 2020, where the drivers of SGDs are - what are you going to report you people?

12.59
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join the colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. However, the chairperson noted factors that could be responsible for low economic growth vis-a-viz GDP and was bringing some factors like environmental effects and so on.

Madam speaker, the chairperson should be open and say that as we spend our money, the areas that take high expenditure are sometimes not the priorities. If we plan to set up a road somewhere, Government must be seen to be also promoting sectors of production in that area so that when a road is finished - the advantages in that area should be exploited.

If we set up a road that is going to Karamoja, Kapchorwa, Kamuli or Ibanda, we must note that in that area or region this is what they do, these are the sectors of production, this is their output and what they produce so that Government also prioritises promoting those production units in that area. When we finish the road, the road also leads to increase in production in that area.

However, you find Government setting up and finishing a road and yet the economic position of that region remains the same. Therefore, Government must also be advised to ensure that production units in those areas where we set up roads also increase and that people from those regions benefit from the roads.

The minority report talked about the increasing debt burden of 41 per cent. Maybe we shall know from the finance minister because from the beginning –(Member timed out.)

1.01
MS LILLY AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for this report. I would like to ask the finance minister to clarify to the people of Napore and to me who represents them here. 

In the Ninth Parliament, Karenga-Bira Road was budgeted for and this road connects to South Sudan via Kidepo. Up to now, you cannot see it anywhere in the budget or in any book. May I know from the finance minister where they placed it? This is a very vital road which takes tourists to Kidepo; and you know what Kidepo National Game Park is doing for this country. I thank you.

1.02
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee. I would like to start by saying that I do not know whether persons with disabilities have done any harm to the Government, because everybody looks at them as very useless.

When you look at even the gender and equity certificate, all the ministries have gone down, because they did not include disability into their assessments. There is a problem and the ministry should reply to us.

I would like to mention as the Chairperson of the Equal Opportunities Committee; those ministries which have not met that assessment should not be passed. I see the energy and lands ministries have gone below the 50 per cent. We need to get an explanation for that.

We have been getting a grant of Shs 3 billion, since 2009; up to now, that money has remained stagnant and has reduced to two point something billion. Maybe the finance minister should explain whether the disabled people have reduced? Can I get an answer so that we know it?

Government promised us motorcycles for our district councillors. Madam Speaker, you are aware because you helped me some time back to push it to the President. However, up to now, the ministries buy cars, the youth will be given motorcycles and other departments will buy anything but just a few of the disabled people cannot access the motorcycles. Nowhere in the budget has it been put and every time we are begging. I do not know whether you have turned us into beggars; I am wondering but we are also Ugandans.

I would like to say that the issue of the budget of gender ministry has been cut. The youth fund is not there and -

THE SPEAKER: Yeah just conclude. Half a minute hon. Asamo she is speaking for many people.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The gender ministry which looks after everybody including old people is dependent on budget support from donors. Government has decided to fold hands that even the little money that has been for the youth has been moved. 

We are wondering what guidelines there are to ensure that that money in State House is going to have an issue of equal opportunities for it to be given to all the youth in Uganda. Otherwise, we are going to have a problem as politicians to explain to the young people.

Lastly, about the health sector; the other day we were with the minister here asking her about ambulances. However, this budget has been cut. The people in the islands do not have health centres, ambulances and we are here looking at the budget and focusing on issues of roads. We can have roads but who will be on the roads if everybody is going to die of sicknesses. Therefore, we need to look at the priorities and put them right. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

1.05
Mr Geoffrey Dhamuzungu (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity you have given me. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have three issues on this: one, before even we start reducing the budget on health, we have very many districts which do not have hospitals. However, key to note even before we look at that, as we plan to also reintroduce the money for the health assemblies, many of our constituencies do not have health centre IVs. I would suggest that instead of reducing this money - the President has pledged this thing for a very long period. We should use this same budget instead of reducing the money and at least ensure that each constituency has a health centre IV.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you also note that Ministry of Local Government, as my colleague said, came up with very many town councils and sub counties; many of our sub counties are big. I would beg that we use this same opportunity in this financial year to ensure that money is allocated to have our sub counties operate. Otherwise, they are there, we have been asked - and as my colleague said, the issue is money. Since we are talking about money, let us prioritise these units and we move on.

Lastly, under works ministry, I have seen vey many roads as far as tourism roads are concerned. In my district, there is a tourism road that goes to Kagulu from-

THE SPEAKER: That is the one I asked him about.

1.07
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for both reports. However, there is a statement, which made me very uncomfortable, which I would like to request the committee to adjust.

The committee recommended that Government should look beyond Namanve Industrial Park by acquiring land in Buikwe, Mpigi, Kayunga and Wakiso for industrial parks. One of the reasons poverty levels are high in the eastern and northern regions is lack of industries. Even the reason that these areas are performing badly, you could look at the results, is because of these high poverty levels. 

I would like to recommend that instead of having them outlined and specifically point out Wakiso and others, they should say that for equity purposes and balancing the situation, Government should emphasise the purchase of land upcountry; which is even cheaper and creating incentives to persuade investors to put up industries upcountry instead of giving specific districts, which are already congested and suffocating with industries. That is why they are even encroaching on the wetlands - (Interruption) - You can give information but later. (Laughter)

Secondly, the issue of reducing –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Give her a half a minute to finish.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that reducing the budget for health is causing a lot of problems. Having a health centre IV, as somebody was recommending, is not enough. The problem is not staffing. 

Recently, mothers lost babies because of shortage of mid-wives in our health centre IV. The mid-wife here works for eight hours and goes home. Whatever happens after that, they are not bothered because a mid-wife for the health centre is not helping the situation. Thank you. 

1.10
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to add my voice to those thanking the Committee on Budget for the elaborate report and that of my side. 

I wish to highlight the fact that the health sector budget has been further reduced by so many billions as you see in the report. You have the copy, so I will not mention the figures.

All along, we have been discussing issues of hard to reach facilities where they lack professionals, consultants and hard-to-reach funds to retain the staff. When we see the funds being reduced, I have got to worry that still that problem will persist.

More so, there is the issue of HIV/AIDS. We have been struggling to have the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund put in the budgets, which is spearheading the presidential fast-track initiative. Again, it is not here, and the funds have been reduced. I do not think they will give it a priority when it is not in the budget and funds have been reduced. This is critical because it is there if you talk about the manifesto of NRM. If you want the manifesto to –(Interjections)– if you want the presidential manifesto to perform, I think you must include the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. 

On the issue of ambulances, the minister has told us that he is no longer going to give them to district hospitals. That is terrible because mothers die because there are no cars for them to be referred to other regional referral hospitals. I wish the issue of health should be taken as paramount and they do not continue reducing money for the health budget when it concerns the lives of our people. Thank you. 

1.13
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the Committee on Budget for this elaborate report.

My concern is on agriculture that I believe employs most of our people. When I look at the budget, it is talking of an increment of three per cent, but it is not clear where the increment is going, and we are talking about irrigation, improved agriculture and mechanisation. This is what employs 80 per cent of the Ugandan population.

I am wondering whether our Government planners are planning or if they plan backwards. If we are talking about attaining the Structural Development Goals (SDGs) by the year 2020, which is in a few years to come, and our planning is retrogressive the way I see in the Budget Framework Paper, how are we going to attain this?

We have pleaded repeatedly that we need funding in agriculture. You cannot talk about irrigation and there is nothing to show what we are going to do to enhance it. Are we going to irrigate Government farms or are we going to choose farmers to give land? What is it? There is no strategy. Can Government show us what strategy there is that we are going to follow to have this attained?  Even the Committee on Budget is saying that it is not clear. What are we talking about? The three per cent increment is just to make us think there is an increment. What is it for? Could it be for salaries? 

We are reducing money for National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS); I would have loved to see the reduction from NAADS go somewhere in an investment still in agriculture. Where is that money going? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, on the issue of schools, yesterday I told you about Sebei where some 10 sub counties have neither a primary nor a secondary school. You must intervene.

1.15
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report.

Basically, my issue is about the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). When they say that it has grown from 5.8 to 6.2 and therefore, we are okay; I would like to get clarification about it. You find that in an economy, growth to GDP could have been contributed by a few individuals. For example, in a population of five people, Mukula and others – I could be having Shs 500,000 while others have Shs 10,000 each making it Shs 540,000. When you divide it by the total population of five people, they will say that the per capita income is Shs 108,000 and therefore the GDP has grown.

Do we have statistics? The chairperson said that according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) it is at six per cent; do we have the statistics of how much the greater population in the rural areas has contributed to that and how much others have? In that way, we would appreciate what the greater rural population has contributed and a few individuals as well. Therefore, what is the plan to make –(Member timed out.)

1.17
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report and their recommendations. I have three issues on the recommendations that were made by the committee.

The first is on human resources census. There was an attempt in the Ninth Parliament to know the quality of our human resource. We have been talking about unemployment, but we do not even know the specialties of our people. Government had tried to look for funds, but it has somehow given up. I am glad the committee has come up with a recommendation that we need to carry out that census.

Madam Speaker, the second is on tax arrears. In the chairman’s report, they are now growing from Shs 1.2 trillion to Shs 2.6 trillion. I think this is a serious concern; we need to know why people are not paying their taxes.

Madam Speaker, the other is counterpart funding. We have been talking about this issue. They come here seeking for loans; they are given and not implemented because the Government has failed. It is actually a very huge bill that is outstanding which the Government is not paying. In addition, if it is not paying the projects cannot be implemented.

Madam Speaker, in hon. Asamo’s submission, she talked about the gender and equity compliance of the Ministry of Lands and Housing and Urban Development that it has gone done to 32 per cent. Madam Speaker, with your permission, the chairperson had given me a copy of the gender and equity compliance report for tabling that shows that it has improved from 32 percent to- 

THE SPEAKER: Were the chairman’s figures outdated?

MR MAWANDA: No. it was hon. Asamo’s submission. This is a revised assessment which I have now and with your permission, I can lay it at the Table so that the chairman, the committee and the House can be able to look at it. I think it was not submitted, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Are you assisting hon. Asamo?

MR MAWANDA: She was saying that the assessment was at 32 per cent but they have now submitted revised assessment which shows that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has now improved to 53 per cent.

THE SPEAKER: Well, you lay them, but I think the chairman had his - but why are you doing the work on behalf of hon. Asamo?

MR MAWANDA: She talked about it and maybe she is referring to the old assessment.

THE SPEAKER: I think we will go with the chairman’s figures because all those chairs are part of the committee.

MR MAWANDA: Okay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.21
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the majority and minority reports. I want to specifically comment about the low levels of domestic tax revenue collection. I think for the last time, when hon. Bahati is still in this House, I have said on this Floor that when you look at the tax collection in this country, 85 per cent comes from the central business area and only 15 per cent comes from the rest of the country.

This means that Government has failed to stimulate production in other areas of the country. This has even misled them. Whenever they talk about GDP, they do not go at length to tell us that 85 per cent of our GDP is held by 10 per cent of the population. The remaining part of the population owns 15 per cent and this is a big challenge.

I want to propose to Government that we invest money in production largely other than focusing on production relations. For instance, in the budget, we pass over Shs 90 billion to give to the President to go and start giving out to people as and when he is happy. 

However, if this money was invested, for instance, in the tourism roads, irrigation, there would be a relation between the investment and what we realize as a result of support to revenue collection. I think this is simple economics, which Government must pick from this point.

I propose that the money we give to the President has no return to the revenue collection in this country, but if we invested this money –(Member timed out.)

1.23
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee especially the makers of the minority report because the issues come out very clearly.

Madam Speaker, I will start from where hon. Mwiru stopped. We have been misled in this country to borrow more money on the measurement that our debt to GDP ratio is very good. That is the reason why in the previous budget, almost half of the budget was for debt payment.

Now, the issue of measuring our ability to borrow more money, our credit worthiness based on debt to GDP ratio is so misleading.

In actual sense, you must look at how much money do you have in your pocket that you can use to pay back, not how much can you get from your combined values of your assets and production. That misleads us because not all that amount of money or the value of GDP will be used to pay back debts. It is what Government will get in terms of taxes from these assets, properties and our production levels that we have.

Therefore, we must look at how we are wasting resources in this country to pay back debts that we borrow at very non-concessional interest rates.

Madam Speaker, I am disappointed. If you look at the minority report, 63 per cent of expenditure budget is going to pay interest. If the report of the committee brought a position that as Government, we are going to protect our infant industries- yesterday I was in Jinja –(Member timed out.)

1.25
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget for his presentation. Mr Chairman, I like it when you say that while the plans for development of this country are very good, the challenge we have is that we do not have the financing plans to effectively attain the plans we have.

This has been pointed out by everybody who has spoken in all the sectors. Like you said, we have issues with the health department. We have good plans, but we do not have the money. We have issues with seed secondary schools, but we do not have the money.

I want to emphasize an area that is on my heart and that is the one of agriculture. Agriculture is the backbone of our economy and it employs majority of our people. However, when you look at what we have committed ourselves to do according to the Maputo Accord; we are supposed to put 10 per cent of our budget into the agricultural sector. Unfortunately, this has not been done. We are working on a three per cent of the national budget towards that commitment we made internationally. I wish we had more money to that sector so that whatever we wish to do come to pass. 

Your budget suggests that we are getting Shs 150 billion out of NAADS, which should actually be more towards supporting agriculture and I would like to agree with everybody who has said that they wish this money stays in the agricultural sector and we find a way of making this sector a bit more productive using that money.

I would also like to point out this –(Member timed out.)

1.27
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have about three points to make. I do not want to thank the chairperson because the report is already here. 

I am concerned about the reduction of the health budget. I wish the people who made this decision had visited Mulago Hospital, Soroti Regional Hospital and Ngora Health Centre IV. If they had visited the mortuary in Mulago, they would have realised that every day, we have a minimum of 30 deaths. I was there the whole of yesterday and this is serious. In my view, we must increase money for the health sector.

This Parliament agreed and resolved that we must roll out the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). Unless I am blind, I need to be educated because I have not seen it here. My people in Ngora are complaining that they do not benefit from it. I need clarity - unless I need to get some glasses to see – because in this Budget Framework Paper, I have not seen it. 

I had so many points to make but due to time constraints, I will just summarise. The other year, we budgeted for 52 primary schools to be constructed in Uganda. Unfortunately, nothing – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: I think you are raising an important point. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, we budgeted and planned to construct 52 primary schools in Uganda and that is in the report. Unfortunately, none of them was constructed and that is where the problem is. I wonder what the Ministry of Education and Sports was doing, and this is causing a lot of embarrassment, not only to Parliament but to the entire country in totality. I would like to thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Did we budget for the money and we appropriated it; for those 52?

1.30
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the Budget Committee for the report. I was excited when the chairman read a very good recommendation that this time round, the Budget Framework Paper for this year would want to emphasise on the growth sectors; that is tourism, mining, agriculture and others. 

However, when I delved into the sector of agriculture, I noticed that they were only emphasising on the crop sector. Nothing is being talked about livestock. I would like to know from the committee whether they are undermining the contribution of the livestock subsector in this country. Who tells you that when you are talking about agriculture, you are only talking about crops? Where is the support for the livestock subsector?

I, therefore, ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to try to look for some money and invest it in that livestock subsector; for example, we need dams. In Karamoja sometimes, when the droughts strike in, the livestock move from the region to the neighbouring districts and cause a lot of problems such as what was happening here. However, if water was provided – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that even the fisheries sector is also ignored, yet the ministry of fisheries has made projections to even Parliament that if we invest Shs 60 billion in agriculture and the fisheries sector, we will get Shs 200 billion annually out of that sector. 

MR LOKII: In conclusion, I think the livestock subsector is continuing to be marginalised within agriculture because of the emergence –(Member timed out.) 

1.32
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. 

I would like to talk about something that is bothering this country; borrowing. The issue of borrowing is becoming a big one in the country. Sometimes you find that the Government even goes to commercial banks here in the country, which have high rates. Government has a huge appetite for borrowing and I think that is the big problem. Moreover, they borrow and even fail to use the money. 

Yesterday, in the Committee on National Economy, we were shocked to find out that there are some monies that were borrowed and were not utilised up to now. I am imploring Parliament, through you, Madam Speaker, that this issue of passing loans without ensuring that the previous monies have been used should be stopped. 

On the issue of secondary schools, Ntoroko has 10 sub counties but we only have three secondary schools. Therefore, we are not seeing it reflected here. 

On the issue of domestic arrears, Government is not paying. People are running out of business and I do associate myself with the recommendation of the committee that Parliament should institute a committee to investigate this. 

I would like to thank my elder brother, hon. Kivumbi, on the issue of tractors. Before they put the distribution list of tractors here, I think nothing should again be talked about them. We should have the distribution list here. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether we should have a session where we review the performance of the loans because we are just - 

1.35
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Keefa, you are a member of the Budget Committee. You are an ex-officio Member so please take your seat. 

1.35
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the good report that they have presented to us. I have few issues that I feel need to be re-emphasised and given funds.

I come from a tourism area and I was shocked one time when I was moving through the landing sites, where some of my voters are, and found a truck with tourists stuck on the road. My worry is that they could have even spent the whole night in the national park. 

From the report, and as other honourable members have presented, Madam Speaker, lack of provision of funds for infrastructural development for tourism is a terrible thing. 

I propose that funds be allocated to these roads, not only in Queen Elizabeth National Park but also in other counties, so that the money we get from the tourist sector makes meaning. 

Secondly, there is the issue on human manpower requirement. I wonder whether, as a country, we have a manpower development plan. Why am I saying this? Year in year out, people are graduating and going to the world of work, but you realise that several universities are training students, for example, in the field of engineering. However, I wonder whether the Government can tell us how many doctors or engineers they need in a year; for example, let them tell us that in 2025, we need such a number of doctors or engineers –(Member timed out.)

1.37
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that a road is one of the factors for any place to develop. The plan to develop Atiak-Afoji Road started when I was still a student; I am now growing old, but the Government continues to roll over the plan again and again. I am aware that funds for Atiak-Laropi Road have been secured, but I do not see the Laropi-Afoji budget anywhere here. Where is it? Where has it gone to? This is very shameful.

We have been very obedient. We have not even been disturbing the Government. However, our silence does not mean we are satisfied; we are only very accommodative. Therefore, I pray that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development considers securing money for Laropi-Afoji Road. It has been rolled over for over 20 years and they are continuing to roll it over without any shame.

Madam Speaker, on one hand, I am happy that hon. Kivumbi has ably presented the minority report. However, what I am not happy about is for him to portray that Government borrows from A to pay a loan from B. That is not true. Even locally here, there is no way you will borrow from hon. Dulu to pay hon. Kivumbi. That is not true –(Member timed out.)

1.39
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Once again, I thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget. However, I would also like to say, with reservations –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are part of the Committee on Budget; sit down. Even hon. Akurut is part of the Committee on Budget.

1.40
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the other Members to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the report. 

I am disappointed by the unfunded priorities in the report. I find issue with the ambulances. We had talked about this as Members of Parliament, but it is not specific which ambulances have been referred to here. We had put emphasis on the district hospitals. Therefore, I would like the chairperson of the Committee on Budget to make a correction here because we said we must handle the district hospitals first before the regional referral hospitals.

Secondly, we have the issue of recruitment of teachers for science subjects, especially in secondary schools. When I was listening to the release of the Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) results yesterday, I noted with great concern the poor performance of students in science subjects, and this is an issue we must handle with seriousness. May we know how much money is being allocated to the recruitment of science teachers in all secondary schools across the country?

Lastly, under the unfunded priorities, we raised the serious issue of the rehabilitation of district hospitals, especially Kawolo and Busolwe, which are always talked about every financial year. May I know why there has been no money allocated to Kawolo and Busolwe hospitals, which are in a sorry state? Thank you.

1.42
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the debate by saying that the report is silent about natural disasters. In Toroma, for example, three schools had their roofs totally blown off by the wind, yet the children are supposed to go back to school next week. This should be incorporated in the report.

The second issue is about tourism. I think all of us read what is happening. Three days ago, Uganda was declared to be the 12th best destination for you to visit before you die, out of a thousand places. What we should do as a country is to prioritise and market the tourism sites and identify others, so that many tourists come to our country. If tourists come to Uganda, our people will be okay; they will have a lot of money and we shall get foreign exchange and so on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.43
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Thank you Madam, Speaker. Let me join colleagues to thank the committee for the report. However, special salutation goes to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for the minority report.

Madam Speaker, inequitable distribution of resources in Uganda has continued unabated with impunity. Can you imagine, in financial year 2016/2017, there was a budget allocation for procurement of tractors and in financial year 2017/2018, there was the same budget allocation to procure 150 tractors, but all were distributed to one subregion – Ankole.

Madam Speaker, we have had other programmes such as Operation Wealth Creation, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) and many beneficiaries have been in central and northern Uganda, but the truth is that eastern Uganda has remained at the tail end, impoverished. One would ask – because I am perturbed – are we children of a smaller god? 

Even the plan to procure 100 tractors as proposed and recommended in the minority report should not require that the distribution list be tabled. It should focus on equity, to distribute to regions like the eastern region, which has been marginalised, and that is the recommendation that should be made.

Madam Speaker, let me talk about thermal generators. Currently, Uganda has surplus power –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Courtesy of Bujagali, we have excess power. One would even wonder whether it is logical to continue paying for expensive thermal power. This Shs 66.8 billion that has to be paid is a haemorrhage, and we do not deserve to continue paying this when we have excess power.

1.46
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee chairperson, hon. Lugoloobi, for the work well done. I also commend hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for dovetailing the report to fit what is required.

My concern is the inadequate gender equity assessment that hon. Kivumbi should have done in detail. We are aware that the certificate of gender equity responsiveness is now becoming a risk because we are taking it as procedural and it is no longer substantial. Therefore, in the report that that hon. Kivumbi read, it is observed that the Auditor-General should undertake a forensic audit of the gender and equity responsive assessment by the Equal Opportunities Commission with the intention of improving its credibility. You have heard him talking about tractors going to one region.

The second one is that Government should undertake the national gender and equity gap mapping to guide budgeting and assessment by the Equal Opportunities Commission. This will guide sectors in addressing gaps identified so that we facilitate better planning and impact assessment.

Lastly, the Equal Opportunities Commission assessment report should offer more clarity and clear report compliance along benchmarks such as constitutional imperatives, gender specific expenditures, equal opportunities expenditures, and mainstream budget expenditures of Government. 

I think this is important to ensure that when we talk of equity, we are referring to Goal No. 5 and Goal No. 10 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), regarding reduced inequalities –(Member timed out.)

1.48
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I add my voice in thanking the committee for the report and for coming up with a good theme and aim of achieving a middle-income status by 2020. 

I would like to begin with the phrase “health is wealth”. I was reading about health in their report and it hurts and makes me cry inside to see that we are still observing that the rate of mothers dying is still high. The recommendations you gave for that one are not very smart. I request that you add something to the recommendations about mothers and children dying. 

One of the reasons the mothers are dying is because they travel long distances when they are going to hospital and some of them do not manage. By the time they reach the referral hospitals, they are tired and everything would have gone wrong and they end up dying. I request that district hospitals are constructed and made a priority in this budget.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, my prayer to this House and Government is that the national health insurance scheme for every Ugandan should be made a priority in this budget. I do not see it and I do not know why the Government does not mind about all Ugandans. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

1.50
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katimaku County South, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish to thank the committee for the report. 

My concern is about the health sector budget, which has been reduced and understandable reasons have been given. However, I wish to request the Committee on Budget to reconsider allocating funds for the construction of district hospitals for those districts which do not have, such as Luwero, as well as the purchase of ambulances for constituencies as recommended by the Committee on Health.

THE SPEAKER: Committee chairperson, for a long time we have been saying we want you to assess the impact of these proposals on the SDGs. We want you to assess their impact on human rights, equity - I do not see it. I want a statement on the SDGs. Everybody is avoiding it.

Does the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries want to say something? Do it quickly and this time our tractors should not go to one corner.

1.52
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to add to the voices of the honourable members to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. However, allow me to mention just two or three issues.

Let me start with the issue of the tractors, which keeps coming up all the time. I wish to restate my earlier explanation that in financial year 2016/2017, we procured 40 tractors, not 150 as mentioned by my brother here –(Interjection)- That is the problem; they went to those districts that were mentioned by the committee chairperson and those districts do not include Kalungu, as you know –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: When hon. Kivumbi was presenting, he mentioned Mitooma as one of the districts that received a tractor. However, I would like to state categorically that Mitooma did not get a tractor. It may have been on the initial allocation but we did not receive it.

MR SSEMPIJJA: For the 110, there was a delay in procurement and these are for financial year 2017/2018. They are already in Namalere and they are going to be distributed to all the other districts, which never got last time –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Honourable minster, we are happy that you are on the Floor. We need to you to be clear and get quoted on the Hansard. Since you have said there are already tractors which will be distributed in some districts, for record purposes help us to state them on the Hansard so that we can demand from there.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, they will be distributed to all the districts where tractors can be used. (Laughter) There are districts that cannot use tractors because of their terrain. However, all the other districts will receive tractors. This financial year, 2018/2019, we are procuring 168 tractors and they will also go to all the districts, apart from those whose terrain –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have just come. Minister, take the Floor.

MR SSEMPIJJA: The other thing, Madam Speaker, concerns the Busoga restocking project. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries supports this and, of course, we have been together in this. The only problem is that at the end of the statement, they said this will be undertaken by the National Animal Genetic Resource and Databank (NAGRC&DB). 

What we want to say is that the scope is very wide. It includes better quality of animal genetics, animal health, vector control, epidemic diseases control, strengthening extension, regulatory services and training farmers. This last bit should say that it will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries instead of NAGRC&DB. The National Animal Genetic Resource and Databank cannot handle all these areas because they are too wide for them as an agent of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)

Madam Speaker, the other concern is about the animal subsector. I want to allay the fears of everyone here; the animal subsector is not marginalised. If the Speaker allows, we can bring the budget allocation of MAAIF and everyone will see that this subsector is not marginalised. It handles disease control and vaccines. In fact, this budget has an element of vaccine development. At the end of this year, it is likely that we are going to produce vaccines ourselves in this country because Parliament gave us money for vaccine development. We are also talking about pasture development, genetics and genetic improvement. We are talking about the pastoralists’ livelihood improvement project, especially for the Karamoja region, which is well funded. 

Therefore, the subsector of animals is not neglected at all. The only thing is that the total sum of the subsector is what we should think about. However, since I am a member of the Executive, I will not go beyond that.

The issue of the water weed has been considered as instructed by Parliament. We discussed the issue of the water weed and so, it is going to be handled. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue which is coming up is what you have been complaining about - the issue of storage. This matter is coming up in this new budget. We are coming up with silos, cleaning of our grains, drying and storing them near the people, at least in every constituency.

Madam Speaker, allow me to stop here. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Can we invite the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development.

2.00
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start by thanking the committee for a job well done. I will focus straight away on three issues.

The first issue is about assessment of the gender and equity responsiveness, where my sector was scored, according to the report, at 45 per cent. I would like to correct this and say that my sector is very mindful about issues of gender and equity. Actually, in the previous financial year, we were scored at 63 per cent. We engaged the Equal Opportunities Commission and shared with them the various areas where our plans and programmes are involved. We also highlighted where our concerns are as far as gender and equity responsiveness are concerned.

Madam Speaker, I would like to share with colleagues a number of areas that we are fully involved in. These include, implementation of the various community development plans, environmental and social impact assessments; implementation of the various resettlement action plans; the technical support we offer to the sister ministries like Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Health, and Ministry of Education and Sports; promotion of technologies like solar water heaters, solar driers, institutional cooking stoves and efficient cooking stoves for the ordinary persons; sensitisation and registration of artisanal small scale miners countrywide and the criteria we use in the construction of the different rural electrification projects. In all these, issues of gender and equity are definitely considered.

Therefore, with the information that we availed to the Equal Opportunities Commission, we were scored at 60 per cent this year. Madam Speaker, I have the Equal Opportunities Commission assessment report on compliance of the National Budget Framework Paper and Sector Budget Framework Papers with gender and equity requirements for financial year 2019/2020, dated December 2018. On page 20 of the assessment findings, in the table, we have been scored at 60 per cent. In section 3.2, regarding sectors recommended to be issued certificates of compliance, the energy and mineral development sector is among them with 60 per cent. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table this record so that it is corrected.

The second area which I would like to comment on is the issue to do with thermal power. Our role is to ensure that this country has adequate, reliable and affordable electricity. Therefore, in our plans, energy security is one of the fundamental issues to consider. You can inquire worldwide; it is one of the best practices and that is why we have thermal energy. These two plants, Jacobsen and Electro-Maxx are on hot standby, with minimum dispatch. The engines have to keep running with minimum dispatch so that any time we have a challenge, whether by virtue of the weather conditions or technical, like the other time when they vandalized the transmission towers, these systems come in handy to alleviate the challenges. We also experienced a long drought in this country and these systems came in handy. It is, therefore, part of our energy security plan which requires to be provided for and therefore needs your full support.

On the issue of the unit cost of electricity, it is our interest to make sure that our electricity is affordable and is as cheap as possible, so that it can support economic development. The unit cost of electricity depends on how much electricity you generate and at what cost. How much do you spend in transmitting that electricity to the various places in the country? How much do you spend in distributing it? How much do you spend to get it to your premises? So, the more cheap electricity we generate and the higher the consumption, the lower the unit cost. Therefore, in our effort to ensure that there is adequate electricity – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, on page 10 of the minority report, we are asking the ministry that rather than spend Shs 66.8 billion, why can’t the ministry spend Shs 35 billion and buy off those companies. Why are you forcing Ugandans to spend this much money instead of doing it the cheap way? That is what we are asking.

Therefore, is it in order for the minister to gloss over issues instead of correcting the wrongs? Otherwise, we shall continue spending money on issues which we could cure cheaply. Is she in order to continue diverting the House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was that issue of whether to continue paying through renting or buy as a one-off. How do you respond to that? 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two stations. The Jacobsen Power Station, in a year and a half when we pay off the outstanding loan, is going to revert to Government of Uganda. So, the amount of money we provide for – These are thermal; they use fuel and the cost of fuel has to be met. One of the plants is going to revert to Government of Uganda and we shall continue spending on the fuel to generate power. The second one is a private investment plant. Moving forward, the unit cost of electricity that this plant is going to produce has been really reduced to about 8 US cents. Therefore, by any standard, the arrangements that we have made are the best for this country. 

Madam Speaker, let me conclude on the issue of the unit cost of electricity. As a sector, we are very mindful and we are doing our best to see how best we can reduce the cost of electricity. With refinancing of Bujagali, we have now been able to achieve a unit cost of electricity at about 8 US cents. Most of that has been channelled to the manufacturers because the President directed that he did not want manufacturers to spend more than 5 US Cents for a unit of electricity, so that we can promote industrialisation.

The industrial parks which are under construction are to add value to our produce and other areas so that we can earn money for this country. So, we are generating and targeting cheaper sources of electricity to ensure that we consume most of the electricity so that we do not pay for any excess. The net effect will be a downward trend of the unit cost of electricity. 

When we compare ourselves within the East African region, we are very competitive. Nevertheless, every effort is being made to see how best we can continuously reduce the unit cost of electricity. Thank you.

2.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the good report. 

I have two issues to respond to. The first one is about the strategic plan for the ministry. I would like to say my ministry developed a strategic plan and it is before the National Planning Authority for approval.

Secondly, there was the issue of the lower local government units that we created. It is true we have 204 town councils and 198 subcounties, but we were able to receive Shs 5 billion to support the town councils. Therefore, we have allocated Shs 50 million to 100 town councils as a start-up fund. This is not enough, and I am aware that some of the town councils have even displaced the sub-counties for office space. However, we have been in talks with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we have agreed with my colleague, hon. Bahati, that he will come and state the facts, because he has been promising us money to start up these lower government units. 

In some of the subcounties and town councils, elections were carried out and some people resigned. I was in Katakwi where a former head teacher resigned to take up the position of the chairperson of a subcounty, but they do not have funds. The councils are not even operating and they are thinking of taking us to court. Therefore, I know my colleague is going to come and state what we have agreed to. Thank you.

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I will be very brief in responding to a few points. 

First, I would like to thank the Members for the contributions they have made. I would like to particularly single out the contribution of hon. Mwiru who talked about revenue mobilisation. Our domestic revenue collection is at Shs 15 trillion. Out of the Shs 15 trillion, Shs 4 trillion is for wages; Shs 2 trillion is for interest payment; and Shs 1.2 trillion is for statutory obligations, which include those institutions we must fund by law. We then remain with only Shs 7 trillion to allocate to different sectors. 

This is very important because from the contributions we got in the House, you are putting more pressure on the budget. The demands must be financed either through domestic revenue or loans. Therefore, I thought it is important that as leaders of the nation, we keep appreciating this point, that if we do not use our own revenue, we have no alternative. In the world now, there are very few people who are donating to us. Therefore, if we have no revenue, we have to borrow. However, as we do that, we have to be very cautious. That is the reason why we set ourselves a threshold, so that as we move forward, we do not go beyond 50 per cent of our GDP. We are committed to that. 

Of course, there are issues of implementation of this borrowed money and we are addressing them. At the same time, for you to raise revenue, you must grow the economy. Therefore, this issue must also be debated through an integral approach, if we are to meet the objectives we are talking about.

The second point –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable minister. On the issue of borrowing, it is not that we do not support you in raising this money. The issue is that borrowing for consumption, just like we did on the issue of veterans, is not the right way to go. We can borrow and invest in things like agro processing and construction of storage facilities at every subcounty to support productivity. It is also okay to borrow for the energy and tourism sectors. Let us borrow for the productive sectors, to enhance revenue collection for this nation. We would walk a bipartisan road if we borrow to improve our own economy and not for consumption.

MR BAHATI: Indeed, that is what we are doing. If you look at our debt portfolio, 85 per cent of the loans are for energy and works. Tourism roads will also come here. We are working with the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure that we raise resources to finance roads for tourism including Kidepo, the other Kamuli road you talked about, and the roads that go to Bwindi, southwestern Uganda and the rest of the country. Therefore, we are coming here with the package to address these issues. However, because of our resource envelope, we are coming through a loan.

The second point is about the subcounties without schools. This question’s answer is here. We brought a loan request here for the World Bank and we are waiting for your approval. The funds from that loan will be supporting subcounties without secondary schools. I am in touch with the Committee on National Economy; I hope that this will be sorted out soon.

Lastly –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, there is an issue here, and I would like to put everyone on notice. Just here, and you can compare notes, the Government of Turkey gave Kenya US$ 170 million as a grant for vocational schools. They have tried to reach out to Ugandans - we were in Turkey and I can bring you this communication – but no one is coming henceforth. Therefore, they are looking forward to channelling these funds to Rwanda - US$ 170 million meant for vocational institutions.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will get in touch with hon. Nsereko on Monday and we can follow up that because if it is a grant, we should pursue that.

THE SPEAKER: May I know whether the Joint Permanent Commission of Uganda and Turkey is operational following the visit of the President about two years ago? If it was working, then I do not know.

MR BAHATI: I will crosscheck that, Madam Speaker. 

I still have two points. One is on the budget for health. Colleagues, you should appreciate that - I thought the chairperson of the Committee on Budget would have brought this out – the reduction in the budget for health is on two accounts. The first one is on gratuity, and it is paid through verification. The verified gratuity reduced this financial year. That is, therefore, one source of reduction on the health budget. 

The second one is the existing projects. Colleagues, once a project is completed, then the allocation for that sector for that particular project reduces. Now Mulago has been completed, for example, so that money which was in the health budget will not continue to be there because the project has ended.

The last issue is on irrigation –(Interruption)-

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You mentioned completed projects and some of them are infrastructural development projects. However, if we have constructed a health facility, it will need operationalisation in terms of equipment, drugs, supplies and personnel. We are seeing this in the National Budget Framework Paper; even when the budget is reducing and you are giving justification, what about the wage Bill that you are keeping constant and yet we need personnel to operationalise these facilities that you have constructed?

MS AKURUT: I would like to seek clarification because he is coming to his conclusion; mine is on the new administrative units that were created. You have not categorically come out to state if you have made any allocations for these new subcounties and town councils that were created. You have heard from the honourable minister; Katakwi is one of the districts that is dragging Government to court -

THE SPEAKER: He had not finished.

MS AKURUT: He was coming to the end.

MR ABALA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the minister for giving way. He has said that when a project ends, the budget also comes down. However, there are also other areas that are important. I will give an example of Soroti Referral Hospital. This is a hospital without senior surgeons and a board, without equipment like x-rays and scanners that can help people, but the budget has been reduced. In my view, the Government should focus on those areas and they should be addressed. I thank you so much.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, at this stage, the Budget Framework Paper gives us an opportunity to focus on broader issues - priorities of the coming financial year. When we go into detail at the budget level, we shall address most of those issues.

The last two points are on irrigation. Working together with the ministers in charge of water and agriculture, we are going to address the issue of irrigation. We will be coming here; we are mobilising resources to help set up a factory that assembles solar powered pumps, which will help irrigation systems in the country. Secondly, we will be able to supply them, using a strategy which has been developed by the ministries of agriculture and water, at the parish level - maybe one or two solar systems. The minister in charge of agriculture will come here with a policy.

On the issue of the SDGs, Madam Speaker, following your guidance and indeed pressure, Government appointed hon. Karooro Okurut to coordinate all our efforts on this matter. You directed that she should be reporting regularly to this House. Therefore, under your guidance, she will come to the House and update us on how far we have gone.

Lastly, the issue of local governments has been raised again and again. It is important that you give us time, before the budget is appropriated or approved by this House; we will come up with some formula on how we can fund some of the units in a phased manner. As I told you, the units which are created now require Shs 400 billion to be operationalised. Given the priorities that we have next financial year, we must take a decision as a country on how many we can take on for this financial year and how many we can take on next financial year.

Madam Speaker, on the youth fund, we took that decision and we are proposing that this House continues supporting the good work of the President, especially in urban centres, so that it can be rolled out to the whole country, so that we can help the youth-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not insult our intelligence; the money may end up in Kampala. No, do not insult our intelligence to give money to urban areas of Kampala. What about the urban areas of Kitgum?

MR BAHATI: This is for rolling out and not for Kampala but for the entire country. That is our proposal. I would like to thank you for all the comments, honourable colleagues. 

MS SENTONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request the minister to say a word about the HIV/AIDS trust fund because this is pertinent to my field of ensuring that HIV/AIDS is reduced in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Also the regulations for the road fund.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister, for the sake of the image of this Parliament, to withdraw the Government pledge to increase salaries for public servants which he promised. You correctly stated that you have only provided Shs 4.24 trillion in this budget. This means that for the public servants, although you promised you would increase their pay, it is not provided for. 

Please, do not put the blame on Parliament; this is proof. Let the public know that public servants have not been provided for in this presentation. I would like this impression to be corrected because there are times the Government gives the impression that it is Parliament that has been refusing to increase salaries.

Secondly, the minister has to explain to this House why he is breaching –

THE SPEAKER: You are a member of the committee.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, you also requested us to make a comment on the tree fund and the HIV/AIDS trust fund. I beg that we come back to this House before the budget is finalised to make sure that we see whether we can implement this. The environment is very important. On the issue of health insurance, we are already in Cabinet and we hope that the Bill will be coming to the House in a few months. 

On the issue of civil servants’ salaries, we are committed to implementing what we promised in a phased manner. At this time, it is not important for the hon. Cecilia Ogwal to press the panic button because the budget process has not ended. She knows this as a member of the Committee on Budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, my attention has been drawn to your document here. Under part 1, you say you would like to speed up enactment of the Bills that are pending in Parliament, for example the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) Bill, Pension Bill, National Health Insurance Bill, Animal Feeds Bill, Fisheries Bill, and Counterfeit Bill. All these are not here but you are telling the world that they are here and we are the ones delaying with them. You have not brought them for the first reading.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, for all those Bills, which are mentioned in the Budget Framework Paper but are not in the House, I would like to take this opportunity to correct the record and also regret that this happened; it should not have happened. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we had more time, we would have extracted the recommendations and dealt with them one by one. It is now difficult to know the meeting point between the minority and the majority and which recommendations we should take, because they are saying different things on the same issues. 

In the future, the sectors should work quickly so that the report is out early enough for the Clerk to extract the recommendations so that we can vote on them one by one. For now, I would like to put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when will you bring the final National Budget Framework Paper?

MR BAHATI: According to the programme, we are supposed to bring the final Budget Framework Paper by the end of March. Before the budget is presented to the House, we shall have worked out the comments of Parliament and brought it back. We shall show you where it is possible to implement a recommendation and where it is not as well as the reasons why.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank you for coming. House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 2.31 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

