

Tuesday, 4 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you this afternoon sitting. I will amend the Order Paper to make two changes. One, to allow the Minister of Education and Sports to give a statement on the new curriculum and also, to allow hon. Odonga Otto to make a personal statement during the course of this sitting. Thank you very much.

There are several matters of national importance but I do not see the ministers here other than the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I will take them at the end of the day.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT POSITION ON PONZI AND
PYRAMID SCHEMES AND CRYPTO-CURRENCIES IN UGANDA

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on 21 January 2020, Parliament directed us to make a statement on Ponzi and Pyramid schemes and Crypto-currencies in Uganda.

Ponzi and Pyramid schemes involve dishonest investors taking advantage of innocent individuals by encouraging them to invest their savings into ventures that have no underlying product, with a promise of extraordinary returns.

On the other hand, crypto-currency is a virtual currency in which encryption techniques, based on block chain technology are used to generate units of the virtual currency and verify the transfer of virtual funds. This process typically operates outside the purview of any central bank or any other central authority.

Crypto-currency provides for its own authenticity, validity and usage terms and conditions. It is a decentralised peer-to-peer payment network that is powered by its users with no central authority.
	
Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has on several occasions, through the media, advised the general public on the risks associated with crypto-currency.

To that end, we have continued to advise the public to desist from investing in crypto-currencies, since they are yet to be supervised and regulated in Uganda. 

We have, therefore, strongly encouraged the members of the public to do their business transactions with only licensed financial institutions. Even today, we encourage the public not to invest in these schemes because they are dangerous.

Madam Speaker, crypto-currency is often wrongly perceived to be the same as Ponzi and Pyramid schemes. As I stated earlier, Ponzi and Pyramid schemes are fraudulent investment scams promising high rates of return of between 30 to - 40 per cent per year with little or no indication of risk to investors. 

Ponzi and Pyramid schemes reward investors mainly through new recruitments, with no underlying commensurate production of goods and services.

Blockchain technology, which is used to operate crypto-currencies, can also be of beneficial application in various sectors such as land registration, industry and manufacturing, logistics and transport and record keeping, among others. 

A blockchain is a decentralised technology spread across many computers that manage and record transactions in such a way that they are irreversible.

Therefore, blockchain is one of the disruptive technologies that can be harnessed to revolutionise and improve business processes.

In order to harness this disruptive technology, Government in March 2019, established the Expert National Task Force on Fourth Industrial Revolution headed by hon. John Nasasira to consider and advise Government on how to harness emerging technologies in the fields of Artificial Intelligence (Al), Big Data, Blockchain Technologies, Robotics, the Internet of Things, (IoT), Cloud Computing, nanotechnology, biotechnology, genetic engineering, Quantum computing, autonomous vehicles and 3D/4D printing. 

The taskforce will also consider global trends, with a focus on developments and aspirations for Uganda and the East African region. 

The task force is, therefore, expected to explore the issue of crypto-currencies and provide proposals on its application in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you will also recall that in November 2018, Parliament adopted a resolution urging Government to ban Ponzi and Pyramid schemes in Uganda. To that end, a number of recommendations are under consideration, namely: 

    1. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to expedite amendment of the Penal Code Act to criminalise Ponzi and Pyramid schemes;

    2.  Uganda Registration Services Bureau to adopt clear guidelines to determine beneficial ownership of companies during registration;
    3. Office of the President, in collaboration with Bank of Uganda and our ministry, to coordinate massive sensitisations about the dangers associated with Ponzi and Pyramid schemes and also educate the masses on alternative Government programmes for income generation.

Madam Speaker, the Second Schedule of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 is also being amended to include virtual assets providers on the list of accountable persons, which will bring virtual assets service providers, including providers of crypto-currencies, to be brought under the purview of the Financial Intelligence Authority and will be required to adhere to reporting requirements under the Act.

Therefore, in brief, Ponzi and Pyramid schemes are not allowed to operate in our country. They are fraudulent schemes. We want to take this opportunity to appeal to the public not to invest their well-earned money into these schemes because you will lose this money.

On the issue for crypto-currencies, we wait to get the report of the task force on the Fourth Industrial Revolution and then, we will inform the country accordingly. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you going to do about those who are advertising crypto-currencies services? 

MR BAHATI: Those who are advertising the services, we are working with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the police to bring them to book because they are doing it illegally. They are not supposed to do that. We are also working with the media. Media please, help us to make sure that you do not advertise something, which is going to be detrimental to the public.

2.32
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank the minister for coming up with a statement and to confirm that, indeed, Ponzi schemes and Crypto- currencies have become a business in this country. I am already a victim, with very many Members of Parliament here.

Hon. Mpaka once raised the matter here as a matter of national importance and it was debated. Fast forward, we became members of what was called D9. 

The people behind D9 are very highly connected. Some are in Government, some are army officers. This person went around recruiting people all over the country. 

Currently, Bank of Uganda froze the accounts of this gentleman. Good enough, we were fast and we ensured that his accounts were frozen because he was about to flee the country. He was arrested at the airport but later on released. 

Luckily, the monies of the members who had been conned were still intact on his account. The monies were frozen on the account and transferred to URSB. He went to court to block URSB from giving this money back to the owners. 

The question we have been asking ourselves is, how can a criminal who has been arrested go to court to block the owners of the money from accessing it? People borrowed money, some victims even committed suicide. It is a very serious issue. 

These people operate with the full knowledge of Government and there is little being done to help those who have fallen victim. 

It is, therefore, important that the minister comes out clearly on strategies or steps they are taking as Government to ensure that the people whose money has successfully been frozen and have been kept with URSB get their money back. Interest is accumulating on the money they borrowed. This is injustice. The minister should come out clear on what they are doing. 

There is a record. Personally, I submitted a record of how much I was using to open an account. Each account cost $2100 and I had over 30 accounts. My money is frozen with URSB and I am paying interest on the loan from where I got the money. 

Madam Speaker, it is a reality but some people already have an opportunity to recover the money. Therefore, the minister should help the country by informing us on how fast they are going to help the people recover their money from these crooks.

2.36
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not certain of these systems. Let him not talk like someone who is on the outside. He is the minister and he should speak with authority. If you are not clear on these financial systems, please, stop them and then go ahead to put strategies in place. Please, study them first. 

They are telling people that money is on cloud nine. What is that? You would rather go to the bank where you can see their physical address. But here, the systems they are talking about do not have a physical address. They are telling them that money is on cloud. 

I have a lot of doubt in the taskforce they have put in place. This is technology we are discussing. They are talking of hon. Nasasira, whom I last heard of when I was still young. He is heading these brains that are saying that the money is on cloud nine. How will that taskforce manage these systems?

I would beg the minister to stop all these financial systems, study them and give a way forward rather than saying that we are still studying crypto-currency. 

2.36
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, we have always expressed concern about our good government. The Government should be vigilant as far as protecting its citizens is concerned. 

We were sharing with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development about this issue. When we had just come to Parliament, that thing was very hot and when you would consult a colleague, they would refer you to a well-placed person in Government to tell you how good it is. They would encourage you to invest. 

It was by luck that some of us were poor and we could not invest at that time. Crypto-currency was the talk every day. They would use enticing terms to explain everything. 

What disturbs us is that these people hold workshops, seminars and conferences in real places, hotels in which you cannot doubt anything. You find their branding in big hotels. They hold seminars to sensitise people on how good the product is and everybody will be there, the well-placed people in this Government will be there. They give testimonies about how they accumulated this and the other, how they invested 30 currencies and now it is high-up; and in the next two years, it will attract so much. They say things like the price was this much in the previous year and in the next 20 days, it will be the other. 
A very well spiced statement will be made and the Government is watching. Now, the minister comes here and tells us that they are investigating and have set up a committee headed by some people who are no longer active now – they could be active wherever they are. 

Honourable minister, in the interest of the citizens of this country – it is because of wishing to invest and accumulate wealth that they go there – can you kindly protect them by doing what we expect the Government to do?

2.40
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report, which has not been convincing. 

As hon. Kibalya said, these things are organised in very big hotels. I remember I attended one in a hotel after Imperial Royale. They brought people who said they had benefitted. They had left their jobs because these things are earning them a lot. They were targeting high-class people like members of Parliament. They said by the time you leave Parliament, you will have billions. 

I studied it and wondered, is this a true thing? Often, somebody who is a friend convinces you to join. I personally did not join. 

I would be very comfortable if the minister came here with the current existing groups and said that we have done this about these ones. If we are going to wait for the Nasasira report, you know the reports in Uganda are sometimes not implemented. If we are going to wait for what police is going to tell us and yet, people are out there crying. 

I remember there was a strong petition that came about this money and some people in town were crying about how their money had gone. These are Ugandans who are struggling to make a living. 

Why don’t we educate our people about such schemes? They are continuing to take the little that people have. Some people have acquired loans to put into these schemes. 

They deceive you and I hear that for the first time, you can get some profit but the next time you put it, it is almost like a betting system. The person disappears and if you go back, you find the office locked and people are no longer there. These things have even been on radios. How can we say we do not know them? You hear people talking about Crypto-currency and Pyramids on radios and mobilising people to join them. They even give out their phone numbers.

Madam Speaker, I would be happy if the minister improves on his statement and tells us “these are the people we have got and they are under custody.” Thank you.

2.42
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I also thank the Member who raised this question. I would like to look at the lessons that we can learn. The fact that a Member of Parliament and minister can be duped to put their money into something like this tells us a lot. 

I urge the minister to come out very openly because we need to use this to educate our children that we need to go back to the values, such as hard work. You do not just put your money into a computer and think it will multiply a hundred times. That goes to show the lack of integrity that – I will leave it at that. We need to educate our children because our children in secondary schools and universities have also been duped to put their money into these schemes.

As has been said, the people who are involved are known and they have local offices. They should be apprehended so that they cease to cheat our people. They should be arrested so that they return the money that they have taken. 

Secondly, we have the ministers in charge of ICT and investment. They should ensure that they know what kind of information Ugandans consume. They should be able to block such schemes and protect Ugandans. We have got a statement but we need to do a lot to ensure that this person who was taken to court does not use the same money to bribe the court systems. (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that when some of these companies came to Uganda, they invited the whole Head of State to launch their programmes. This makes Members feel that they are genuine organisations.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. However, the Head of State is advised by the ministers and we, Members. We are the Government. That such a thing can happen reflects the lack of integrity among all of us Ugandans and we need to go back to that level of integrity that can protect the Head of State and our children. Thank you.

2.46
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One year ago, we passed a resolution to ban all Pyramids and Ponzi schemes. The minister is right that there is a difference between Crypto-currency and Ponzi scheme. However, on several occasions, the Prime Minister of this country has launched Crypto-currency at Serena Hotel. The chairman of the Crypto-currency Association is a son to one of the front benchers. For Pyramid and Ponzi schemes, we do not need a committee headed by hon. Nasasira or whoever. 

Financial Intelligence Authority submitted a list of 14 companies operating in Uganda and I laid this list on the Table here. We had a meeting with the Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Prime Minister said: “Ndugu, we are going to close all these companies.” The ministry actually knows these companies but they are keeping quiet. One of the Ponzi Scheme leaders in this country is now a bishop and he is using a church to recruit people and he is guarded by soldiers of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces.

Madam Speaker, I believe these people are being protected by our own Government. The Government knows these companies. Thank you.

2.48
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to say that the Government has a lot of laxity and is unwilling to help Ugandans when they see us being cheated. The minister is aware that we have very many financial institutions, which are operating illegally. 

Madam Speaker, those of you who watched Bukedde TV news at 10.00 p.m. yesterday saw what was happening in Masaka where a so-called financial institution evicted an old Mzee from a very big house, saying he had not paid a balance of some little money, yet the man had paid all the money. 

I came on this Floor to report a financial institution in my constituency, which when you clear and have a loan balance of Shs 50,000 they disappear. They later take you to court and come with court orders. Instead of demanding the remaining Shs 50,000, they say you should pay Shs 700,000 to the court bailiffs and you also pay court Shs 500,000. This is a clear indication that the ministry does not have serious supervision over the financial institutions. 

Secondly, we need more money for public relations. Why don’t the ministers also go on radios and televisions and sensitise people? These companies also use WhatsApp platforms. Their methods of advertising are very modern. Therefore, the minister cannot just sit. The Government can use the minister to close those WhatsApp platforms, which are informing our young children that when you bring Shs 10,000 you will get Shs 1,000,000. People are money-hungry in this country. When they hear of huge profits, they are persuaded.

Therefore, there is serious unwillingness on the part of the Government to help our people. I beg to submit.

2.50
MR JOHN LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now more than 12 months that this House has been deliberating on the same matter concerning Crypto-currency and other similar systems. Hon. Mwiine Mpaka raised the matter and we debated it. He also laid names of some of the individuals and organisations that are involved. I am expecting the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with definitive information on what the Government has done for all this time.

The Government should have done a lot because individuals and their accounts are known. The big people are even presiding over the launch of these kinds of schemes. Since the Government is taking time to solve this issue, I suggest that the Government should compensate people who have been duped because they presided over this false system. The Government compensated those who lost money in South Sudan.

I believe that Government should take liability and compensate all the people who have lost money in these schemes. 


2.52
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From the statement the minister gave, it appears that defining issues of crypto-currency is rather a technical issue. It was even very difficult for some of us to understand the statement, which the minister himself read. How about the common man?

We have already known this as highly classified electronic fraud. The minister is telling us that they are waiting for advice from a technical committee or taskforce, headed by hon. Nasasira, whom I know as - I think - a civil engineer. Even the capacity itself of the taskforce seems not to be credible. Do we expect anything to come out of this?

I think we better task the minister to come out openly and tell us whether this is not a ploy to delay and continue to allow these fellows to cheat people. I thank you very much.

2.53
MS FLORENCE WAMALA NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also join my colleagues to thank the honourable minister for presenting that statement. In Bugisu sub-region, their office was situated in Mbale and was called Dunamis Coins. It had over 500 people in this company.

It is very sad that Uganda is known for the best laws but it seems when it comes to application, they are applied selectively. We have a law against money laundering but it is very sad that our people are left to join such conmen and then they come out to pretend to care about them.

Out of these 500 people, seven have died and others are on their deathbeds because of pressure. They got loans and went to money lenders and their properties are being taken away. This company was closed without information. These people are wondering what is going to happen to them.

Unfortunately today, our constituents or electorate think it is the members of Parliament who are supposed to save them from this. My prayer is for the minister to tell this House and the country when they are going to reimburse the money that was taken by these conmen. I thank you.

2.55
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regardless of the various names given to these people, I think these are conmen who have just changed strategy and tactics. In my opinion, these are people who would not come without any connections but they come when there is a connection.

The minister has openly said here that there is no guiding law for these people to operate. Why do we allow them to operate? These people are not only in Kampala but all over. People in my constituency have been calling me. In one family, around four people lost money and they were saying they have given their money to some people who have run away. Children are not going to school. It is a disaster, which is throughout the country.

Madam Speaker, if Government was to take action and get concerned about this issue, this is the third time we are debating this issue. The first time, the issue was raised by hon. Atiku. The one of hon. Mpaka was the second one. This is the third time we are talking about the same thing but there is no action – (Interjections) – Just a moment.

One time, we debated here at length about issues of casinos. We said these slot machines are all over, even up to the rural areas. We asked Government to withdraw all these. The argument given by the minister was that some of these things come to the country as spare parts. At the end of the day, they are taken throughout the country.

I was in my rural village last week but these slot machines are still there, even when we expect Government to have already taken action. How many times do we have to debate these issues here and no action is taken?

The argument that these are things, which are being handled by big people is not a lie. I was called by somebody who said he was a Bishop and he gave me a reference of a very senior person. However, I told him there is no way one can get rich easily like that, unless one is a thief.

I can never ever get involved in such acts –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable colleague, thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the House is that actually, the first region to be conned by the Ponzi Scheme was Kigezi ten years ago by a group calling itself Caring for Orphans Widows and Elderly (COWE).

It cheated people of over Shs 30 billion. The proprietors of COWE were known and brought to the attention of Government but it did not take any action. It all runs through. It is maybe a Government strategy to keep people poor and cheat them but the Government knows these thugs. 

MR ONZIMA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to Government to take action on this issue because it is an alarming situation; it is a not a simple matter. One day, when we were talking about this issue, one of the ministers declared his interest here, which was a clear sign that many of them are actually involved in these things.

I think let them be responsible and help the country. Thank you.

2.58
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity you have given me. I would like to thank the honourable minister who made the statement here on the Floor of Parliament. However, when we talk about these schemes, it is not only Parliament that these people have conned. We have people from the districts like the security personnel that called us some time back on this very D9.

There is a group called the Nigerians. They are now after the business people. I know of business people whom they have conned of Shs 500 million here in Uganda and they are within Uganda. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is aware of all these things that are taking place. It is only that they are trying to pretend to cover it up. 

Looking at hon. Nasasira, what is he doing there yet he with his friends are actually the ones doing this kind of nonsense to our people? It is very annoying, Madam Speaker. When people keep on calling us that money has been taken away from them, they do not know what to do and we should help them, yet we even have no answers for them. I think the ministry should be serious.

We have a bank that regulates all the financial institutions here in Uganda. We have details with all these banks. They know everybody’s cash flows. When these monies come weekly like that, why don’t they make an alert to the public? Why don’t they inform us that money is flowing in this particular bank; in a month or week, they are getting millions of money?

We cannot say that they are alone. There are people in Government who are trying to help them. It is very sad that we are the ones letting our people down and I believe one day, one time, we will all have to account for it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.00
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing this statement. These people are high class, professional thieves and conmen. They have been conning everybody, from the smallest to the top. Some are simply keeping quiet because they were conned but they do not want to declare.

For anybody dealing with finances, there must be an institution. If this institution calls itself crypto-currency; when it comes to work in Uganda, I thought all financial institutions are registered and licensed. Why do you allow these people to simply operate anyhow to con people?

These people are collecting money and putting it in our banks and yet, when we bring our small money to the banks, we are asked about the source of the money.

Why don’t the banks inquire where the people using crypto-currency are getting this money from? These people are just operating here carelessly when Government might even be aware. If the Government were serious, they would have rooted them out. There is one who was arrested but released. 

I suggest that anybody operating in such business should be put in jail. They must refund people’s money. We should not continue lamenting here when we have the powers to do so.

Madam Speaker, I am telling the minister to go and act so that we stop this menace that is robbing our people. Thank you very much. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When I clocked in, the computer showed me clearly that I had clocked in but when I looked up on the attendance information screen, I saw there is no minister who signed in. I am wondering what that means for us who have clocked in and are physically present.

I, therefore, would like to find out whether it is procedurally right for me to clock in and yet, the information is not being reflected?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had instructed somebody to check because even me, I can see from the attendance information screen that no Member of Parliament has signed in or signed out. It is showing that nobody is present in the House. So, let the Clerk check on it. 

3.04
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for his statement. However, I would like to inform the Members in this House that the elites who are supposed to help the illiterates are taking this opportunity to get even the little those people sweat for to survive in this country.

The crypto-currency has been advertised on TV West and on Radio massively. The people who are targeted mostly are those earning good money. I remember that in this House, a former Member of Parliament and a minister mobilised women Members of Parliament and put them in a hotel and told them they needed to invest because there is life after Parliament. They said they were surviving by investing in the system. 

People cannot tell the truth because of that experience because the mobiliser is a recognised and reputable person in this country. People give in their money but they cannot declare it now. 

That is an indication that the thieves are well-connected and they know who gets what and if they are conned. Some of the Members were called in some other small hotels. They bring very brilliant ladies who know ICT and they just show you information about the investment in crypto-currency.

I have a request to the Government through the honourable minister who made the statement; since the Government has blocked cloud money, which is in one of the banks in this country, how long does it take to release that money to the owners so that we can save the lives of the people who borrowed money and are dying of pressure because of this? 

If we can deliberately do that, as Members of Parliament, to save the Members outside the country, then the people will see us as their heroes. We should not stand by idly when we see things are going berserk. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Muhindo, I just would like to say that I am disappointed that Government is not interested in this issue. We complained about COWE, Dutch Coin and D9 Club here but nothing has happened. 

3.07
MR HAROLD TONNY MUHINDO (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I must say I am disturbed by the paradox that the President of this country launched Crypto-currency and encouraged Ugandans to invest in it because it is one of the ways Ugandans would get out of poverty. 

Today, the minister has come out to tell us that Crypto-currency is not operating within the central system of this country. It is, therefore, unfortunate that the President, as the Head of State and the central system, encourages the citizens to invest in Crypto-currency.

I also would like to say something to hon. Jovah Kamateeka that she is right to say; it is rather astonishing to see members of Parliament in the forefront of this and getting duped. I would like to inform her that Rwenzori Region has been duped of over Shs 1.6 billion by a group called Mega Cashit Ltd and their Managing Directors are known to come from Mitooma District. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, tomorrow, I will lay on Table the pictures of these people, their names, signatures and all other documents. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate my colleague for informing the House that there are some people from Mitooma whom he knows have conned people. Is he in order to have this kind of information and sit on it until hon. Kamateeka raises the issue and then he comes to say it in the House?

Everyone has responsibility to report a crime to the police so that we can protect our people. Therefore, is he in order? In fact, even in the case of the President, each one of us had a personal responsibility. You do not invest your money into something just because the President has said you can. Where is the personal responsibility in checking whether the information the company is giving out is correct? 

So, Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to protect thieves from Mitooma who are cheating our people? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has offered to lay the names of the people from Mitooma who are cheating the people on the Table tomorrow.  

MR MUHINDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that this is not the first time I am speaking about this. I remember I said on this Floor that I will bring evidence and the list had the name of Gen. Otafiire. This is when I brought the matter to the attention of this House. 

So, this is not the first time. I would like to inform the Members that the leaders in Kasese, after realising that we have such dangerous conmen, went to police and tried to arrest the Directors of this company.

Gen. Otafiire wrote a letter asking police to allow these people to continue operating. In one of the documents that we have, written by the Managing Director in the visitors’ book saying that “nobody should come and disturb the operations of Mega cashit it because whoever does that interferes with Government programmes.” It is very well written.

This, therefore, makes me think in line with hon. Niwagaba and that is the thought of many people from the Rwenzori region; that yet another programme of making sure that the citizens of Uganda, have increased poverty has come. It should be Government to now come out and stand its position showing that it is not for poverty increment but for poverty eradication.

I beg to submit.

3.13
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the true hon. Kasibate. (Laughter) The most important point was alluded to by hon. Mwine Mpaka when he said that the chairperson of the crypto-currency association is a son to one of the frontbenchers here.

The fraud scheme is a very networked and connected scheme. I know one of it in Nateete; they collect money from unsuspecting Ugandans and police only comes in to arrest them after collecting that money. People are complaining to police, it gives time to these fraudsters until they are with collecting money, then police comes in to arrest them and you do not hear of anything about them thereafter.

I would like to sympathise with the victims, including honourable Members of Parliament, who have confessed that somebody could dupe them into saying that he can convert their money into his own coin. To me, that is very serious. When you go to some of these conferences, the faces you see of the members of Parliament and ministers, they are part of the other scheme and not contributors there. They actually do not even speak.

However, the people who come to submit refer to them and they remain silent to only dupe you. I am very happy that I am not part of that. However, where I see Government is failing is that there are two departments that do not work, if they exist. One is what we call National Guidance. Sometime back, I heard that there was a minister in charge, not very aware whether there is a Minister in charge of National Guidance.

Another one is Economic Monitoring; that people can con including ministers and members of Parliament and we have what we call National Guidance. To me, it is just mafias. These people are part of the conmen themselves.

Madam Speaker, I do not want to review much because hon. Mwine has good information. He is also a son of one of the frontbenchers. Therefore, he has the information. However, let me tell you where we are doing worst. One time, I bumped into one of the sons and I suspect that it could be the one hon. Mwine is referring to. He had a conference in Lusaka Zambia about Crypto-currency. Therefore, when I heard him mentioning that, I am now confirming but I will leave it with him.

Uganda is getting a very bad image, even outside here. People are as far as Zambia trading in crypto- currencies but they are connected. They are sons, daughters of the frontbenchers here. I just heard the name that was similar to some Member here who is a frontbencher and I wondered if this could be a son of so and so. And when I heard from hon. Mwine, I now confirm that this is a son and he is connected to this.

Madam Speaker-(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I thank you. We would like to help the future readers of the Hansard, the proceedings of this House. When we talk generally about sons and daughters of the frontbenchers; we have both. Therefore, we have the frontbenchers this side and the other side. 

Can we be fair, Madam Speaker, if you could guide? Are we proceeding well when we get one of the frontbenchers pointing fingers and speaking generally as if we are in a market place without mentioning specific names?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kasibate, can you substantiate?

MR KASIBATE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought hon. Mwine Mpaka would be more substantive in as far as that is concerned. I only became suspicious because when I was in Zambia, I landed on a name called Nkwame and the second name was similar to one of the frontbenchers here.

However, if you wanted clarity, the name is Nkwame Rugunda. I did not know whether he is a son of Dr Rugunda. However, when I heard hon. Mwine talking about a frontbencher’s son, I am now losing the suspicion to the confirmation that this could be the one being referred to. Thank you very much.

3.19
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the minister for giving elaborate information though without mentioning names. I would like to thank my brother hon. Bernard Atiku for being bold and declaring that he is a victim. We have very many victims in this House.

There was a time I went to the Parliamentary SACCO and I found seven Members withdrawing part of their fixed savings and borrowing to the tune of Shs 200 million each. I was worried that maybe the next day, we would not be in position to operate. All that money was withdrawn to do that business of money in D9. These victims are both on the Government side and the Opposition side.

I would also like to say that in this House, we also have beneficiaries of the D9 on both sides. That is a matter of fact. We have just mentioned the name of the son of the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda as being the sons of the frontbenchers and of course he is a member of this House; he will have the right to defend himself.

We also have information that we have many people on the frontbench who are beneficiary and part of the network. We also have information that there are some people on the Opposition side who are part of the network. That is why this House may not be in position to help the people out there who are victims of this kind of causalities. At an appropriate time, I have already started mentioning names. Do not get worried that you may be the next. (Laughter) 

When the development channel came, it is indeed a very powerful project presided over by the Head of State and there are very many people in this House who are victims. I am part of them though the money is not much but I am a victim.

When I went there, I found many members of Parliament who were promised job opportunities in that constituency. That was the catch word. Of course, everyone wants to prove that they are delivering by creating job opportunities in their constituencies.

They would say, “Give in this amount of money and we give you that. Afterwards, you will benefit out of this.” 

When their chairman who was a Nigerian was arrested, he was escorted home by police and part of Special Forces Command (SFC). They went and bought a very big house on Ben Kiwanuka Close in Bukoto, opposite Bobi Wine’s studio. It is next to the Head Office of Pride Microfinance. They are being guarded by SFC, military in red top and police. You cannot touch any of them.

We know that there is nobody who can sanction deployment of any security forces apart from the Commander in Chief. If not, then there are people responsible and somebody must be seated here.

If you want to be real in this Parliament, then you must speak the truth and walk the talk. We must stop deceiving our people out there that we are fighting for the poor who are victims of these people. We have a network of conmen.

I was confronted by Gen. Pecos Kutesa, who has now walked out, that even some of us in this House came by gambling, so, we would like to live a life of gambling. That is why we end up being victims. I rest my case.

3.23
Mr gaffa mbwatekamwa (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find the minister’s report very demanding and I think he has been mean with facts. 

Putting hon. Nasasira who was born in the old generation – I do not know how to put it - to chair that taskforce, I find him as someone who was born before the computer age. That is BBC –(Interjections)– Yes. That is our generation of P.O. Box.

Therefore, I would have found it very interesting if we just thought about someone who is well versed with information technology. This is cloud money, which you cannot even see. It is not like bitumen whereby the engineer is qualified so he can get stones and create some patches to make a road. 

I wish to ask the honourable minister; what is the role of the Financial Intelligence Authority? What are they investigating? Why do you bring other people to investigate something that would have been investigated by that Authority?

Members are here but a majority are crying internally –(Interjections)– I will take the information later. I remember the time we were going to be given money for buying cars. Very many of us were approached to invest in bitcoin. Most of the Members who were mobilising others to join are Army members of Parliament. They are very big people here.

The Speaker: That is why they have left.

Mr mbwatekamwa: I think that is why they are not here. They are shying away. The seats are empty. I saw a majority of the Generals mobilising us to join.

When you look at the people who own crypto-currency and bitcoin – hon. Mwine Mpaka talked about the bishop but he never disclosed the bishop’s name. We have people like Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga, the former Member of Parliament for Moyo and Bishop Fred Ntabazi.

I have a feeling the ministry is keeping quiet they are also either beneficiaries or victims. 

I remember that for most of us who own radio stations, Uganda Communications Corporation (UCC) came up with a policy. We were selling airtime to witchdoctors to advertise. They said that witchdoctors were conning Ugandans and they stopped them immediately.

If these people are conning Ugandans, why is it that they cannot even be stopped from advertising? That tells me that – not hon. Bahati but the likes of front benchers as they said are also part of people who are cheating Ugandans.

Honourable minister, why don’t you do us a favour, contact UCC and they ban all these companies from advertising if you are not involved?  Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we have spent a bit of time on this issue. I would like to ask hon. Muhindo to lay some documents. 

3.28
Mr Harold muhindo (FDC, Bukonzo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a document that is mainly a petition containing the three accused people. It is in the names of Samuel Barigye, Alex Tumwebaze and Lauben Turyasingura from Mitooma –(Laughter)– having fraudulently taken money worth Shs 822 million from Bukonzo East; Shs 40 million from Busongora South, Shs 800 million from Kasese Municipality, Shs 160 million from Busongora North and Shs 183 million from Bundibugyo District.

Attached are lists of members with their contacts. We also have a Certificate of Registration with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). 

We have a letter written to the Director General Internal Security Organisation asking that Mega cashit it be allowed to continue its operations despite the case, which they have. It is signed by Gen. Otafiire.

We have a document, which is a memorandum of understanding between Mega cashit and Bank of Uganda.

We also have a trading licence from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

In the little time, I could not print the pictures but I will be bringing them tomorrow. For these specific ones, I beg to lay. 

3.30
Mr abdu katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This seems to be a bigger problem than what actually meets the eye. 

What this country suffers from is lack of consumer protections laws and weak agencies of Government. Take for example, the gaming and lotteries. You get a few private people, organise some scheme and collect free money from wanainchi. Of what they collect, they only return may be 5 per cent. There is no regulation.

Government cannot allow its citizens to be fooled and give money to a private individual. What other jurisdiction do you for example –

Lotteries and gaming is for public purposes. Government might want to finance a hospital and it lacks finance. It, therefore, opens up a lottery. The money collected from wanainchi goes for a bigger public good. 

In this country, today, lotteries are for private gain. You get individuals just collecting free money. You cannot earn money without consideration; that is cheating. We need to protect the most vulnerable of our society. 

There is an advert that runs on radios and televisions these days about the Deposit Protection Fund. It says that all your deposits in banks are insured and protected, which is wrong. They are only insured and protected to a maximum of Shs. 10 million. Why should a Government agency lie to its own population? The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that is supposed to be supervising this department, simply looks on. 

Take, for example, health. I know UCC has now made some direction about advertisements of these – whether you call them local doctors or witchdoctors. Due to the fact that our people are vulnerable and suffering from all kinds of diseases, everybody comes up and claims to be a doctor. Even where science has proved that this disease does not have a cure, like HIV/AIDS, adverts are there and people are running around saying they are selling medicines that cure Cancer, HIV/AIDS and so on and Government simply looks on. 

This is a laissez faire country. You come, cheat the people, as much as possible and go away. We cannot accept this. Specifically about D9, I have to declare an interest. In my private capacity, I am representing some of the people who were conned by D9. However, when they tell you the stories, Madam Speaker, you feel like crying. A certain lady used to work with one of these institutions in town. She saved Shs 230 million in NSSF, picked it and took the whole of it to D9. I am asking Government, is there any business in this country, which is not licensed? Why do you allow people to do these unlicensed businesses and con our people? 

Instead, the minister is telling us that they have set up a committee. What is the committee going to do? This is a criminal. These are people who should be in jail. We are just wasting our time, Madam Speaker. We simply need a very serious Government enforcement agency to make sure that this does not happen again. 

As much as the minister is talking about that committee, it will come to nothing. What this House is demanding of Government is to defend the most vulnerable of our people. We need to defend them. It is billions of money being stolen every day.

You have a Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General here. Hon. Kamuntu, is this justice? You have the minister for borrowing here –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do you have something to say? 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable colleagues. We do appreciate the comments and the contribution of members of Parliament on this important issue and also on how best we can address it. 

I would like to make three points, as I conclude. I seek the indulgence of the House to make a distinction between Ponzi and Pyramid schemes and blockchain Technology. Those are two different things. Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes are owned by conmen that con our people of the money that they invest in them. We are saying to the public that, please, do not invest in Ponzi and Pyramid schemes. 

From here, tomorrow, we are going to – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is Block Chain allowed in this country? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I was coming to that. Tomorrow, we are going to put an advert in the papers and we are also discussing with the Minister of Internal Affairs. We shall put a complaint to ban the companies that have been banned –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. Honourable minister, you were trying to explain to Ugandans the difference between Ponzi and Pyramid schemes and Block Chain. 

An ordinary Ugandan out there will not know what belongs to that Ponzi scheme or the Block Chain. Would you like to state categorically clear the list of the examples of the Ponzi Schemes and the Block Chains? Can you also clarify for us who licenses these categories of dealers in town? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are going to inform the public and follow the companies that we now know. Remember, these companies keep changing. A company may register with the Registrar of Companies and say that they are doing microfinance but on the ground, they do something else. Therefore, they will have a license of microfinance to lend and they do something else. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Kasibante mentioned Mr Kwame Rugunda, as one of those people involved in the Block Chain Technology. I wanted to make a statement here that it is true Kwame Rugunda is a son of Rt Hon. Rugunda. He has organised conferences on Block Chain Technology, the Fourth Industrial Revolution, internet of things, 3D and 4D Printing. To the best of the knowledge we have now, Kwame Rugunda is not involved in Ponzi or Pyramid schemes. He is involved in Block Chain Technology. 

The Speaker said we have limited time to conclude. The last point is that the hon. Niwagaba said that he suspects that these could be schemes of the Government to impoverish our people. 

Hon. Niwagaba, you know the record of the NRM Government. You know how much we have fought long and hard to fight poverty in this country. We came in when it was at 56 per cent and now it is at 21 per cent. We came in when the level of subsistence was at 92 per cent and now it is at 68.9 per cent. 
Therefore, I think this was a misplaced statement in this House and you really deserve to apologise for it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, on 4 December 2018, we had that famous debate on Ponzi and Pyramid schemes. This is what we expected you to do:

    1. Government freezes bank accounts of the schemes and individuals operating the schemes and compensate the victims;
    2. Government bans and closes all Ponzi or Pyramid schemes in Uganda;
    3. Government sensitises the public about the Ponzi or Pyramid schemes and the dangers of investing therein;
    4. Government sensitises the public about the real investment opportunities in the country. 

How much have you done of this? We expect answers from you about these resolutions because it is continuing.

MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, we seek your permission that we come next week to address the issues, the recommendations of Parliament and tell Parliament how far we have gone in terms of the recommendations you made in the House in 2018.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we have booked you on the Order Paper for next week.

MS ABABIKU: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the minister carefully. However, from the statement given by the minister paragraph 8 answers partly what you have asked. So, can he explain what is in paragraph 8? –(Interjections)– it says that Parliament adopted a resolution urging Government to ban Ponzi and pyramid schemes in Uganda. 

To that end, a number of recommendations are under consideration, namely the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to expedite amendment of the Penal Code Act to criminalise Ponzi and Pyramid schemes.

Madam Speaker, this provides a response to some of the recommendations we made in 2018. Why is the minister saying that he will come later with that response and yet, there is a provision here? To me, he should clarify on this paragraph 8. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you my colleague for referring to this paragraph 8. However, I just wanted to inform my colleague that the Speaker of the House is the Speaker of the House. This statement was made by the Speaker who wants more information and we shall give the House more information about this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, Next item. 

STATEMENT ON THE ROLLOUT OF LOWER SECONDARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to present a statement by the Ministry of Education and Sports on the rollout of the lower secondary curriculum.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, the Ministry of Education and Sports, for the last twelve years, has been reviewing the lower secondary curriculum with the aim of addressing the call on Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Goal no. 4 which states; ”Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all…” 

I want to state why the review:

To achieve quality education, we had to review the curriculum and put strategies that would improve on what the children learn.

The Government of Uganda has in its regulations: the Government White Paper on Education, the National Development Plans and the Parliament Committee on Education and Sports reports, have continuously echoed the issue of the need to review the curriculum and roll out.

The current curriculum was designed in the 1960s to address mainly producing the human resource for white-collar jobs. The Government currently has a different development agenda to address the country's transformation.

We note that lower secondary level is still basic education. Learners are exposed to a variety of subjects to widen their scope of thinking and enable their intellectual ability to grow. 

The cognitive growth is enhanced through exposure among other things. At this level, we are not yet going into career paths but exposed to what one can pick interest in or is about to do.

The curriculum is competence based aimed at exposing the learners to issues of creativity and innovativeness and emphasises values, which have been a challenge. 

Madam Speaker, the teaching has been developing only the cognitive domain (just about grades) most of our schools have been teaching for the purpose of getting grades. How many grades they get in order to get more customers if I can term it that way, without developing the entire child, with development of affective and psycho-motor domains.

The concepts of the Ordinary level curriculum have not changed much, the concepts are the same; the major changes in this curriculum are:

The methodologies; the teaching strategies on how the teachers will teach the different subjects (the teacher’s role will majorly be facilitation of learning)

The emphasis on values; the learner is expected to acquire positive values through the teaching strategies that have been provided. For example, cooperation, respect for others, being a team player, resilience, among others.

These come as a result of what the child is being exposed to in the new teaching and learning process.

The assessment modalities; Honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that the biggest challenge we have had is where our learners, as soon as they begin term one, it is testing; week one testing, week two testing, end of month testing. All through the term, is just testing and our major concern as educationists is how do you weigh a cow all the time without feeding it? 

The emphasis of formative assessment in the new curriculum is also the shift from thinking that teaching is about assessment. The teachers will through observation, conversation and the product form the basis of this kind of assessment.

The reduction on instruction time from 8.00a.m to 2.55 p.m will create time for self-reflection by learners. This will be guided and supervised by the teachers but also the plan is to have learners to be innovative and creative during this time to consolidate on the learning that would have taken place earlier. 

The other issue, some subjects that have been emphasised, for example Kiswahili have been introduced at primary level and should continue at secondary since it is the second official language. There is no way we can neglect it.

Furthermore, because of the integration of the East African Community, emphasis of teaching of Kiswahili is inevitable.

Another important issue that I would like the House to appreciate is that there has been an outcry on the overloaded curriculum with as many as 43 subjects. They have now been reduced to 21, of which 11 subjects are compulsory. These are Mathematics, English, Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Kiswahili, Physical Education, History and Political Education, Geography and Entrepreneurship. 

Some of the subjects on the menu currently have too much content that in some, like Chemistry, teachers were not completing the syllabus. Some of the content in subjects like Physics – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to present this important statement. 

MS SENINDE: Honourable members, I beg that you attentively listen to this because at the end of the day, you are the people who are going to help your communities to appreciate this. 

I would like to give an example of subjects like Chemistry, teachers were not completing the syllabus. Some of the content in subjects like Physics was obsolete in the areas of electronics. Geography has had topics like Rhine Lands, Tennessee Valley. These and many others had to be removed to keep relevant with the expectations of our society and the world today. 

The competence based curriculum –(Interjections)

MR OYET: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. You guided the House that we must pay attention to the presentation of the honourable minister on the new curriculum. Is it, therefore, in order for the Members of the Cabinet to be engaging in private conversations, especially the Minister of Internal Affairs, the new Minister for Environment and the Minister of Local Government who should actually help the colleague in disseminating the information about the new curriculum? Are they in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, what were you discussing there? (Laughter)

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, what we were discussing was relevant but we apologise that we were doing it here. We were asking at what time children wake up to go to school. We apologise for the interruption. 

THE SPEAKER: Madam Minister -

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add that the competence based curriculum emphasises acquisition of skills. In this case, the ministry has provided for assessment for skills acquisition at this level. 

Senior four leavers will now leave with two certificates. They will leave with an O’Level certificate and that of the world of work under the directorate of industrial training. (Applause)

To add, colleagues will agree that the curriculum has been creating one avenue for children to move on. If you do not go to the university, then it means you are a failure. That has been the avenue but now, we are creating two avenues. If a child does not take that avenue, at least, they can take the avenue of the technical institutions. This is basically to be innovative and create their own jobs. It is good for the country. 

These and many others have been a concern by the legislators and Ugandans have re-echoed their call to review the curriculum to have a different Uganda beginning with basic education and all through to the University. 

The preparation of the kind of human resource the country wants begins with basic education, which needs to change to provide enough basis for learners to take on tertiary and university education with enough grounding. What is happening now is lacking and it surely needs to change. The change must be now.

What has been done to date: I am sure members would like to know what we have done to show readiness. The lower secondary is still basic. Therefore, the curriculum aides are giving the most critical content that is felt necessary, which the learner should acquire before leaving this level of education. 

In order to do this, we have retooled master trainers who are also now helping us in training the teachers, especially the senior one teachers, who are supposed to implement this curriculum. This training is being done at SESEMAT centres. 

I would like to allay the fears of Parliament that training is a continuous process. It cannot be a one off or a one day thing. Whether we started it yesterday, we should continuously do the retooling. That is what makes a perfect teacher. 

I would like to reassure my colleagues that we have no problem, we are going to do this. Honourable colleagues, remember you will never do anything until you do it. This is the time we must implement this curriculum for the good of this country. It is not about politics. It is about the good of your children, our children and our grandchildren. 

A lot of consultations have also been done. We have consulted all the necessary stakeholders. We have consulted the head teachers’ associations, the headteachers and the religious bodies in charge of education. We have consulted Parliament as well through our Committee on Education and Sports, which represents Parliament. On several occasions, we have held workshops. I have evidence that members of Parliament have thoroughly been consulted and engaged. We have interacted with them on several occasions, in hotels, at Parliament and at NCDC.

To make matters worse, this has been on for the last 12 years. Therefore, even if anyone wanted to ask more questions, there has been enough time for us to be able to put answers in place. 

All in all, we shall continue providing responses and information. 

Cabinet discussed the curriculum review several times and approved it. That is why we are implementing it. The materials have also been developed, including the senior one text-books, which are being used to kick-start the implementation of the lower secondary curriculum. I brought copies of all the books that we have developed and which are going to help us in the implementation of this curriculum. At the end of my presentation, I will lay them on Table.

Madam Speaker, the distribution of these books is on-going in preparation for the Senior One students, who are reporting on 17 February. Some schools have already received these books. The process of procuring the textbooks from the publishers is on-going and the books for Senior One and Senior Two are expected to be supplied in July. The Senior One group, which will be instructed in the new curriculum, are expected to sit for their first national examinations in 2023.

There are quite a number of issues that Members and probably, the public have been concerned about. One of them is why Kiswahili and not Agriculture, is compulsory. 

The East African Community calls for East African integration and use of Kiswahili is pertinent. We are all aware that we have recognised Kiswahili, like I have already said, as our second official language. Agriculture is one of the subjects that we have provided and it is going to be taught under integrated science, which gives the learners early exposure to offer it when they get to Senior One, if they so wish. 

Besides, learning takes place throughout one’s life. Therefore, informally, our learners get agriculture skills from home, the communities and as they interact in their society; but also in the teaching of General Science. Learners still have the option of offering it as an elective when they get to school. The science concept also incorporates the concept of learning Agriculture.

Madam Speaker, the second issue has been that of private schools. Members of Parliament and the public have had a fear that probably private schools have been left out. I would like to confirm that teachers in private schools have been included in the curriculum review process and even in the retooling programme. We have been retooling both Government and private schools’ teachers. Some of the private schools’ staff participated in the writing of the curriculum and others have been trained as Master Trainers. They are now participating in the training of the 20,000 teachers nationwide. Government has issued all syllabus books to private schools free-of-charge. Honourable members, I would like to assure you that all our private secondary schools are going to get these books as long as they are registered with the Government. 

The ministry has designed the textbooks and developed the Senior One textbooks to be used this year to kick-start the teaching of the new curriculum. The provision of books will continue and, like I have said, we shall not stop.

Madam Speaker, the budget is another issue that Members have been concerned about. The sector requires a budget of Shs 143 billion for the next five years. This time round, our budget is about Shs 47 billion. Government has provided Shs 10.3 billion to kick-start the process as more funds are going to be identified. I would like to assure Members that Government is committed to this and it will provide the resources.

Madam Speaker, our prayer is that your office organises a one-day workshop where the Ministry of Education and Sports  will sensitise Members on the new lower secondary school curriculum to enable them respond to their constituents with authority –[Member: “But you said you had consulted us.”]- We have consulted them, Madam Speaker but we need the workshop in case they want to be more informed or if they have any questions to ask. They need to be authorities when they are talking on radios or when interacting with their constituents about this matter. It is very shameful for a member of Parliament to be asked a question and they are not able to respond correctly.

We request members of Parliament to support us because improving the quality of education in Uganda is not a sole responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports; it is our shared role.

Madam Speaker, Government is not halting the implementation of the lower secondary curriculum. I wish to emphasise that it is starting now with the Senior One in February, 2020.

At this moment, allow me to lay on Table all the books I have: the support manuals and teachers’ guides as well as subject textbooks.

THE SPEAKER: Lay them one by one.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on Table:

    1. The English Language and Literature in English, Senior One textbook for Lower Secondary Curriculum
    2. Geography textbook
    3. Entrepreneurship Learners’ Book for Senior One
    4. Entrepreneurship Teachers’ Guide for Senior One
    5. CRE Learners’ Book for Senior One
    6. Mathematics Teachers’ Guide for Senior One
    7. Physics Teachers Guide for Senior One
    8. Teachers’ Support Manual for Biology Session and Workshops for Senior One
    9. Senior One Physics Prototype by NCDC
    10. Biology Prototype Teachers’ Guide for Senior One – Lower Secondary Curriculum NCDC –(Interruption)

MR ABBAS AGABA: Madam Speaker, in academic writing, the title of the book is read with the name of the publisher, author and year of publication. Would it not be procedurally right that the minister includes those details in her mentioning of the books? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let us have more details.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, may be, to round it all, these books were published by the National Curriculum Development Centre in 2019.

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the minister, we all went to school. There is no person who studied Geography and has the capacity to publish Chemistry, Physics and all those books. Since the minister has requested us to support the programme, we request her to tell us the authors of all the books that have been laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Who are the authors?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, the General Science Textbook for Senor One was published by the NCDC, 2019.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, who developed them? 

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, the National Curriculum Development Centre is not a person. It is not one person, honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to lay her books.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, the NCDC is composed of various disciplines –(Interjections)– Yes. (Laughter) It is composed of a number of disciplines.

    1. The History and Political Education Teacher’s Guide to Prototype Book for Senior One by the National Curriculum Development Centre

    2. History and Political Education Prototype Learners’ Textbook by NCDC 2019
    3. Physical Education Prototype Senior One by NCDC 2019
    4. Physical Education Teacher’s Guide to the Learners’ Prototype NCDC Senior One 2019 
    5. Chemistry Teacher’s Guide Senior One Lower Secondary Curriculum by NCDC 2019 and
    6. Chemistry Textbook Senior One Lower Secondary Curriculum by the NCDC 2019.

Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to thank you very much for the information. However, I take exception to your statement here that Parliament should allow ministries do their work for the common good. It is not fair to Parliament. First of all, you should have come last year. We are in this because we ordered you to bring them; otherwise, you are moving on your own. We are out in the countryside and they are asking us. Parliament is a stakeholder and we are not interfering. We are stakeholders, honourable minister.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, that is why I have not read it. I beg that it is removed from the statement. That is why I did not present it on record. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I know you are going to allow us to debate this matter. The procedural issue I am raising in this statement contains inaccuracies. Are they going to be addressed by the debate? The minister tells lies out-rightly. 

I went to Kibuli where my son is a student. The teachers who are going to undertake this new curriculum are fidgeting while going through training. That is why you have postponed the term for these schools; they are confused. I was in schools in Kampala. Some schools are visiting others to find out how this will work but where they are visiting, they are telling them that they also do not know.

This ministerial statement is full of inaccuracies. I do not know whether we need to debate it or ask her to go and bring a statement. Moreover, as you have rightly pointed out, Madam Speaker, there are even elements of the statement she has not read because she is embarrassed by her own statement. That is why she is keeping them.

The truth of the matter is that you have caused a stampede in secondary schools. If you do not know, maybe you do not live in Uganda. I am raising a procedural issue. Do we begin debating the statement with its inaccuracies and outright lies from the minister?

THE SPEAKER: That is what she has presented. Let us debate it as it is and you point out the inaccuracies. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I want to thank you, Madam Speaker -

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, I am the one who raised the question. I think I should have the opportunity to speak.

MR SSEMUJJU: This is a statement now.

THE SPEAKER: I think it was his. Let us start with hon. Mawanda. 

4.16
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I would like to note the following. I appreciate that the new curriculum is good and I implore Members to support it. However, it has loopholes, honourable minister.

One, it is a competence-based curriculum. You are creating an island. You are starting it from Senior One when in actual sense, you should have started from Primary One. It is a competence assessment curriculum. (Applause) Why are you creating an island? Why are you starting from Senior One, not from Primary One? 

Two, on the grading system, UNEB is going to set exams out of 80 per cent. Twenty per cent is going to be assessed by teachers. Honourable minister, schools all over the country have various competencies. A student in Bukomero Secondary School is not the same student in Kings’ College, Buddo. 

You do not have enough money for inspectors to go and inspect what is taking place in schools. Do you have enough money to give UNEB to go and assess and ensure that the 20 per cent that will be produced by the teachers in various schools will be the right marks? (Applause)

Thirdly, as Members have alluded, the ministry has created a stampede. In some schools, Senior One has started but there are no textbooks. The whole curriculum is based on human resource, the teachers who are going to impact knowledge that is going to have an effect on a child for the rest of his or her life, who has not been taught? How can you impart something you have spent more than 12 or 13 years preparing into somebody for three days and you expect that teacher to teach somebody for the rest of their lives?  

Honourable minister, students change schools. This is a competence assessment curriculum.  A student is in Kigezi High School. After Senior Two, he carries his bags from Kigezi High School to go to Makerere College School. On the 20 per cent, Makerere College School will say that it cannot carry marks for Kigezi High School, because it does not believe in the competence of teachers in Kigezi High School. What will that student do? (Applause)

This kind of curriculum has not started from Uganda. Other countries have tried it and faced challenges. Have you looked at those challenges? Kenya started it last year with primary school. Why have you started with secondary school? They tried it in Lesotho but it failed in the first years. They tried it in Swaziland; it failed in the first three years. In Ghana, it almost failed but Government was able to give more money to the ministry.

In this policy of 20 per cent assessment, you will expect teachers to be on the students all the time but you will find that one teacher, because of the low pay, is teaching in more than 10 schools. When will that teacher get enough time to assess the students in the ten schools? Have you looked at the financial implications in as far as this new curriculum is concerned? 

I am glad you have said that you are not going to halt this exercise. We have a saying that you jump from a frying pan into fire itself. I would like to inform you, honourable minister, that if you are not careful, you are jumping from a frying pan into fire itself –(Interruption) 

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Mawanda, for giving me way. Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports have real problems and I do not think this is an emergency for them to be in such a hurry to implement. You can handle all your plans but the issue of assessment - Everywhere, there must be motivation at the end of each term. If you say you are eradicating the end of term assessments, how will our children perform?

Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Mawanda is that on the Floor of Parliament, you directed the Ministry of Education and Sports to bring here a policy on school feeding but up to now, they are hiding. They have not brought that policy here and yet, our children are not performing well because there is no feeding in schools. Some districts are getting no first grade. I have just read that Abim District got no first grade. Those are the issues you should be handling now. 

We have issues of lack of inspections in schools. Children are not performing well and teachers are not on duty because of lack of inspection. You have been crying that you do not have money for inspection and now, you are bringing curriculum change which you need money to implement. However, out of Shs 150 billion, you have just got Shs 10 billion –

THE SPEAKER: Is that still information or you are smuggling? 

MR MAWANDA: Finally, Madam Speaker, - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR MAWANDA: As I conclude, the minister said he has brought all the stakeholders on board. I would like her to clarify, which stakeholders they brought on board because the private schools, parents and members of Parliament are crying out. Who have you brought on board? Why are you hurrying to implement something where you have taken 13 years? Why don’t you give yourself a year to pilot the curriculum to see how possible it can be implemented? Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the shadow minister. However, honourable minister, I also would like to know whether the private schools you consulted are the ones in Kampala or the ones in Kitgum and Bundibugyo. 

4.24
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement prompted by Parliament. I would hesitate to call this a reform in education. When you are fixing a short term problem, you make an adjustment. If you are doing it for posterity, you reform. The minister just communicated an adjustment in the curriculum. Therefore, we cannot call this a reform in education. If you did consider it a reform, then you were misled. This cannot pass for a curriculum reform.

One of the key deliverables of our education policy is access on top of numerous literacy and general skills development for the young people. Just before these statements and policies are set to wait, the Ministry of Education and Sports communicated in December that there is a policy adjustment. They said there is no more funding for USE in private secondary schools.

Before that has settled, they have now thrown this in our faces. This is what is called chaotic planning. There is no better way of describing what we are facing than calling it chaos. First of all, you are implementing a change that has limited access to USE to Government secondary schools. 

The initial policy was that for every sub-county, there would be a secondary school. These schools are not there. Before you put them there, you are making a very serious reform to the effect that you can only fund children strictly through Government schools. You are throwing a spanner in the work. I do not know whether the Ministry of Education and Sports is in a panic and we do not have information about it or if they are not being honest to seek help from those who know what to do. 

You cannot talk about a change in assessment without taking time to develop assessment tools and take the trainers through how you are going to assess. (Applause) Honourable minister, this is called organised chaos. Assessment, as a key component in education, is a whole different aspect and it needs time. 

The supervisors of our education are head teachers. However, the headteachers of the private and Government schools are completely green about this. The ministry is training some teachers through SESEMAT schools but their supervisors are green. So, what are they telling the headteachers to do? Are they supposed to look on in awe, admiration or fear as their juniors come to cause further organised chaos at the schools they are supposed to tend over and report?

Honourable minister, with due respect, I do not think you are ready unless you are not discussing education. If you are discussing education, we need to roll back this policy because it is very clear. 

Madam Speaker, I made a quick peep into this book called, “A Prototype” and in it, where you would have necessarily acknowledgement, you have a disclaimer and it reads, “This material has been developed strictly for training purposes. Contents and images have been adapted from several sources, which we might not fully acknowledge. This document, therefore, is restricted from being reproduced for any commercial purposes”.

The disclaimer is not necessarily for commercial reason but even the content is disclaimed. So, somebody simply picked pictures here and there, pieced them together and said, “here we are; go and train.” So, if the trainee in SESEMAT schools does ask what these pictures mean, somebody would ask him to read the disclaimer.

Madam Speaker, we can do better than this. I would like to invite the minister – she is a seasoned educator and I am sure I am communicating. She really knows what to do and she has very – We know each other because we are good friends. She knows that this is not education but something different.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, she was the Chairperson of the Committee on Quality Education of this House.

MR MPUUGA: Absolutely –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to this House is that the training the minister is talking about - the ministry invited not more than five teachers per school. Currently, according to the new curriculum, we have 14 basic subjects. I am wondering how those four teachers that are being trained shall handle all the subjects being put in the curriculum. We need to be very serious. 

I am happy that the minister said that learning is a process. The assumption of the ministry is that if a pupil starts Primary One in a particular school that child will finish senior four in that same school. That assumption is very wrong. What will happen to those who will be expelled from that school and those who will transfer from one school to another? Therefore, we need to be serious, Madam Speaker.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, -(Interjections)- just a minute. The minister talked about retooling. Retooling in education is about two things; the physical tools and the knowledge. Perhaps the haft and puffed programmes in SESMAT schools could pass over the partial tools but how about the physical tools? Like the honourable member submitted, some schools have already started. Where are the physical tools. Hitherto, the ministry was supposed to start vocational institutions in every sub-county and they would have perhaps borrowed the physical tools from there but they are not there. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we can help the minister, ministry, our children and our country because clearly in her statement, there is no pool of deliverable skills that we shall get out of this. I think out of the 1980 White Paper in Education, the ministry as a ritual was trying to say that we have implemented it. When they picked UPE out of that White Paper; again, the implementation was chaotic. See where we are. On another day, we shall discuss the progress failures under UPE because they are growing every other year. 

I would like to invite the minister and the ministry to consider a retraction of the policy for the good of the country, our children and posterity. It is not late. And I do not think that any intelligent person would be ashamed of withdrawing something shameful and then, prepare properly to return and do better.

Therefore, I do not think it is shameful for the minister to say we can understand there is –(Member timed out.)

4.34
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Somehow, I think over time, when Government has talked about curriculum review, there have been some physical steps taken to review the curriculum because most of the time the attempt has been made, there has been a change of curriculum menu but the curriculum has not been changed.

This time around, there is an attempt to change the curriculum. However, I think it has been half hazardly done that it poses a big risk for our children. The question I would pose is, curriculum review and implementation is not an emergency or a do or die and it crosses political lines. Why doesn’t the ministry take time to first understand and prepare for the curriculum to be implemented?

We need a great number of Kiswahili teachers, you need laboratories to teach the compulsory subjects and you need to do a lot of preparation. Is it too much to ask Government that we wait to implement this curriculum? 

Recently, the Government wanted to close Ministries Departments and Agencies and bring them back to the mother ministries but currently, it is choking in the Government because they cannot do it. What if we enforce this curriculum and we find it choking and we cannot withdraw it, yet, it is the children, their future and the future of our country involved.

I note three things in the curriculum;

    1. It is illogical to say that you have done away with 43 subjects but kept 11 compulsory. We have been doing those 43 subjects but with only six compulsory. The rest of the others have been optional. Now, you have kept 21 subjects but made 11 compulsory. It is illogical; what have we changed? You have made more subjects compulsory and imposed a burden on the learners and Government.

    2. Secondly, you are doing away with practical subjects like Agriculture and Fine Art; the understanding that required the change in curriculum was that when my daughter finishes at senior four, she has skills of Woodwork, Technical Drawing and Agriculture that she can use to better her life. Now, you have made the compulsory subjects optional and then, claimed that there will be a two way out. It is impossible.

    3. Why have we been crying for a curriculum change? It is because of the assessment modality that tests reproduction of knowledge instead of application of knowledge and skills. The ministry must understand this from the foundation.

The ministry needs to appreciate the fact that our children are doing what we call rot-learning. Why did Saidi Saidi set up his base in Zanzibar? They reproduced what they were given. We need an assessment modality and not just removing regular tests. They are also necessary but test the students on application of the knowledge and skills they have acquired.

Finally, Madam Speaker, it is also difficult to appreciate that we are reducing the time the students are in contact with studies to end at 2 o’clock and yet, we want them to develop technical skills. When are they going to develop these technical skills?

Already in the old curriculum, they had little time for the study and that is why sometime, they would not finish the syllabus. Therefore, how will you make time for them to improve their skills when you are reducing the time they have to be in contact with the study?

I suggest we pilot the programme first and also look for where it has been working before such that we are sure our nation and children are being trained the right way, given the right knowledge and they are being trained through the right method. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.39
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad to contribute on this subject. When I came into Parliament, the first thing I wanted to know was what the cause of the problems we have is.

Working with the researcher for Parliament, Mr Tuhaise, we sat down and said that there should be a change of the curriculum. My understanding is the educational policy of any nation is designed to fulfil and identify the problem. I am asking; who does the assessment to see what to teach our pupils? When the honourable minister introduced this, I was happy but I noticed one thing. We need a mind shift. When they say, “Who produced this,” - if this thing had been written on, “Oxford University Press”, all of you would have clapped. However, because it is Ugandan, the mind set –(Interjections).

What type of people was the education system we had from the beginning creating? They were creating civil servants but never owners of the nation. There is a difference between a worker and a manual labourer.

Even in developed countries, there are universities for some people and those for other people. That is why, I am sorry to say, in the United States of America, the highest profession a black man can be is a lawyer, policeman or he is on the doorstep – or a soldier but who does the thinking? These people are trying to put up something after assessing the situation. 

Before you talk of how many schools, what are you going to teach them? That is what this curriculum is about. We should appreciate and add value to it by contributing positively instead of just – let us have a mind shift. Do not believe that what is written by Mr White cannot be written by hon. Seninde.  Thank you.

4.42
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, People with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister’s statement and that this country also needs a curriculum change. 

When I listened to the minister, I heard nothing about Special Needs Education. For the subjects she is bringing, I am wondering how my blind students are going to do Physics, Chemistry and Biology, which are compulsory. You need to clarify, in your statement, how our students are going to benefit from your new curriculum.

I am a beneficiary of the curriculum she said they are changing. I did Home Economics, some kind of Woodwork, Needlework and Housekeeping in my secondary school. In senior two, I was able to make cakes as a result of Home Economics. They teach you how to lay a bed. 

There is nothing like a change. Instead, the ministry decided to remove some of these subjects. In fact, the ministry is to blame. There were these subjects and some of us are their products. We used to do knitting of sweaters in senior two. Therefore, we should not say that we are bringing something new. 

However, are we prepared? Recently, the ministry said 15,000 teachers will be off the list according to the registration you did online. We have not thought of how to replace them but we are now bringing a new curriculum. The human resource is less and they do not know what to do.

As a teacher, I should be given instructions in a Teacher Training College to understand the curriculum I am going to teach. However, in three days, where you have 1,000 people like they have come for a rally, how will they understand this information?

Honourable minister, you and I are teachers. We must not put these teachers into temptation that they did not teach. I would like to say that the ratio of students in our USE is supposed to be 1:40 if you are to do assessment. In our village schools where you have 100 students, when do you do the assessment? This is critical.

In eastern Uganda, there are schools where we do not see laboratories. I do not know whether this will be done under the trees. We need to give the real picture. Otherwise, we shall remain the least. Eastern Uganda is already doing badly and we do not want to continue doing so.

I would like to also say that on the issue of education, what comes first? There are books but are they enough for each pupil? Practical subjects require that you have your own –(Member timed out.)

4.45
Mr henry kibalya (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. We are saying this in good faith because we all wish our children well. The ministry had this in plan for 12 years but they have decided to take people for training for three days. Those who saw what was happening in the training, they had grouped people. One person has about eight people around him. Another has around 10 and others mind their stories as another one talks. We saw them. Which training is that for teachers who are coming to teach students?

Secondly, you cannot tell me that you have taken four teachers for training in all the subjects for year one, including Kiswahili where we do not even have the trainers. You can look for Kiswahili teachers in Uganda and fail to get 100 of them. 

We have institutions that train teachers. For 12 years, if the ministry knew, what they are fidgeting to train in three days would have been introduced in these training institutions so that teachers are trained thoroughly by the time they begin teaching Senior One. 

We have private schools. I wonder if there was a teacher from Bugabula who came for that training. I also have secondary schools in Bugabula South but they were not among these teachers who came for training and those you have around. What will happen to those Senior Ones?

They said they have the assessment. As colleagues have put it, the assessment of my secondary of Naminage Secondary school will be very different from that of Kings College Budo. Uganda National Examinations Board will continue setting examinations in their own way. 

We do not know what the ministry is fighting to cure. We have aired this out now and again. Every time, the minister said there will be a certificate for the other side and the skills in this – (member timed out.)

The Speaker: I have not heard about vernacular. Are they going to continue teaching it? 

4.48
Ms connie NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. However, much as she has said that they widely consulted, I would like to clearly say that the consultation was not wide. As members of Parliament, we also needed to make an input. The committee was not consulted but they came to present before it, which is different from our consultation. We need wide consultations before we always begin on something.

There are thousands of teachers in this country who have been teaching Senior One and very many subjects. Where are they going after they have retooled those few?

Madam Speaker, I would also like to find out where the inspectors, who are going to ensure that these syllabi are taken care of in the right way?

I would also like to find out from the minister – we had the early childhood education programme that we first needed Government to take care of. In that programme, all children in this country were supposed to study from a nursery school that was begun by Government. 

However, all the nursery schools are in the hands of the private sector. If we have not begun early childhood education and are jumping up, we are missing a point. We need to begin from down there and then get up. If this has not worked, let us examine this one. 

Madam Speaker, we had comprehensive schools. One of them is Mbale Secondary School, where I studied. We had all the practical subjects; Technical Drawing, Metal Work, Wood Work, Home Economics and Knitting. It was for whoever was in the school because they had to study one of those subjects. It was compulsory. 

At the end of it all, these subjects were –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER:  Please, conclude. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you. Madam Speaker, my opinion is that as we plan to roll out this one and maybe, pilot it first, can we get to the basics of having the comprehensive schools? All these schools should have at least a student do a practical subject. This is in order for it to be included on the certificate. Instead of getting two certificates, it becomes one but with another skill on it. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.52
MR BONNY OKELLO (NRM, Kole County North, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, we need to be very honest with ourselves, as Ugandans. The minister presented a report about the new curriculum. Unfortunately, she did not present about the manpower; the infrastructure for delivering this new curriculum. 

Most of the schools do not have Physical Education (PE) teachers. As we talk right now, we are remaining with two weeks to the beginning of the term and most of the schools are now relying on Biology and Chemistry teachers, who are graduates and trained from Makerere University, for senior ones. Those are the only teachers who can teach PE. What about the village schools? 

The trainings are on-going in the various centres. For Lango sub-region, the training is on-going in Lango College. Five hundred teachers were invited from SESEMAT schools. Forty five secondary schools were not invited. They expected 500 teachers but 800 turned up. As a result, the excess teachers have been denied food. They have been asked to feed, accommodate and also transport themselves back. The reason is that they have not been budgeted for.

Madam Minister, did you just wake up one morning and think of this training? You had the whole of third term holidays up to today to organise this training in the various centres. You have picked four teachers per school. What will happen in the rural schools - because some are community schools? You know very well that your Government schools cannot absorb all our students. Most of your Government schools have cut off points, which stop at seven, eight, nine and 10. What about those who go to rural community schools? What about your seed schools, some of them do not even have laboratories? 

In your new curriculum, you are saying it is going to be student-centred learning. Where are the computer centres? Where will they do their research? You have removed some subjects that are very important for this country, like Agriculture. Agriculture is optional. You are making Religious Education and History, which should have been removed, compulsory. You are making ICT and Fine Art optional and you have removed Technical Drawing and Metal Work. 

I am one of the beneficiaries of those metal work subjects. When I joined Senior One, Metal Work and Wood Work were compulsory; you either pick Wood Work or Metal Work. I did metal work and I was repairing padlocks in school. That is how I –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, is it possible to get those 21 subjects you have approved because we do not know what you are talking about? Can we know them? 

4.55
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The country has been yearning for a review in the curriculum. The emphasis in this House has been how our children can apply their knowledge effectively other than waiting for white collar jobs. In my view, the review has not comprehensively addressed the questions we raised in this House. 

Therefore, I request that the honourable minister clarifies on the major issues of human resource because without those issues, knowledge will never be impacted the way we expect it to be done. The teachers must first be trained. Training of teachers cannot be done in one year. The three days are questionable because teachers must be trained and assessed before they are deployed. You can deploy a teacher for training but is it a must that he or she will acquire the knowledge and be able to apply it or transfer it to learners? 

Madam Speaker, I request that the minister clarifies on this. I support the proposal to have Kiswahili across the board but our dropout rate begins from primary. Look at our districts’ performances. If somebody can also learn this at the lower level, then, it can help us. Hence, the minister should tell us the reasons they left out the lower levels of learning, especially the primary level. I must be a useful Ugandan and be able to earn a living when I drop out at primary seven. 

I feel we should look at the lower level but also in relation to this, how many teachers are we going to get from the market to teach Kiswahili, when we have not prepared for them? Are we going to provide market for other countries to come and –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minister’s statement. I have always wondered; how come these developed countries have a different curriculum from developing countries? I am one of those that you gave chance to attend the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisations Conference (UNESCO) in France but I raised this kind of question. UNESCO has a composition of almost 80 per cent of the countries in the world. I asked, how come the western world has a different curriculum from us, yet, we are all UNESCO members? 

Madam Speaker, this is the answer they gave me. They said that they come, train us - we went with technical people from the Ministry of Education and Sports. They said it is up to the member states to decide what they want to take.

I strongly believe that because of our thinking as developing countries and the colonial time thinking, we are depending on the western world. We do not want to change what they gave us. That is why we are creating more job seekers than job makers.

I was saying that because of what the colonial masters gave us, which we do not want to change. That is why our education system is producing more job seekers than job makers.

Madam Speaker, I know change is very hard and because of the fear of the unknown, people may say what they say because of the fear of the unknown. My only fears here would be that these teachers that Government itself taught in these training institutions, where are they going to put them?

My other question would be; would there be sustainability? I am a teacher by profession. When Members say that teachers were brought to study for three days, I strongly believe that these are teachers who are already trained; they just come for refresher courses.

For profession teachers who are here, I want one to stand up and testify whether in the teaching- (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, in the training institutions, they did not teach us topics that we teach the students. They taught us methodology. How are we going to teach the students?

Therefore, I would think that the time they give is enough because these teachers are just given methodology. I would be happy –(Interjections)- because I am also a mother and I teach children.

I look at a situation that our children have been offloaded from the big load that they have been having and they will spare that time to internalise, think of what else they can do than this theoretical teaching.

Madam Speaker, the 20 per cent assessment is something that I would think that even the child of Buvuma would benefit from. Because as children go to the university –(Member timed out.)

4.03
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for her statement. However, I am reluctant to support her.

As many have said, today, I was from one of the biggest schools but I was surprised that even the Headteacher, Deputy and teachers are wondering whether we are serious. We normally come up with good policies. However, when it comes to implementation, it is as if we are rushing and on a crash programme.

Madam Speaker, that is even how the ministry came up with Skilling Uganda. However, when you go on the ground, some programmes are half way done.

I am also a teacher by profession and I went through Makerere School of Education, then Uganda Christian University. What is most important is human resource. Teachers have been trained for three days and that cannot be good enough for them to come and be able to teach.

When you look at the Ministry of Education and Sports to be fair, they are already facing a challenge of inspectors. Many schools are not well inspected. I would like to give an example. The bad private schools are the harbours of the good secondary schools. They register 600 students from senior one to senior four. They start dropping them when it comes to UNEB. And they are registered in the poor schools.

That is why you see a big school with a population of 100 candidates but when they had 800 at the beginning. Where has the 700 gone? This ministry does not even know because they are targeting the percentage.

You find a school having 21 candidates, yet, they had 200. The 180 has been absorbed by the poor schools that are happy to get money. However, the ministry is not even bothered to know that.

If the Ministry cannot manage to inspect schools to that level, then –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give and get from you hon. Ssenyonga is that I am your client because I have brought students to your school. This programme is being rolled out and I appreciate the ministry for it. Are you ready for this programme at your school? Or you are now trying to tell us that you are not ready for the programme.

MR MUYANJA: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need your guidance on a procedural matter. Of course, we are variously involved in different businesses. When a question of such a nature is asked of a member of Parliament, for example, the current question that hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga is an owner of a school, his client asks and the client wants to know if the school is prepared. Under such circumstances, would the hon. Muyanja answer the question as the director of the school or answer as a member of Parliament? Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a conflict of interest; do not answer that question.

MR MUYANJA: I would like conclude, Madam Speaker, by just saying that when you look at the so-called many private schools in general, you can only see a few, which are registered. For example, when you go to my area, you will find that the privately registered schools are 14 but in general, there are 27, which are operating and they have our children. 

Therefore, those are going to be left out by the ministry. However, children are not private. The reasons are very clear, Madam Speaker. Many of our children end up going to those schools because that is where the parents can afford the fees and those are the only schools there. However, now the ministry is considering only registered schools and they allow children to be there. What arrangements have been done for those who are not in the registered schools? Thank you.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for this opportunity.

Honourable colleagues, if you really want to ask yourself a fundamental question, what are the underlying reasons for wanting to change the curriculum and make it competence based?

If you really want to answer that question, you realise that the underlying reason is the mismatch we have experienced between what is taught in schools and training institutions and what is demanded in the job market. The result has been many educated Ugandans with no jobs and yet, there are many jobs to be done but with no skills acquired by Ugandans.

Therefore, we need to re-organise and think very deeply. The reason for this fundamentally lies with what is taught, which has very little relevance with what is demanded in the market. We must change the curriculum and make it competence based. 

We have a challenge – the greatest challenge the country is facing now is youth unemployment. There is no question. Everywhere you go, you find young people asking for job placement and yet, there is so much to be done in this country. 

If we are going to transform our economy from being peasant and poor, surely you need trained, skilled people to do this. The first step is not to wait. (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for allowing this clarification. The honourable minister received very good education during his days and he was one of the ministers in the UPC Government. That time, the quality of the people who were coming out of the university – definitely, the unemployment rates were down. 

The point of clarification I want from the minister would be to tell us, what was it that they were doing those days in UPC that is now not being done and has led to all this unemployment? Thank you. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, where we have been is known and where we are is known. It is where we are going that is most interesting. It is precisely because of that that this competence based curriculum is being proposed because the challenges that we will have in the future are fundamentally different from what we have experienced in the past. We need to change the curriculum.

Secondly, we need thinkers. I have looked at these books. When you casually look at them, you will realise that the fundamental purpose of this reform competence syllabus, which is being proposed is to make students think instead of cramming what is taught. It is a fundamental shift from cramming and passing exams as a way of teaching, without any application. This time, we want the students to be thinkers. Therefore, we do not need to wait. Let us start today, not tomorrow and we fine-tune what needs to be fine-tuned but to wait is to completely compound the problem. 

Lastly, I know the human mind fears change. Change is unknown but we need to recognise that change is the only constant in our lives. We need to start today to address the changes that are being produced. Thank you. 

5.13
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a contribution but I will first raise a procedural point. 

When you look at the subject at hand, it is a very serious matter, which affects the future of our children. I do not see the full minister and the minister in charge of the sector in this House.

My honourable colleague, the Minister for Primary Education, I would like to say that maybe they misdiagnosed the problem. We are talking about curriculum but whenever she has been contributing, she has been talking about methodology to mean curriculum and curriculum to mean methodology. I was at pains to accommodate and interchange them as she was speaking.

I had come to a point where I was losing patience because when she was justifying the change – when we talk about competences, it is not about skilling but the minister talked about creating employment while talking about competency. There is no relation that actually the reason those who have gone through our education system and have not got jobs is because they are not competent or because they lack the skill to get the job. 

My colleague, the honourable minister at one point alluded to the fact that in their understanding as a ministry, the curriculum, which was developed in 1960 was intended to produce white collar jobs. This is a lie. The system as of then had technical colleges at every level. From primary, there were technical colleges, after Senior Four, there were technical colleges and after Senior Six, there were technical colleges. 

What this Government has done was to assimilate some of those colleges and turn them into universities. I brought a motion in this House and it was adopted that we stop assimilating Government technical colleges into universities.

We do not want to look as if we are not courteous to our honourable colleague but I think honourable Muyingo is more competent to handle a matter of this nature since that is his docket and we are talking about higher education. 

For him not to be in this House when even the substantive is not in this House, I am wondering whether we are proceeding correctly, given the background I have given. 

5.16
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA(FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter we are discussing is very critical and very important to our nation. We have all gone to school and studied. We have reviewed curricula very many times but it is not good to rush. When you rush, things will turn against you. When you do things with proper planning, you will minimise challenges. 

Take for example today, schools opened but some schools did not open because the teachers are on training and the students in those schools have also not gone to school because the schools are being used for training the teacher trainers who will train others. 

We all know that time wasted will never be gained. Today is the first day of the term in 2020 and we are going to waste the whole week without the students going to school. 

The books are being laid here. I do not think they have even reached the schools. Yet, teachers are supposed to go to work with schemes of work and lesson plans. Those schools, which opened today, are they going to start implementing this curriculum today? 

May I remind the ministry and my sister the minister and teacher that prior proper planning prevents poor performance. This is what is killing our country and our children. 

We all studied handiwork in primary school. In secondary school, we were studying all these.

Lastly, we have reduced on the time. The schools will start from 8.30 a.m. to 2.50 p.m. when the students go for games and other practicals. Where will they get teachers with our shortage of teachers who are also complaining about poor remuneration? Are they putting into consideration how they are going to facilitate teachers in doing the assessment? We want to assess the values, the academic and the practical things. Let us introduce handiwork –(Member timed out.)

5.20
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was looking at the prototype books, one of the subjects, which has been suggested to be compulsory at Ordinary Level is Physical Education. As a sportsman, I know there is a relationship between Physical Education and the games or sports for which I have passion as well as interest and even task as the Shadow Minister for Sports and in the coming Government, I will be the minister responsible for sports. Of course, we must not lose the bigger picture. 

There is no need for Physical Education to be compulsory at Ordinary Level when we lack very many things to be done for us to implement the proper Physical Education programme. In this book for Physical Education, many programmes are based on the playgrounds. We need basketball courts to teach how basketball is played. We need volleyball courts to teach how volleyball is played and we need football pitches. We need these facilities in each school because these are the units in this subject. Therefore, I do not see how Uganda is going to implement this curriculum because, as of now, we lack those pitches and playing surfaces.

Secondly, it makes no business sense. Last week, we were looking at the National Development Plan III, where the minister emphasised that by 2023 Uganda is going to have more job creators and innovators. However, when you look at the national budget, sports is given Shs 10 billion only. People in sports will be fighting for only Shs 10 billion each year, yet, we have many subjects such as ICT and Agriculture, which have been left out. Information and Communication Technology has been endorsed by each and every country. It is high time Uganda also endorsed it.

Agriculture can be more easily implemented as a subject than Physical Education because Physical Education needs more resources than Agriculture. Agriculture is everywhere as stated by the minister. Therefore, I beg that the minister withdraws the curriculum and we carry out more research about how to make changes and implement it. Thank you.

5.23
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just got information that about 700 teachers that had been sent for retooling programme have stormed out of the centres because of the delayed payment of their money and the minister should take note of this.

Physical Education has been mentioned as a subject that has been made compulsory. I am a professional teacher. The best teaching aid for Physical Education is a playing field. Let us take the example of Kampala and the Metropolitan Area, where the ministry is licensing schools in former shops, with hardly parking space for the teachers’ cars. How are they going to be exercising? Are we going to be having Physical Education taught theoretically? We even need more facilities, including physicians. 

I have just been reading through the books and they are subjecting learners to things such as acrobatics. You need a physician to ascertain whether somebody can undergo such an exercise. You are going to kill these learners for nothing. If it is to be practical and serious, for every school to subject a learner to physicals, there must be a physician to ascertain that individual learners are fit. Where is that, Madam Minister?

Another subject that has been made compulsory is Kiswahili. A curriculum must address the economic and cultural trends of any given society. If it does not do that, it is awkward. Do we have economic values in Kiswahili when we are exporting to the Arab world more than to Kenya? Do we have any economic value attached to Kiswahili when we are exporting more to China than Tanzania? Moreover, these countries already speak English as their second language. We shall meet them in English. By the way, they are as poor as we are.

Madam Speaker, it is not in dispute that we need to change the curriculum. However, the implementation and the content must be addressed seriously if –(Member timed out.)

5.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Madam Speaker, allow me start by thanking the minister for at least remembering to come to Parliament, although very late. The minister should have come to Parliament and presented this proposal before implementing it. 

I would like to start by addressing the issue of the formative assessment. As the minister was presenting, she said they will reduce the time from 8.30 up to 2.50 p.m. and thereafter, there will be experimental teachers’ supervision of the learners whereby the teachers will be able to observe the students. There are schools with over 1,000 students and we have very few teachers and some of these teachers will even be laid off. I do not know how these teachers will be able to observe these students. I do not know how many students a teacher will be in charge of. This issue of supervising and observing students will not work, yet, it will contribute 20 per cent of their total marks.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister. If you are saying that 20 per cent of the marks of the students will come from after-the-normal-class activity - that is after 2.50 p.m. –yet the teachers are not enough, who will be there to observe these students? First of all, you are training only four teachers and not from all schools.

With observation as a research method of work, you have to be one-one-one. You cannot be observing, for example, 20 students at ago. If I am to observe you, Madam Speaker, I must be focused on you, look at you to determine whether you have changed or not and I must do it for a considerable amount of time.
 
In this case, they are training only four teachers and yet, marks are supposed to be given out of that. It is the 20 per cent, which will be compiled and submitted to UNEB at the end of the year. 

There are problems in this world. For example, if a teacher who was observing students falls, sick then what will happen to the student? If a teacher dies, what will happen to that assessment? Member timed out.)

5.30
MR STEPHEN BIRAHWA (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, as the country continues to live in denial and postpone the national dialogue on the values we want to impart in the education system and curriculum, we are going to continue having jobless graduates. You are going to continue having challenges of having an Early Childhood Development (ECD) policy without any budget.

Right now, teachers are asking for transport from us to register in the ministry. I am an Old Boy and parent of Ndejje Secondary School. I was called on Sunday to pick children. We are living in denial and failing to take it head on that the education system we have has been disorienting our children. 

Honourable minister, it is coming to 24 years since we introduced UPE. We are now jumping on Senior One. Are you aware that over 85 per cent of citizens in the education system since UPE have dropped out? Can you first give us the action point on that? 

Hon. Seninde, I know that from your time as Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports and the Forum for Quality Education, you know what is at heart. Your submission was only sort of an apology from Government; a sense of remorse that citizens have been imparted with poison. 

We are now waking up. We want to do a surgery. Can it start from ECD in primary - because you have had a policy of ECD for ten years? Kenya reduced the years. Do not say three years of ECD, seven years of primary, four years of secondary and then two of senior six. You can do eleven years for all and then, you vocationalise the education system.

I was born to a headteacher who had gone for in-service training in 1965. Do you have in-service training? Zero. It is really a challenge for us who are grandchildren of educationists and educationists ourselves. We sometimes feel we are not being sincere to citizens when we say we are giving them education.

Therefore, let us face the reality and agree that what we are doing is not what our children deserve and we have made them victims. Can we get the action points immediately? Of course, I am for continuous assessment and vocationalisation but with the way you are doing it, the formula is wrong. The intention is not put properly –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR BIRAHWA: Madam Speaker, I last looked at the Government White Paper on Implementation of the Recommendations of the Report of the Education Policy Review Commission entitled "Education for national integration and development" when I was a student at Makerere University. I also looked at the manpower survey of this country in 1989. Can our education system be informed by a manpower survey? Who closed the polytechnics and rushed for universities? The problems are all ours.

It is our generational responsibility to own up the act and accept that we have a challenge. It is not simply about Senior Ones and secondary education. Agriculture should be compulsory at ECD, primary and secondary school because most of the drop outs are ending up in Agriculture. You are now complaining about the jobless fraternity and calling them the ghetto boys. You are now looking for them when they are self-made and we are having a problem.

I would like to pray that we seriously look at this matter beyond Senior One and we fix it for our children. The population dividend can only be got if this magic bullet of education public investment can make our children all-round, relevant and appropriate to industrialise this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.34
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that, honourable minister, the intentions are good but the problem is simply the process of implementation. 

I think we needed to have thought out this long time ago; the thirteen years we talked about. We needed to have come up with what we want our children to be many years ago. From it, we should have thought about what kind of preparedness we need to put in place, in order to achieve what we are thinking about our children. Unfortunately, we have not done that.

The preparedness we are talking about should have been in terms of the staffing and infrastructure we need and also attaining some kind of equilibrium, looking at rural schools and also the urban schools. At some point, we would have thought; at what stage do we want to introduce this?

Colleagues, I know some Members have thought about introducing this at either ECD or primary stage. For me, the introduction should have started with the kind of teachers we use, because we are talking about a teacher who is going to model a child differently. We needed to have looked at that teacher. However, the way our teachers are trained now; they are trained still in the traditional way, where they are going to be teaching the children, not the way that they are going to be helping the children to develop their competencies and things like that.

It would be difficult for a current teacher to be able to support a child to develop those competences because this teacher’s training is based on the traditional way of teaching the children and the teacher knows he or she is coming out to go and teach. That is why you can hear clearly from my colleagues here that the three or four days you have given the teachers will not orientate their thinking in such a way that they can now guide the children the way they should be.

Therefore, I think this whole thing needs to be withdrawn so that we have a completely new perspective about it and we give ourselves a number of years to be able to attain what we are looking at. Thank you very much.

5.37
MR CHARLES ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What is before us is very important. However, I was told by my mother that there are three ways of eating cassava. Either you eat it raw, roast it or cook it. This is exactly what we are trying to do. We are trying to eat raw cassava, which is not well cooked. (Laughter) I am kindly requesting the honourable minister that in her response, the best thing to do is to withdraw this motion.

However, I would like to remind her also that when God created the world, it took seven days but I think planning took some time, although we have not been told. In this case, the planning has not been very good because she knows very well the word “uniform”. If you go to Agweng Primary School in my constituency, it has 1600 pupils with only 11 teachers. 

What we need first, as we are talking about education, is to teach those who are going to teach the teachers and then the teachers who are going to teach the pupils or students. When you take this one seriously, you find that there is a variance in one class, for example in Senior One. There may be over 500 students and only – I do not know whether the four teachers who were trained are for 100 or more students. 

This has not been revealed to us. Probably, you should go back on the drawing board and come back later. Maybe, we should have started from primary schools so that when a pupil reaches Primary Seven, he can decide to go to a technical institute or otherwise and then join university later. 

These, however, are two avenues that are good. When you start from Senior One, the challenges we face are teachers, classrooms and the text books we are talking about. There are some books, which you have presented here, whose content I do not know. There are those authors who are also writing similar books for English or other subjects, which are much better. Are you going to request them not to sell them to schools? 

I understand these days that even Government school head teachers are going to buy some of these books from the bookshops. What are we going to do about this? (Member timed out.)

5.41
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The House, following the debates from both sides, are for the reform. In fact, I have a problem with the issue the minister stated in the statement while reading the curriculum review. As a result, hon. Mawanda wondered whether we are doing a review or reform. These two words are different. 

The minister stated that the last time the educational curriculum was designed was in the 1960s. Do you want to do away with something designed in 1960s in a twinkle of an eye? To do that, you either have to be very intelligent or you must have done a lot of research.

Others have talked about the unemployment in Uganda while relating it to the skilling and retooling.  Why then do you remove Agriculture, which forms 80 per cent of our economy? This is where we are going wrong. We are making Agriculture appear like a last resort.

I would like to challenge the Government and therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports where I know out of the four ministers, three are trained teachers with Bachelors Degree of Education onwards. It is only hon. Obua who is not a trained teacher. I would like to challenge them to give us the information on - we might be unfair - what formed the basis for this curriculum of 1960s? What are the real concerns that have been found out? In the job market, what do the employers want? 

We might be unfair but we believe the NCDC in –(Member timed out.) 

Madam Speaker, can the minister share with us if – we are all parents here. It is not that we are afraid of change but we are afraid of sudden change. We must be prepared for change. Why were you bypassing Parliament and yet, you know there is democracy in Uganda. 

These are the representatives of the people. Ignore the concerns being raised here at your own peril. 

5.44
MS LILY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really would like to register my disappointment with what the Ministry of Education and Sports is doing. They seem to be running around like headless chicken. 

We have a lot of policies that are being introduced at the same time in the ministry. It has already sent chills to many of the teachers. 

Recently, they said that all teachers must register. I am a trained teacher. I have not registered and I do not know whether they have struck me off the teachers’ register. 

There is another policy where they are saying teachers have to register every year. That means a teacher in Karamoja or Kisoro has to travel to Kampala every year to register. That already is a problem to the sector. Currently, over 15,000 teachers will get off the payroll and they are already panicking. There is a policy that all teachers must be graduates and teachers are panicking while looking for ways to upgrade from diploma or Grade Three to bachelors degree in ten years. 

Government is not admitting students to Primary Teachers Colleges anymore and this has caused panic as well. They did not think about bringing a new curriculum when the term has just started in the last minute. They must have planned these things for many years. 

These are teachers who know what has to be done. You take people through a gradual process. I do not know if the four teachers trained in a school where there are 100 teachers will again go and put their fellow teachers down and teach them. The whole term would end with that.

We should not be looked at as if we are against any change that is being brought. The change should be done in good faith and systematically. That is what education is supposed to be for but not this –

Above all, we are all farmers. I do not understand why you would take away Agriculture and then make Physical Education compulsory. We already know that there are many urban people, even those who did not do Agriculture in school who are now trying to – even me, I am doing farming and I look for my Ordinary Level Agriculture notes to guide me in farming. (Member timed out.)

5.47
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to extend my innermost appreciation for the time you have accorded this matter. This is a very important matter that even if we do not deal with any other item, we should deal with it alone for the good of our country. 

I believe that all of us are in agreement that there is need for curriculum review but the methodology is where we differ. Curriculum review has been long overdue. However, because we want to review the curriculum, are we going to do it the way the Ministry of Education and Sports wants to?

We are planning for future generations. Therefore, we must really think hard about what we are planning for them. It does not ring a bell that the new curriculum they are talking about must be implemented this term when the term began yesterday. The training that is going on cannot justify that we are going to have a formidable team that is going to handle the new curriculum.

Madam Speaker, I believe that it might be true that the technocrats in the ministry have been having workshops in hotels and many places and they are convinced of what they did. However, we are representing the people and we know what is on ground.

You remember when Government introduced sciences to be compulsory everywhere, yet Government knows that there are schools that have never seen laboratories. And when they are setting exams, they are national exams regardless of whether you have a laboratory or not. And when they are grading, the first schools come up and the schools of our voters do not turn up; simply because they are lacking facilities. It is exactly what the ministry is trying to do.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the readiness checklist for the new curriculum, it is zero. There is no way as a trained teacher, who must scheme and have a lesson plan come out to say now this is the new curriculum and this is the lesson plan. It does not-

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, there are so many matters at times that come on this Floor of the House and divide us. However, on this issue, we are united as Ugandans regardless of our political divides, we are united. What we need is the best; we want the best for our future generations.

I request, Madam Speaker, that you prevail over the Ministry of Education and Sports and halt this exercise as we bring a motion that we stay the introduction of the new curriculum until everybody is on board and know where we are going. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues on this very important item. As we debate this matter, we must be very careful in digesting the delivery because we have individuals here who are school owners.

Madam Speaker, why I support-(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: The rate at which we are losing the ministers is worrying. Either they are conceding that the policy review is bad or they are abandoning their friend. We have just seen two female ministers abandoning their colleague here and they were sitting closer to her and giving her company and support.

Are the two ministers in order to leave unceremoniously?

THE SPEAKER: The ministers should come back and support their colleague.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important subject which I would like to implore all the members to debate with soberness. First and foremost, yes we do agree that as a country we need curriculum review and that must be done comprehensively.

Hon. Mukitale proposed here that as a country, we must revisit the framework under which we are training the manpower in this country. If I am to ask the minister or ministers here, what is the manpower plan for this country?

Therefore, if we do not have a manpower plan for the country, what informs the ministry in coming up with a particular curriculum? The curriculum must in all be traced in the manpower plan that will deliver the human resource that will develop this country. Therefore, before we endorse this proposal that the minister and her ministry are about to roll out, they must lay before this House the framework, manpower plan for this country.

Secondly, when you look at the statement, the minister is talking of Shs 143 billion that is required to implement this new curriculum over the next five years. However, in this financial Year, they have only provided Shs 10.3 billion. They are starting on a wrong note because at the beginning is where we expect a lot of resources, we expect many people to be brought on board and you are talking of four teachers per school. How do you expect these people to lay the foundation for this new curriculum?

Hon. Mawanda you are the one who raised this matter and you have made extensive submission and you are also having conflict of interest in this matter –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Atiku in order to say that much as I have raised this matter, I have a conflict of interest in it? When I do not have an interest in this matter, I am also looking at having a better future for my children. Is he in order to insinuate that I have a conflict of interest?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Atiku, can you substantiate?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am reliably informed that when hon. Mawanda raised this matter, he raised it in perspective of St Michael which belongs to him. And much as we appreciate that we are debating in national interest, he has a peculiar interest that is -(Laughter) 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, allow me to finish by requesting the minister to go back because when we look at the time- first of all -(Member timed out)

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been hesitating to speak on this point of procedure. However, what we speak is the message that we sent to the nation.

I have tried to search and looked at the curriculum that we are talking about. Some members here are saying that Agriculture as a subject has been completely removed.

The procedural issue that I want to raise is that Agriculture as a subject has been optional and it has been taken –(Interjection)- I am speaking as it has been. And it has been taken by senior one and two and whoever wanted to do it at senior three could take it.

The procedural matter that I want to raise is would it be procedurally right like you have guided for the honourable minister to first of all give us the subjects so that we debate from an informed point of view?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have instructed the minister to-

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, first of all, allow me to use this very moment to thank the Members of Parliament. I know they have not finished but the reason why I thank them is the passion they have expressed and concerns rose.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request this august House to allow the Ministry of Education and Sports on Tuesday or Wednesday to bring responses in detail to the concerns the members have raised. It is a humble request.

As I conclude on this, we are ready to take all the concerns that members are raising because they are pertinent. They are doing it for the good of all of us. Therefore, I would like to request that you permit us to come and give responses to all the concerns that members have raised.

The Speaker: We shall rule at the end. Let the members still bring up their issues.

5.59 
Mr denis oguzu (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. A philosopher one time indicated that you do not need nuclear weapons to destroy a country. You only need to kill its education system. That is what our respected honourable colleague has been using to lead today.
If –(Interruption)

Ms seninde: Madam Speaker, after observing and listening to colleagues very attentively and appreciating their concerns, is it in order for my honourable colleague, the one I respect, to raise the kind of statement he is raising that the minister is killing education with that kind of bomb as he alleges?

Is he in order when he is also aware that I am a teacher by profession, a teacher educator and a person very passionate and concerned about the education on this country?

The Speaker: Can you substantiate?

Mr oguzu: Madam Speaker, we have been reliably informed that there is a line minister who should have been here to address these issues in relation to secondary education. 

Now, we have someone in charge of primary education who is leading and trying to address issue that relate to secondary education. In that direction, we are right to conclude that there is a problem based on the submissions from –(Interruption)

Ms seninde: Madam Speaker, I sincerely would have hesitated to raise this point of order but I am doing so because I wonder why my colleague doubts my ability to represent the Ministry of Education and Sports.

In addition, we work as a team. It is collective responsibility. Is my colleague in order to think that the Minister in charge of Primary Education is not concerned about the issues of the Ministry of Education and Sports as a whole?

The Speaker: Honourable members, the Minister in charge of Primary Education is very competent and knowledgeable about education so you are out of order.

Mr oguzu: Madam Speaker, the issues we are discussing are very substantial and affect the future of this country. We have been complaining of a mismatch. This curriculum reform offers a unique opportunity for Ugandans to address the issues of the mismatch.

However, here we are. The minister has presented a proposal, which is already executed and yet there is no clear implementation plan. There is no record of any preparedness study in the various schools this proposal will be implemented in.

Thirdly, they have proposed that they will be using Information, Communication Technology (ICT) as a tool of instruction as well as a subject.

If we go to the various schools, we are told they do not have this infrastructure. I sit on the Committee on Information, Communication and Technology. Uganda Communications Corporation (UCC) gave out computers to schools but the Ministry of Education and Sports cannot maintain them. There is no content on the computers. What sort of subject are they going to teach when there is no content on the computers?

Finally, I would like to say that the ministry needs to do more consultation on this matter. In 2016, there was a plan by the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC) to pilot this in 20 schools. The President directed that the process would be halted because there were not wide public consultations.
  
Since this issue touches majority of Ugandans, I would think we should have the kind of consultations we had during the Age Limit (Amendment) Bill such that every Ugandan gets to understand what we are talking about. 

Only then can we be able to say, “We are ready to move.” Otherwise, we will be implementing a policy based on a wild imagination and it will be very speculative.  Thank you.
 
6.09
Mr john baptist nambeshe (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clearly evident that the need to change the curriculum in Uganda cannot be overemphasised. It is about acquisition of skills. 

In the statement of the minister, it seems that they have not done any benchmarking. They would have borrowed a leaf from the neighbourhood in Kenya.

Kenya is implementing a similar curriculum change. They have started with lower elementary, the Early Childhood Development (ECD). It is Grade I, II and III and it is progressing very well. However, here is the minister with the entire ministry climbing the tree from the top, which is next to impossibility.

If you looked at the compulsory subjects, among which is Political Education - why members are very gravely concerned is that the curriculum change leaves out Agriculture. It is there but as an optional subject. Moreover, the backbone of this country is Agriculture. 

The concern that one would be advancing is that now that more focus is on Political Education, is it about teaching party ideology to Ugandans so that we are more ideologically oriented to a given party ideology? Those are some of the questions that flood one’s mind.

This curriculum is headed for serious trouble. Even among the books that were laid here, there is one for Christian Religious Education (CRE). Unlike the previous curriculum, this book completely excludes other religions. It is so selective that even Islamic Religious Education is no longer there. That is a recipe for disaster.

If it were to focus on assessment tools, the retooling that the statement talks about should have started with trainer of trainers. It should have been accorded sufficient duration of time, rather than just a few days to train and expect to get –(Interruption)

MR ETUKA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have listened to the discussion keenly from the beginning up to now. We are discussing a very serious issue but from what I see, we are really misleading the country by giving wrong information. 

My colleague said that rich Islamic/religious education is left out of the curriculum. When the minister made her presentation, she gave us a list of all the subjects. The implication I am getting is that we have not read the report properly and we have not, in fact, internalised what we are discussing because the subjects that we are saying are left out are there. Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to mislead this country by giving wrong information? 

THE SPEAKER: I want to see the full list. We shall need the full list. 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, he should be taken through the training manuals. You will realise that in these training manuals, even the one that has already been submitted or laid here is CRE, but the one of other religions, which were provided for in the earlier curriculum, including Islamic religion, are missing.

I am speaking from an informed position. His cell phone could be misleading him. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

6.11
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. Unfortunately, the report is “sick.” It has left a lot to be desired. 

I wonder why she is insisting that we must implement this type of programme. In my opinion, as we talk now, teachers are teaching using the old curriculum in Teso. I was there the other day and I had a meeting with teachers and they were wondering what the new curriculum means. They were not even aware that there is a new curriculum in Uganda. 

This is where the problem is. For example, we have one school called Kobwin Seed Secondary School. It has 15 teachers and only one science teacher. We have written letters to the ministry and it has become very adamant. When you come to this type of curriculum, I wonder what type of assessment or learning is going to be in such a school. 

Madam Speaker, we are talking about making Kiswahili a compulsory language in Uganda. The biggest problem in this country is unemployment. I do not know how Kiswahili is going to help us fight against unemployment in this country. I am sure if agriculture is made compulsory, then, we are going to work hard and this country will have enough food. We shall have enough money and the country will develop, unlike having Swahili – where you say things like, “habari, mzuri.” 

Madam Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a fact that Kiswahili is our second national language. There are commendable efforts to promote the use of Kiswahili because of our regional integration. For all other intents and purposes, it is part of the State or the national direction. 

I would like to know if it is procedurally right for the colleague to make it appear as if Kiswahili being compulsory is mutually exclusive with agriculture being compulsory. 

Madam Speaker, agriculture can be compulsory as well as Kiswahili. There is nowhere it is either or but the honourable colleague makes it appear as if either Kiswahili is compulsory or agriculture. Therefore, the value addition of either or - even when Kiswahili is our second national language - Would he be procedurally right, Madam Speaker? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Substantiate. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I am aware that Kiswahili will only help us in communication and doing some business. However, in terms of creating employment in Uganda, I do not see the relationship. That is why, in my opinion, agriculture will generate more income and a lot of employment for our youth. That was the basis on which I presented that position here. 

Madam Speaker, the other point I would like to raise is that this curriculum is only good in the area of politics. Why am I saying this? We are talking about political education implying that Uganda is a politically active country. I am worried that we are going to generate a lot of activism in this country that is going to cause a lot of challenges, unless we address some of these things. ICT should be central in transforming this country and not political education. I thank you very much. 

6.15
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter we are discussing touches the future of this country, which is with its education system. Therefore, we must take a lot of caution when we are talking about either review or reform.
I, for one, am an ardent supporter of the reform of our curriculum because of the challenges we have with the current curriculum. There is no question about that. 

However, the issue is, how do we do it? Why is the ministry coming into a rush to do something that concerns all Ugandans, without proper planning, consultation and thinking through? 

From the debate, Madam Speaker, you can see that even Members of Parliament were not consulted. The ministry comes here to tell us what they are doing about a curriculum reform, when they have already started implementation. 

In my view, Madam Speaker, all Ugandans must be consulted, sensitised, educated and involved in this curriculum review or reform. Therefore, we cannot begin implementing it this year. 
I think the problem we are trying to cure by reforming our curriculum does not stop at secondary education level. The problem starts at early childhood education. Therefore, when we are reforming or reviewing our curriculum, we should begin from that point, not jumping to begin from secondary education. 
The ministry ought to sit down, through consultations and proper planning, and look at what resources we need to implement this reform; the personnel resources, infrastructure and all others, before we begin the implementation. 

My colleagues have talked about the teachers, we need to take a minimum of two years to prepare the teachers who are going to deliver this new curriculum or else we are going to have half-baked teachers delivering things they have not been prepared to deliver and then the result will not be good for us.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I think and I believe that since it is the first time we are doing it, reforming from what the colonialists left with us, it is not advisable to wholesomely take it as if it is going to work when we have not tested it.

My proposal is that after we have done the consultation and preparation, we pilot it. We can pick out those areas that are hard to reach, those areas that are doing very badly in education like Karamoja, Bundibugyo, the islands, Buliisa and see how it works -(Interjection)- Yes, we know areas that are doing very badly. I am from Bundibugyo I know how Bundibugyo is doing. Pilot it and see how it works before we roll it out to the entire country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the honourable minister for this statement but also that she has accepted that the statement is wanting.

I am a professional teacher from Kyambogo University. When I look at what this curriculum would be, it is like starting a mud house and then putting bricks or cement in the middle. The lower primary has not been touched. I one time raised an issue of the thematic system.

In Bugisu, we have two dialects - the north and south. In addition, the north is implementing the southern dialect in the thematic system which is already causing trouble for us as the stakeholders of education in Bugisu.

The minister was supposed to bring a statement here on the evaluation of thematic but I have sat here and never heard it.

When you look at the UPE programme, it meant good but because of no consultation or less consultation, it is struggling. That is why parents up to date still think that the Government is supposed to feed their children. They were not consulted. They do not know what they expect from Government.

Madam Speaker, when I look at the time for the classes, I come from the mountains, our students have been reporting to school at 10.00am because they know they will leave at 4.00pm. However, look at this time from 8.00am to 2.00pm. That means we are going to be left out, Madam Speaker.

When you look at the infrastructure in the mountainous areas, we are totally out completely. When it starts raining, for us we are done, we are not part of this curriculum or not part of education anymore.

When you look at the ratio of teachers to students, Madam Speaker, the wage bill has affected. Some of the classes do not have teachers. A teacher will come from the other class then go to the other one. So, what is going to happen where students are left to learn on their own?

Madam Speaker, when you look at what has been done in the statement, honourable minister- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister they are addressing you.

MS NAMBOZO: You see, when the other ministers left we sort of asked maybe if she is left alone she will concentrate. What has been done in the statement, there is a paragraph that talks about the instruction material being delivered in July. That means the senior ones have started school but the instruction material will be delivered in July, now what are they starting on now that they have already gone to school?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, retooling teachers in one week or days is not practical. It is just an imagination and we should stop telling this country lies. It is not going to work, it has failed from now - (Member timed out)-

THE SPEAKER: Conclude then Yaguma and Baba.

MS NAMBOZO: Madam Speaker, for me, it has failed already so we had better start on something else because it is not relevant for us unless if it is going to be partial. If it is for urban areas then it is okay. However, what about the rural areas? You are cutting us off completely.

Shs 143 billion to rollout a programme when students in Bugisu and Sironko in particular are studying under trees is that fair? When it rains, they are running to their homes for shelter, what are we going to tell our people when we go back, Madam Minister? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.24
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the attempt of the ministry to reform the curriculum and I would actually call upon the ministry to reform the entire education system.

Madam Speaker, we have always complained of irrelevant educational system handed over to us by the colonial masters and this system, was supposed to train job seeker rather than job makers.

Now when I listened and when you look at the curriculum, at least it is going to be student-centered, they are emphasizing sciences and practicals, limiting the issue of cram work and examination.

However, honourable minister, I will support you if extensive consultations are done. Because the way the thing is, they did not consult anybody. There is no input from anybody. It is just a scheme, if I may go beyond what they are presenting somewhere, to confuse and steal money through these books.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there are programmes that have been introduced by the ministry before, for example, UPE. It is now common knowledge that no child can join primary one without going through nursery like we used to do from home to primary one and yet the ministry has not provided nursery school teachers. 

It is the parents who are able to provide and those who are not able, children remain at home, they will not go to school, you cannot start from primary one because others have started from nursery. Why, Madam Minister, don’t you reform the primary education first? Why don’t you get enough teachers for nursery?

Thirdly, the minister has not told us the cost implications. Are we going to manage? In addition, the way it is, this programme is likely to be more expensive.

Fourth, Madam Speaker, Ntare School for example has not opened. The ministry has forced the school not to open because they are going to use it to train the teachers who are going to teach this new curriculum. The implication is that even the teachers have not been identified and we know a teacher teaches Senior One to Senior Six. Now they are calling Senior One teachers, who are these?

We have Universal Secondary Education, but there are no teachers.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the ministry has just released national examination- PLE and UCE. There are districts in this country where we do not have even a single first grade. This is because there are no resources, no teachers. These are districts which are economically disadvantaged therefore the parents cannot manage. What are we creating? Inequalities, conflicts and a disorganised society. Thank you. 

6.29
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to support what the minister has brought, but honourable minister, this project you have brought is heading for a storm. 

We are going to have a wreck by the nature of the preparedness everybody has talked about. Please listen to the voices of the honourable members here. 

You cannot bring a national programme covering the whole country to this House only to implement it partially. What kind of training can you impart in three days? 

I used to be a teacher too. When we went for thematic courses, three day training was for refresher courses. Now this is a whole programme of review for the whole country and you do it only for three days and selectively. That cannot be a national programme. 

Secondly, - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you for giving me the opportunity. 

I have noticed something. That whenever somebody leaves Cabinet, he speaks so well. (Laughter) You are aware – 

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I started by supporting this review. I supported it very strongly. Is the honourable member from Sironko in order to make these allegations when I fully supported it? 

Yes, I was in Cabinet, I supported programmes of Government, now I am a backbencher representing the people of Koboko County. I am now expressing their sentiments, the way they sent me here.

Is he therefore in order to bring irrelevancies when I am making strong points? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order.

MR BABA: Thank you for your ruling, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, honourable minister, the point here is that let us take this review seriously. Let us go back to the drawing board, let us pilot and encompass the whole country in this programme. Let us bring everybody on board. 

Secondly, let us see the linkages between this new skilling of secondary school students. When they come out, what is their next stage? We did not see that in your statement. 

We have killed most of the technical schools we used to have. The plumbers who trained at Wairaka Technical School are the ones who did the plumbing in Sheraton. I remember that very well because the students there were my friends and they are doing plumbing here. Kisubi, Elgon, Kicwamba was very good in board building. Where have all these gone? Let us see the linkage between this new skilling of secondary schools and their next output. 

One does technical drawing, metal work, wood work, after that, what? Where is the outlet? Let us see these clear linkages. 

I think this point needs to be emphasised again. A child’s brain is developed in the first three to five years. If you do not focus on that, you have lost it. Those of us who are here now and made it without early learning centers should call ourselves lucky but we cannot rely on luck alone. 

Let us focus on early learning centres for children. No matter the cost, if we want a future for our children and our country, that is where to start the reform from, not from the top of the tree. Thank you. 

6.33
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, allow me to thank you for giving this Parliament enough time and opportunity to express the concern of this country on matters that concern education in the country and looking into the curriculum.

I would like to speak to the minister of education; please, you, your colleagues and all the technical people in the ministry should take time to listen to the concerns of Ugandans being expressed in this House today. 

The concern of this Parliament is that not enough time has been given to reviewing the curriculum of this country with the aim that we prepare the human resource right from nursery, primary, secondary to institutions and then to the job market. 

I would like to know from the minister whether the institutions after senior four are also prepared, the universities are also prepared and even the job market prepared to take on these people so that at the end of the day we get benefit from this review. 

If that is not done – first of all somebody comes from primary education with a mentality, he reaches O’level and there is a new system, after senior four, the system is different, then going to the institution, it is different again. 

Are we sitting here to plan properly for this country and to have people who are going to get into the job market and help the country? 

Our concern is, there are issues that we feel you have not considered. By now we should be talking about IT based learning. 

The President is struggling alone with issues of patriotism, we would expect you to have some of those issues come in right from primary. 

Initially, we used to have civics, physical education, mental publication and technical drawing and all those things were lost. We thought this was the time that you would get us back on the drawing board with the curriculum and we move forward and create a human resource which is well trained and strengthened from nursery up to university. 

Honourable minister, I would like to know from you the cost – the cost of education is very high in this country, now you are introducing a new system. We thought review of curriculum would help us in reducing the cost of education so that everybody would get access to affordable education. But you are not bringing this forward.

I am concerned about your capacity to supervise and ensure that whatever you are bringing forward, the schools can to take on. Most private schools are not going to take it just like they didn’t take on the thematic curriculum. 

I am concerned because most of those people in the ministry – the minister, the technical people – have got secondary schools and that is why people are getting to that level to create an opportunity where you confuse the country because you are working for your own interest. 

You need to bring Ugandans on board and the concerns of everybody taken like this so that whatever review on the curriculum that we are going to take is going to be for the benefit and transformation of the future of this country.

Finally, I would like to know from the minister the benchmarking that has been done. Which countries have we gone to and learnt from them so that from their experience of failures and success, we are going to put ourselves on the right track?

If you have not yet studied that, then we would think that the minister of education should withdraw and wait for at least one year while we prepare to move. So that in the next academic year, we will have taken all the trouble to see in training because there is something my lecturer used to tell us. That he is a teacher who teaches teachers who teach our children. Have you taken all that trouble? 

I think the ministry should go slow and not rush. We should not push it as a ministry but listen to the country, listen to the voice of the people so that we move when we have planned to succeed. Otherwise, failing to plan is planning to fail. This is what has always happened with the few programmes that we have taken. 

We want to be cautious that this time round on education, we move and move forward and never look behind. Thank you. 

6.38
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the honourable minister for her report. However, let us go one step at a time. We are not rushing, Uganda is our country, and we are still here. We are young and we will grow old in our country. 

Honourable minister, we are not against the new curriculum but we are saying that you need a lot of time to consult Ugandans. We were not even consulted. From your report, you said you consulted us but I do not know at what level.

Madam Speaker, in the statement the minister talks of addressing the Sustainable Development Goal No. 4 on quality education for all but I see that the curriculum is very segregative and discriminative against the people with disabilities, especially in physical education. Do you have enough money to put the facilities in place for people with disabilities?

Secondly, honourable minister, you are doing away with the ICT revolution which has become an inevitable tool for our socio-economic development. The same applies to agriculture that is our backbone and livelihood. You have made agriculture optional, yet you have made others compulsory. ICT and agriculture are what we live with every day.

Madam Speaker, I think the minister needs to review the curriculum. My interest is on ICT. Most of the schools that we have do not even have electricity. Some schools do not have computers and the ones that have computers, have no power. When we come on the Floor of Parliament and ask why power to northern Uganda is delaying, there is no answer. These are some of the thing. If we talk about quality education, I do not think the minister is ready.

Madam Speaker, if we were to benchmark the best practices in other countries – in Europe, for example, there is no concoction of subjects like sciences and arts, right from childhood development. When a kid of Primary One is asked by a parent:  “What do you want to be in future?” If the kid says, “I want to become a doctor,” that kid will be taken to a school for doctors. For us here, it is different. 

We should be paying more attention to skilling our young ones in every school instead of being theoretical. When we have theories, it does not help us. Today we are complaining about jobs but let us look at our education system. We are doing more of theories than skilling our own. Where do we get the jobs? We talk about the youth being unemployed. 

The education system itself has a problem and that is where we have to start from. If we can work on our education system, we would not be beggars. We would not find master’s degree graduates suffering here on Makerere streets – drinking and smoking marijuana – if the Ministry of Education and Sports had worked to help our people. I would like to know from the minister: how many PE and Kiswahili teachers have you recruited and how many have you already posted to the secondary schools? Thank you.

6.42
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Madam Speaker, last year I was on the Committee on Education and Sports. We visited the Uganda National Curriculum Development Centre and we actually found that there was supposed to be a pilot of this curriculum in 20 schools. After piloting, they were going to do an evaluation and analysis of whether it had succeeded or not. However, what I am hearing from the minister now is a rollout without piloting and proper study to reveal the weaknesses and strengths. 

Do you want the whole country to fail? At least, let 20 schools fail if there is a problem instead of having every school in the country to fail.

Madam Speaker, there was no proper research and consultations. I also checked the budget of National Curriculum Development Centre and they have minimal budget for research. You cannot compare what they have for research with what they are supposed to do. The task ahead of them is very big – to carry out a comprehensive research on the problems in the country like the problem of unemployment. I even asked them in the committee. I said: “You need to do a lot of research on the challenges Uganda is facing as far as unemployment is concerned but I see your budget is very minimal.”

Madam Speaker, if there was a wide consultation and I was asked about what should have been included in this new curriculum, one thing which I would have advocated for is diplomacy, public relations and customer care. When we hosted the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC), I saw an important thing which we miss as a country. I would like to thank you for organising training, where hon. Oboth Oboth trained us on protocol, diplomacy and public relations. That training was very important for us as a country. 

For example, there are things like customer care that we take as obvious. It is very common for you go to a shop in our country and find the owner of the shop behaving as if he wants to box you, yet you are the customer. You would find the owner very rude. We need to learn customer care right from primary. We should put it in our curriculum. You should not just wait for somebody to go to a tertiary institution like Uganda College of Commerce to teach him customer care. What about the people who are going to branch off from P.7 or P.5?

In diplomacy and public relations, for example, we were told that when I bring my daughter and I am introducing her to the Speaker, I cannot say: “My daughter, meet the Speaker.” I should say: “Madam Speaker, meet my daughter.” These are things we think are obvious but they are not obvious. 

They even taught us how to smile. When some of us smile, it is like we are crying. (Laughter) These are things that we must learn. What is wrong if you put diplomacy and public relations in our curriculum so that people learn them from the beginning? Imagine how we were rushing. If we were to analyse how we were smiling, most of them were plastic smiles because these are things that we should have been taught from the beginning. Madam Minister, what you should introduce in the curriculum is diplomacy, public relations and customer care.

However, I would like to thank the ministry for introducing acrobatics. During Amin’s regime, we used to have acrobatics. Before we would enter the class, there would be a lot of dancing and jumping up and down. I am happy to hear that it is in the curriculum. Those are the things that we really want. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.47
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budope West County, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting such a statement. I agree with honourable colleagues on the programme. Honourable minister, what should be clear is that we are not against the new curriculum. However, the formulae and speed at which it is being implemented is causing worries in terms of whether it will really succeed.

Madam Speaker, I am a teacher by profession and I would like to speak from a professional point of view. When the minister comes and assures this Parliament that the new curriculum shall take effect from first term of this academic year, it is impractical. 

As a teacher, much as an academic year is dissected into three academic terms; that is for learners. However, teachers are on duty 24 hours, whereby an academic term begins from where the previous term ends and there are some activities that are carried on by a teacher.

For example, you digest a syllabus and make a scheme of work. From the scheme of work, you develop teaching methods. From teaching methods, you develop teaching materials or identify teaching materials and then the lesson plan.

If you tell me that the curriculum is going to be implemented with effect from first term - which is a week from now - that is impractical. The teachers need to make a scheme of work yet some active teachers had already made schemes of work, developed methods of teaching and therefore teaching aids. It becomes really impractical and impossible.

Secondly, honourable minister, I would like to appreciate the Ministry of Education and Sports. It has come up with a number of ideas and policies - one after the other – all with the intention of making education better. However, one of the reasons as to why some of these changes have not really yielded much is the urgency and speed at which they are implemented. Let us look at the ECD programme, school feeding policy and the issue of science teachers and how it came about. Let us look at the thematic curriculum.

Once all these are thought of and implemented within a day without involving stakeholders; honourable minister, we have many stakeholders in the education sector. These include parents, the community, teachers, learners and the ministry, among others. If I may ask, are our parents aware because they are secondary consumers? Are they aware of the curriculum?  

Madam Speaker, I would like to give an example. I heard of a scenario whereby a parent slapped his child because he could not understand what had been written by a teacher in red ink. The teacher wrote, “Do corrections” but the parent read, “Don’t corrections” The parent said, “It means you do not do corrections.”

We need to bring parents on board, in that if a child goes back, the parent should try to crosscheck on the work that has been done at school so that they are on the same page, including community leaders and Members of Parliament. However, smuggling it is a challenge.

Lastly, it is about the issue of assessment. Many people have talked about the weakness in leaving the 20 per cent in the hands of teachers. There is a problem now. We are living in a mixed society. I would like to give a scenario. A teacher does not support or is not in good books with parent X. Do you really think that there shall be equitable distribution of marks? Of course, there must be something, unless when we are going to have teachers who move without pockets, otherwise –(Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, my colleague hon. Robert Musoke. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give –(Interjection)– I am on the Floor. I was just giving information -

6.52
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I rise to move a motion. Having followed the debate on the issue of the proposed curriculum, which has actually taken about two hours exhaustively and having listened to the position of the members and that of the ministers; I, therefore, would like to move a motion that the question be put. I beg to move.

6.53
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion, due to the fact that we have similarity of thoughts, expression and opinion. We cannot go on unless – Madam Speaker, you can guide this House – there are those who are going to speak against. Those are the ones that you could. 

Those who are still seeking for the review to be done better are largely the majority. Those who are supporting the Government position could be few –(Interjections)- I am seconding a motion. Madam Speaker, every pleading must come to an end. 

The book of Lamentations has only four chapters. That is a book where people are lamenting. We have expressed our internal thoughts, unless other members say they have superior thoughts than what is going to be made. I would support the motion that the debate on this matter be closed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a statement. It is not that the minister has asked us to take a decision on this matter and it is a very important issue in this country. (Applause) Let members finish what they are saying. We still need to know the subjects from the minister. We want to know those 21 subjects. This House must be part of the decision about the subjects. Let members complete debate. (Applause)

MR ROBERT MUSOKE: I had given way for a point of information.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was on the Floor; hon. Musoke had given me way for a point of information. The information I would like to give the House is that in all teaching fields, a teacher qualifies to go and teach a given subject. Every teacher is assessed and they do all those assessment tests to qualify. Others who fail do not qualify to go and teach.

What is happening in this instance is that all the four teachers per school that have been taken have already qualified. There is no assessment for them. They have just taken them to be trained to come and teach. There is no room for them to know whether some have failed, others have passed or they are qualified to teach or not. They have already told us that the four they have picked have already qualified to teach these subjects that they want to Senior Ones.

MR ROBERT MUSOKE: Thank you for the information. Lastly, Madam Speaker, we have an issue of schools that are upcountry and in vulnerable areas. Which schools have not managed to send teachers for training? What shall be the basis of the head teachers and directors of those schools to admit teachers who are going to implement this new curriculum?

There is need to train these teachers, an assessment be subjected to them and they even get certificates as it was with vernacular teachers. (Applause) When vernacular teachers were being introduced, they were trained –(Interjection) I do not want your information. (Laughter) They were trained and even given certificates. This will help schools that are upcountry that have not got a chance to send teachers for training to have a basis of recruiting teachers who are going to implement the curriculum.

Madam Speaker, we are not ready for the new curriculum. We need to pilot it so that we can implement what we have already tested and we are aware shall be pivotal in the education system in this country. Thank you.

6.58
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to this important debate. When the minister was reading her statement, she said she did wide consultations including with Members of Parliament. Honourable minister, if you had done wide consultation with members, I think we would not have these debates now. We would have solved that problem a long time ago. 

I have discovered that ministries are very fond of coming up with policies. They compile policies from their offices and bypass Parliament while implementing. Now when it becomes difficult, that is when they come back to us for help. Please in future, when you are coming up with a policy and while you are consulting out there, bring it to the House so that we bless it. 

Otherwise, this curriculum reform is very important because we would like to see our children really becoming competent and doing something at the end of their education. Even this curriculum should go to Primary Seven just like it is with Senior Four and Senior Six so that at the end of the primary education, the pupils are able to do something. 

Otherwise, it is a very good curriculum but the problem is the implementation. The training of the teachers cannot be done in two weeks. Who are the tutors of these teachers? Where are they trained from? Are they competent themselves? We would like to know where the tutors were got from. Did you take some teachers abroad to be trained to teach our teachers or you just picked them anyhow?

To produce competent people, we must have competent teachers. Our training is – if you talk of competence – hands-on training where you can do practical work. Shall we have all the equipment necessary for the hands-on training or we are just trying to go back to do nothing? When the teachers do not have equipment, they will sit down and wait. 

Honourable minister, you picked 100 schools in 2017. Up to now, you have not added classrooms in them. They do not have classrooms. The equipment for the laboratories are parked in stores, for example in Millennium College in Koboko. Even when they want to do practical exercises, they come and sit under mango trees. When it is raining, they do not do it. 

Are these the types of schools you are bringing hands-on subjects to? How will it be done? We must be very realistic. Let us plan for things. The money given should be used for equipping the schools and putting structures that are necessary for this training. That is when we can start. The curriculum is good except some few items where we need to correct together so that it is implemented. 

When it comes to people with disabilities in this training of yours, honourable minister, how many teachers are there with special skills like sign language to teach students with special needs? Are we really going to include people with disabilities in this hands-on training? What about the teachers like me? If I want to go back to the classroom, how shall I observe the competence of my students?

Therefore, we need to consider the disability as well so that we benefit from this curriculum. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Namukhula, there are sub-counties that do not have secondary schools. How will you cater for the children in those sub-counties?

7.03
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the effort of reviewing the curriculum. I think I had almost got confused. 

The guidelines from the curriculum centre to schools seem to be contradicting the minister’s statement. The so-called practical subjects that have been sent to schools are the traditional subjects that we have been teaching. Then the would-be practical subjects are the electives. 

When you look at the market, the elective subjects are not targeting the market. In the market, we would be looking at textile and garment cutting; maybe we would also look at bricklaying and things that when the learners finish, they can do something.

The other point is on the instruction from NCDC that the schools have to formally write to get instructional materials. Schools have already started especially the private ones. They have already started receiving the Senior One students and yet they are supposed to write to get instructional materials, which may reach schools at the end of the term. That means the First Term of the school calendar is done. 

Honourable minister, I would like to find out from the ministry and NCDC whether we have curriculum for the tutors in PTCs, NTCs and universities that are preparing teachers to implement this curriculum. Are we using the old teachers to do that? It is because eventually we need products from the NTCs and universities to join the schools. Do we also have a programme – 

When we review a curriculum, we need to have clinical supervision to be able to see what exactly is happening in the classrooms. Are the inspectors trained or are we planning to train them so that they can carry out the clinical supervision for the schools?

Lastly, in curriculum design and development, we need to pilot. May I know where you piloted this new curriculum in which we now want to correct what is missing in the formative assessment? 

In formative assessments, teachers would design objectives that they can easily achieve. Through this, the 20 marks will be given to the students. It is because a teacher who does not know what he is doing will set an objective for the lessons and evaluate the lessons according to his interest because he is not willing to lose his job. He will prepare what he can achieve.

Finally, on tabula rasa as teacher starts from the early stages of development of a child - If we pass the oral and phallic stages of child development, we will do nothing. Maybe, we should start from Senior One and go back to Primary Seven. May God bless you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We might be debating while making technical mistakes. First of all, the policy is developed by technical people and dealt with maybe by the ministry. After that, if it has budget issues, Parliament then appropriates money. 

What we are hearing is that the training has started already. This Financial Year is 2019/2020; now for a programme to be implemented and it has a financial implication, that means we must have appropriated money. And that means that the policy was brought here and from there we funded it.

Madam speaker, it procedurally right for the Minister of Education to implement a policy which has a financial implication without approval of money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, was this money appropriated in the 2019/2020 Budget?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, yes it was in the Budget of the MCDC. For this financial year, it is Shs 47 billion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, clarification. Now you have seen the budgeting, if you brought a figure here, did you tell Parliament that this money Shs 48 billion was to implement a new curriculum which consists of teaching people X, Y and Z so that it was approved?

THE SPEAKER: Give us answers when you come back. We shall need answers about it.

7.09
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What many colleagues have been submitting is that we are not against this curriculum change but the methodology issues are at stake here. The ministry needs to incorporate into so many aspects to make sure that this programme is going to be well implemented; especially on issues of how it is going to be done, monitored and evaluation that need to be factored in.

Another issue that I was going to comment on which the other previous colleague has just talked about is the issue of resources. This programme has been at a late stage when other processes of implementation have already started.

For example, I see that some teachers were already trained and yet the way things are, it is as if we are going to say that this programme should first be suspended and it means that we are now wasting the country’s resources on this backward and forward movement. I think this is unplanned and uncalled for. Next time we are going to implement such a programme, we must think of it properly and learn to see how we can best implement it without wasting resources.

Madam Speaker, there is an issue about these learning materials that I would like to talk about. We have very many private schools and in many cases, they are about making money from very many learners. What has been happening is that you know the ministry has failed to control issues of fees.

The fees increments and the issue of scholastic materials, sometimes you can find even nursery pupils who go to school are asked to give reams of paper every term. So you keep wondering how a nursery school can be asking for reams of paper every term; not only that but also other scholastic materials.

What we are talking about here is exploitation of the parents by the private schools. Therefore, now that we are going to ask for learning materials, what is going to happen in this case? Won’t there be cases whereby they will be asking our students to carry computers, laptops and many other things on the long list. Therefore, something should be done to control the private school so that we do not go to the excess of-
In a nutshell, the ministry needs to plan well and I am of the view that they first suspend this programme and carry it on when everything is in high gear and properly planned –(Interruption)

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, member for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what the member has just said. While coming from Moyo to Arua, where I have two private schools, I found eight of my teachers have been taken for this training. That goes to show that this programme has already been rolled and cannot be reversed.

What I can advise the ministry is that when a child is born, the child first crawls, and with time he/she will stabilise and things will move on. Secondly, a journey of 1,000 kilometres start with a step; Ministry of Education and Sports go ahead with your programmes. Thank you, I give you blessings.

7.13
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement and say yet that the curriculum review in Uganda has been long overdue. It was last reviewed in 1960 and it is so many years down the road and I know we have been grappling with a lot of challenges on our education system.

I would like to say that it is a step in a right direction for the fact that it is learner-centred and they are not going to focus on grades like it has been the case. To me that is a plus on the side of the ministry.

However, the challenge is if we are talking of the system being learner-centred and we are not planning for the teachers, currently you find a student-teacher ratio of almost about 100 to one teacher or 50 plus to one teacher. If you are talking of this curriculum being learner-centred and you have not addressed the challenge of student teacher ratio, then it is still going to be a big issue.

For us to be focused and pass the students we need to first review and focus on the infrastructure; the classrooms and teachers have to be brought on board. The most worrying is about the resources/logistics. If you talked of having a Budget of Shs 145 billion to roll out this programme in five years and you have only received Shs 10 billion, honestly, how realistic is this?

This is already a reason or an indicator that you are going to face so many challenges. Maybe that is why there is even commotion. If you took 13 years to plan for this review of the curriculum and now implementation seems to be rushing on it, we are training these teachers within three days- And according to the information that we have gotten, we are getting four teachers and not even in all the schools in the country.

What happens to the schools that have not been targeted and have not gotten the teachers? At the end of the day, what are we going to do with them because the assessment is going to be done holistically?

I would like to make a recommendation just like the rest of the colleagues have. We need to go back to the drawing board. We used to have TDMS, where we used to skill teachers during holiday programme. I would suggest that the minister would go back so that we get these teachers during the holiday time and train them in this curriculum so that at the end of the day, they shall be able to go back and impact the skills on the students.

Otherwise, for us to rush and train them within three days is not practical. Therefore, we need to go back and think about the TDMS system that we used to have; use the holidays to retrain the teachers so that we can be able to roll out. Otherwise, the review of the curriculum and implementation in the country is long overdue. That is the recommendation I am making. Thank you.

7.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I join in the reading of the Book of Lamentation, allow me to comment on the statement of the minister. First of all, I have taken very serious note of the period upon which the current education model has been designed. That is the model of 1960. I have taken note of that and I think the members also need to take a serious note of it.

Secondly, I have looked at the publications. I have only picked two as a sample. The green one is for Biology. From the top cover page to the last one, there is no date anywhere yet the minister has said that all of them have got the publisher and date.

I have noted about these two books – I have picked only two but I am sure you may find out that they are all similar – the statement, which says that the content and images have been adapted from several sources, which we might not fully acknowledge. This is very important and the same statement is in this book.

According to the content of the publications, which have been given to us as Members of Parliament who link directly with those who are going to use these materials, nobody will be able to give clarification on any information in this book. We do not know the author. All we know is that the National Curriculum Development Centre is the author and the publisher.

Above all, the preamble – what we call the preface and acknowledgement – it is the same authors and statements in all these publications. 

The third note I would like to make on the minister’s statement is on page 3. It states that “The Committee of Parliament on Education and Sports interacted with the National Curriculum Development Centre in their retreat in Munyonyo and discussed the matter. They made their observations and these were incorporated in the curriculum.”

As far as Members of Parliament are concerned, the retreat, which the committee of Parliament attended, was enough information for all of us. There is no mention anywhere that whatever was captured in the retreat was brought to Parliament. Therefore, there is no information as far as we are concerned.

What is scaring me most is; do we have conflict of interest? Are we commercialising the process? I am sorry to say this but let us be clear-minded. 

Why we are discussing this matter, and hon. Nandala-Mafabi has just questioned about the budget, the statement of the minister says that the distribution of these textbooks has already kick-started. It is already ongoing and the preparation of senior one to open is on. It states that the process for procurement of textbooks from publishers is already ongoing. Where did we get the money from?

Allow me to join the rest of the comments. I have three comments to make. First, from what I have been told, the cut and copy scenario, which I have seen in this publication shows that the look of the unique situation of Uganda is not incorporated in these books. We have just copied and pasted for our children to learning. This is what this book is confessing.

That is a matter, which we need to examine. That goes to justify the call that the ministry needs to rethink this document they have brought or the process they would like to start.

I would like to appreciate the statement the minister brought. It shows the minister wants to be modern and wants us to think with a mind of dynamism because the world is changing. 

Indeed, if the world is changing and the minister is conscious of the foundational model that was adopted in 1960 based on the prescription of what was needed for Uganda at the time of independence – there were three major challenges: poverty, ignorance and disease. Education was based on that. If you had the knowledge, you would have cured most of that.

The second model of education is that you should have taken care of the gaps, which you have identified over these years. What are those gaps? The new model, I would have anticipated, should have incorporated simple things. For example, when you just pick Agriculture, you would have touched poverty and disease because of food security.

How can you say that Agriculture becomes optional? Are we Ugandans? Our Economics says that the backbone of our economy is Agriculture. Why do we say it is optional? You are not serious. You would have addressed all the core areas just by adopting Agriculture.

If we are serious about adopting the model of dynamic approach to education, there is no way we would have left out Information Communication and Technology. That is the modern way of doing things.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. When I was delegated to the African, Caribbean and Pacific –European Union (ACP-EU), there was this programme, which we sold to Uganda and they refused; a computer per child. Rwanda embraced it. That is why Rwanda can sell its manpower anywhere because they are prepared for the world today and tomorrow. Why can’t we adopt a modern way of education with a computer per child? Let us be serious.

In the new model, I am surprised my sister, hon. Baba Diri was able to see. The moment she is able to see, it is a very serious matter. How do you develop a new model to education and leave out the tools for teaching the blind and the deaf?

How can you leave out the practical approach to adaptation and acclimatisation to the climate change challenges that we are facing? How can you leave it out of our education model?

I would like to sound a warning. If there are people in the Ministry of Education and Sports who are designing this for commercialising their core business, we have to stand warned. We should not joke with the future of our children. 

We are what we are because we started from Primary one. We had good teachers and system. That is why I am nationalistic in the spirit. I do not care whether I am dealing with a Munyankole, Mukiga or a Karimajong because of the model of the education system that was given to me. We need to design a holistic system that takes care of our needs.

7.31
Ms BETTY nambooze (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us time to talk about this important matter. I would like to bring to the attention of this House that I have received information from my area. 

I have taken note myself that the Ministry of Education and Sports these days behaves as if it is a super ministry. The people down there, including chief administrative officers, are no longer able to even supervise the education officers. They take instructions right from the ministry. 

Madam Speaker, we are here discussing this matter in good faith. Let it not be taken by anybody that we are trying to fight anyone. 

I would also like to say that the ministers and the commissioners in this ministry are highly conflicted. Many of them are investors and are investing in schools. When we get some of these problems in the education ministry, it is partly because the supervisors and the implementers of policy are part of the system. They own schools. At one time, I will come here and bring a motion to investigate some people. 

In my constituency, for example, most of the schools are becoming one man’s schools. People are buying off schools and they are all owned by one person. You do not know where to go. Today, these schools have even established supermarkets at the school and the children are being sent back home. If you buy books for your child, they send him back home that you must buy the books from school. There are even pancakes, school uniforms and you know the whole town is bogged down. People cannot do business because the schools have become supermarkets and everything. This is how much the ministry is conflicted, Madam Speaker. 

About this particular matter, I would like to pose these simple questions to the minister. Madam Minister, in relation to the issue of agriculture, I would like to know when you were deciding which subjects should be optional and which ones should be compulsory, what did you have in mind? What were the parameters? What did you have to consider? 

This is because it defeats anybody’s understanding to see that a country like Uganda does not have agriculture as a compulsory subject. 

Yesterday, fresh graduates were standing on Kampala roads and were asking the question what next? In my small understanding, I thought it is us to ask those educated people what next, since they have been trained. However, they were there with their plaque cards asking boda boda people, who have never gone to school, “what next”. 

That means we are not imparting the right skills to our people. All of us have been waiting for the reforms. In fact, we have been calling for the reforms. I heard you say that we fear change. No, we do not fear change but we want change that is planned, phased, shared and every stakeholder is consulted. 

Madam Speaker, I also saw that we are introducing Chinese as an optional subject. The need for our children to be able to speak so many languages cannot be underestimated but I have never seen anywhere in a training school for teachers where they are teaching teachers who will teach Chinese. Does the ministry now intend to import teachers from China and their Coronavirus? 

I do not know exactly what we are going to do because once the subject is optional, that means every school must provide those teachers. Where are we going to get these teachers? Wouldn’t it have been proper if we started giving teachers courses in this language and then finally we get people to teach this Chinese language? 

We have also heard about Swahili. The only Swahili I know are words of violence because that is what we were made to believe Swahili was all about; words such as “Toka, Lala Kini, Kimbiya”. 

Madam Speaker, we also have sign language and it is becoming an internationally recognised language. You see that on TVs, it is now compulsory; that whoever has a news bulletin must have somebody translating it in sign language. When do we intend to put this two-hour student so that they get these skills? This is in order for us to focus more on giving out skills more than anything else. In this, I would have loved to see fewer hours in class for theory and at school and more hours in practical lessons. 
However, when you see the new curriculum they are providing, they are talking about 20 plus subjects and this is nothing little. This is too much for our learners, Madam Speaker. 

I think that if we sit and plan better, some of these subjects would even be dealt away with or we would introduce even others that have not been thought about but are equally important for the learners, Madam Speaker. 

With that, I would like to request the honourable minister - I know she is going to face a very difficult task. First of all, her brother, the State Minister for Higher Education, is not here and the substantive minister is also not here. She will have a very big task to explain to the others, she has left behind, whatever we have discussed here. 

I would like to appeal to her that next time, Madam Speaker, if it pleases you, the three of them should sit here before this Parliament, we give time to this matter and discuss it conclusively. This is because at the end of the day, all of us want a change in our education system but it is only that the change now being proposed is not the one we were looking at. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.34
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement she has made on this new curriculum. 

We have lamented in this House. You have ordered, as the Speaker, several times, but you can see where Government is. I think it is over your shoulder and it is too much for you. Your fellow ministers have run away because they know they cannot accommodate this. 

Madam Speaker, this curriculum leaves a lot to be desired. First, in her statement, she said that Cabinet has discussed the curriculum review several times and they have approved it. 

In her statement, she also said that the materials, most especially the text books, will be delivered or supplied in July but students are reporting on 17th February. You wonder what they are going to use, as textbooks, to study. I believe they are going to supply it in July. She said it might be supplied in July so that means it might or it might not. That means, the whole year, they will have no text books. 

It would be prudent enough for the teachers, that are being trained, to at least be trained for a year, assess if they have really performed well, then, they would be taken to train or teach in the schools. They should have special classes but in this particular case, one week is not enough. We are going to produce raw students. They will not have understood. 

It is under this circumstance that a number of policies that have been passed could not take off. We have the sexuality educational policy. How is it working? We have the ECD policy but where are the teachers or the classes? Where is the curriculum? Those are some of the challenges that we have. 

Madam Speaker, a lot leaves to be desired in this particular case. Yes, we appreciate agriculture is optional. However, Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda is moving towards sciences and Agriculture is a science subject. Remember the Students’ Loan Scheme is tagged against sciences and you are making it optional.

We have a country where we say Agriculture is the backbone but we are leaving it to be optional, Madam Speaker. We need to have Agriculture as a compulsory subject so that it may help our students and children meaning that from class they are going to the field to demonstrate what they have learnt. They are going to do value addition and doing practicals but we are saying it has to be optimal. This is not acceptable, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, in China, children in primary, sometimes even in nursery are so innovative. However, the innovation that we used to have- I know you underwent that training, Madam Speaker, from primary where we used to make things, is no more. Why don’t we bring technical drawing, metal works? Because when we train them in technical drawing, then these are surveyors, plumbers in the making.

When we bring home economics, they can be trained in bakery and then knitting, designers in the making. Our children of today cannot even fix their own buttons because they do not know knitting at all- they have not been trained. Therefore, we are saying that let us bring back home economics, technical drawing and the rest of it.

Madam Speaker, I am also concerned of the lessons starting at 8.00am and ending 2.55pm. This means that they will only be having five hours for classes because there is break time for 30 minutes, and then there is lunch for one hour. I would imagine that the syllabus would not be completed.

However, this is a ministry, which is saying that at the end of it all, these students are going to graduate with two certificates. May I understand from you, Madam Minister, which certificate will qualify them to go to advanced level? This is because these are two certificates that they are coming up with. We appreciate it. Which one will now qualify them -(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. I would like to inform my colleague that this curriculum is only for lower secondary. There is nothing for upper secondary and nothing for primary. Therefore, you wonder what type of curriculum starts in the middle and ends in the middle. It has no linkage.

Secondly, even the minister does not believe in this curriculum. There is a review report here, which was made by UTAMU, but at the end of it all, it has a disclaimer. 

Let me read the disclaimer; that the views of the minister - what you have seen in the report is similar. They are saying that the views and opinions expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Belgian Development Cooperation or, the Uganda Ministry of Education and Sports.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much my brother for the information -(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and hon Joy. The information I give you is small but straight to the point. I have heard the passion with which you are concerned about this new curriculum and I share with you the same sentiments.

However, I would like to inform you that this new curriculum is bound to be barren for one reason that the ministry developed it without involvement of the key stakeholders. I think as we are going to end this debate, the honourable minister is going to appreciate the wealth of knowledge and experience that this august House has.

You see, you must have really gotten the expertise that is resident in this august House. Therefore, I think going forward, for intervention and development of the curriculum of this nature, you need to involve greatly many stakeholders as probably as you can, because only then, will you strengthen the movement for change that you probably desire in the curriculum development. Thank you, hon. Joy.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you, honourable member, for giving that information. Madam Speaker, you have just heard that it is copy and paste. If you check some of these textbooks, they have written and then they have appended that it is owned by the Minister of Education – Hon. Janet Kataha. However, such information, the Government is there, Belgium is there, she has not signed to own it. I would have loved if she signed meaning that she owns what is in some of these textbooks.

Madam Speaker, if you check in the physical education, some member was just saying that there seems to be commercialization and there is some conflict of interest.

Some companies have got involved in this, how dare “Movit”- you find here Movit, for us we work on our hair with different oil, you would just mention “oil” but how dare “Movit” has come to be in this book?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, some of these things have to be investigated. As I conclude, we appreciate that the curriculum of Uganda needed to be changed. We all appreciate and we all buy the idea but please, let us go step by step. Let us start at an early age so that they develop it and have the concept of it so that by the time they go for secondary school, they know that this is what we are supposed to do. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Hansard team is giving six minutes; it seems they have now forgotten.

7.46
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dear colleagues, it has been long that I have heard such a conversation. I would like to thank colleagues for this afternoon debate.

I only feel so much pity for the honourable minister. You have been abandoned. You are all alone. Where are your colleagues? Is it because they do not take this debate seriously or is it because they disagree with what you have brought?

It is not only about that, Madam Speaker. A debate like this which is technical in nature, I expected the technical staff of Ministry of Education to be behind there to back you up, there is none. I think these are parliamentary staff. No commissioner of education, nobody from the Curriculum Centre and this is their product.

The conversation we are having today should have been the first before you started rolling out this programme. This is the first national debate involving the people of this country through their representatives. How dare you roll out a programme concerning our children without consultation? 

A reference is made to a Parliamentary Committee on a retreat. You know how this House works. If a committee has been consulted, it has to come with a report to the House. (Applause) That report will be debated, you will pick our ideas and you go and develop this curriculum. Then this debate would not be taking place. 

I heard your opening statement. You said something like, you know, the curriculum which we are trying to overhaul was developed in the 60s and it was aimed at producing white collar job seekers. That is not accurate hon. Seninde. Let me give you the facts. Everybody knows that there were technical colleges immediately after primary seven for those who had not had the advantage of going to senior one. Everybody knows that there were technical colleges immediately after O’level for those who had not had the advantage to go to HSC. Similarly after HSC, those who did not go to the university would end up at Kyambogo. All these are facts known. Just ask your neighbour. 

Is there a crisis in the education system? Yes, there is a crisis. Have you diagnosed the problem? Apparently no! 

Let us look at the figures. How many children sit at primary level and don’t join senior one? Are you going to help them by this innovation? How many children drop out after sitting senior four? Are you helping them? 

We have argued over and over again that you need to invest in technical education. How many technical schools have you opened up in the last 20 years knowing very well that the number of students going to school has been increasing year after year? 

All of them have just fallen out and then you have started adopting ad hoc methods – skilling Uganda: very ad hoc! Sometimes they even con His Excellency the President. They call him and he gives Shs 30 million and that group goes away, another one he gives Shs 40 million. Save us this ad hoclism. You are playing with the future of this country. 

Madam Speaker, if you cannot have quality education, the products will be counterfeit (Applause). The counterfeits can only produce a counterfeit economy. The counterfeit can only produce a counterfeit lawyer, a counterfeit doctor, counterfeit teacher, and counterfeit educationalist – like the one who is doing this. Why is this? Because we lack a proper system of education. There is no way you are going to cure the problem by just counterfeit – 

Let me tell you, honourable minister, it has never happened anywhere in the world. You are in the world book of records that you are going to train people for a few days to start changing the curriculum of a country. Where has this happened? Give us an example. Ask the professor next to you. He will tell you how long it takes to train some of these. 

The issue here is, do we need to change? Yes, we do. What are our priorities? 

And then, this is the last time we should hear this: we should stop blaming the colonialists. That song must stop. We have been in power from 1962. How many years are those? And we are still blaming the colonialists! Even people like your neighbour, the retired professor is a product of the colonialist. How can you blame that system that it is responsible for our problems today? Our problems are ours. We do things without thinking twice. We do things because we want to impress others. We request you please, do not play with the future of our children.

I would request, Madam Speaker, that you withdraw – it is the consensus of this House – and we make more consultation. It does no harm. There is no absurdity. There is no gap you are going to create by withdrawing this proposal. Let them remain proposals. We study them, make our inputs and then we can move forward. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.54
MR LYANDRO KOMAKETCH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join this debate by starting with a proverb. Because of the fear of the unknown, the tortoise moves with the whole of its shell for protection. 

The way the minister begun her statement, in terms of quoting sources, was tantamount to a criminal act because in knowledge management, it is criminal to plagiarize sources where you have no authority. It is intellectual dishonesty, it is bankruptcy of understanding the subject matter you are concerned with and therefore it is irrelevant. 

I speak as someone who has published six times and I can be quoted anywhere in the world. Hearing from the sources where they are supposed to be managing our process of education, you begin to question the direction in which education is moving in this country.

Formal education was introduced in this country in 1886. From that time, the British, in their own understanding brought many commissions to study even the church missionary schools that were funded. 

That is why you read about the De La Warr commission, the de Bunsen Report, the Kothari Education Report of 1964, and then the Kajubi Report of 1989. That is the process. 

Have we taken time to take audit of the Kajubi report that was implemented by the Government? Have we done it? So that from that we generate an understanding of an outcome that the gaps we have here is in the national curriculum development issues.

Those should be outcomes of a study that should be commissioned by the Government of Uganda so that you take action. You cannot jump from any place and then state that we are now proceeding with a review of the curriculum. 

What is the justification? As we speak now, the presentation you made should actually form the conceptual idea for beginning the whole process of putting in place a commission to study how we have gone since the implementation of the Kajubi Report.

Madam Speaker, the philosophy of education in this country needs to be questioned. Look at Tanzania. In Tanzania, they say “education for self-reliance”. What is Uganda’s education philosophy ever since the Kajubi Report? Is it “education for self-reliance” or “education for national development”? What is it? There should be a running thread from our philosophy to the entire system that we develop.

Madam Speaker, we are a product of what has been ongoing. I was in St Joseph’s College, Layibi and before that I went to a village primary school from where I obtained aggregate 4. It was a primary school where we used to walk six kilometres to and from. It is very difficult to do so now, because the challenge we have today is not about curriculum but about learning materials and poor teacher development in schools. That is why we are not performing well. 

You go to any of these schools in the country – we do not have enough learning materials. When you look at the teacher development in the country, there is no consideration for empowering teacher education. Instead, we have decided to remove Kyambogo and make it a university for everything. It was put in place as a special institute for teacher development. How do you now say that you are beginning to train teachers to go and train others in three days? It is extremely criminal. What we should be concentrating on is to think about how we can make it better. 

If you go to South Africa, the South Africans say they actually rely on Ugandans more than anybody else in terms of human resource. Look at the doctors that are manning the top-notch hospitals in South Africa. They are Ugandan doctors. It is because the medical curriculum in Uganda combines surgery, medicine and everything else. We have the best – unless we do not know what we are.

Madam Speaker, I request this House to pause and have a reflection. In Kiswahili they say: “Tafakari”. For those who say we do not know Kiswahili, we speak Kiswahili. “Tafakari” means “reflections”. This is the time. I request the Minister of Education and Sports to know that we are competent intellectuals in this House. When we are outside this country, they respect us because of our education. However, I believe our children are struggling today because of the large classes and that is why they are not performing.

Madam Speaker, it is painful to speak on this issue because we thought education should just be a normal process but it has become a crisis. I pause here by requesting that this Parliament agrees that the ministry withdraws this curriculum quickly and quietly and we begin the process of putting a commission in place to study the Kajubi Report that has been implemented for over 20 years, and from there we can move forward so that we no longer only deal with the National Curriculum Development but the entire education system. I beg to move.

8.02
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the statement. We had really longed to see the curriculum change. However, it has come at a time when most of our students and stakeholders are not prepared. First and foremost, there is a principle that the minister did not look at, the principle of effective change. This is where school leaders were supposed to have been brought together to see the demands of the society and that is where we could derive what we could conclude and perhaps draw a better curriculum for our children. 

For example, if consultations were done regionally, we in Bugisu – who live in the mountains – would have had our input. The people of Buvuma live in the islands and they would have also had their input and that would have been good for this country.

Secondly, I heard the minister talk about vocational institutions and hon. Katuntu asked about vocational institutions that have been put up by Government in the last 10 years. In my district, there is no vocational institute, yet under the policy, the ministry proposed that every constituency should have a vocational institute. 

I visited the ministry over the issue of vocational institutes many times. Over the last 10 years, the institutes that have been built were built by the donors and the donors withdrew some of the funds. For example, in Namutumba, there was a vocational institute that was put up but when the donors followed up the accountability, they found that there were sketchy buildings without teachers and students. Therefore, the donors withdrew the funds. As a country, we have to look into that because the minister talked about our children joining vocational institutes but there are no vocational institutions.

The other thing is about the number of teachers. I do not know whether you will use this Shs 147 billion to hire teachers for vocational institutions because they are also not there.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we are rolling out the new curriculum to Government schools, yet the curriculum is already in private schools. I do not know whether this was brought in good faith or just to fail our students that are coming from those poor upcountry schools. Thank you.

8.05
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for her statement. The minister has informed us that the current curriculum we are using was designed in the 1960s, yet things keep changing every day. Therefore, I support the curriculum review because children will be taught what is relevant today and which will help them after school.

We have also been told that consultations were made. However, the fact that consultations were made does not mean that we are supposed to begin it immediately. 

Madam Speaker, the implementation of this curriculum has been rushed. The Government has been piloting some programmes like Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). It was piloted in 14 districts and more districts came on later and this House continued to ask Government to bring on board more districts because of the testimonies from beneficiaries from the pilot districts. 

Therefore, the ministry should have done this in as far as this curriculum is concerned by sampling schools from rural, urban and hard-to-reach areas. This would then guide us after seeing the successes and achievements.

Madam Speaker, we had a thematic curriculum. It had a lot of challenges. Personally, I participated in the development of materials at NCDC when I was in education office in my district. However, after developing them, we laboured a lot to develop those materials but the ministry took long to have them printed and taken to the schools. 

Even when they were taken, they were inadequate. I am seeing a scenario where we might have this challenge in this proposed curriculum. Therefore, the ministry needs ample time to plan for the materials, as well as for the teachers. Giving teachers of Senior One to handle this, to me, is not enough. 

Teachers are supposed to be all round; they should be ready to handle any class. All the teachers in the school should be trained and therefore, time again has to be put aside for the teachers to be trained.

I do not think all the teachers from my two secondary schools in Amudat District could have attended this, particularly from Pokot Girls’ S.S in Karita, where we have no network. I do not think they could have even received information to attend that training. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need to bring all the teachers on board.

On agriculture being taken as optional, I think this is not correct. Uganda is basically an agricultural economy and I believe when the learners get this knowledge in school, they will be able to take it back home. When they go back to their communities, they can help in imparting the knowledge they got from school on the modern methods of farming. Back in our communities, even these extension workers are very few. I think the children who have studied agriculture would help us a lot back in the rural areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.09
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for making her presentation. It is really amazing that four teachers are picked per school and they are trained within three days.

The teachers, in their normal training, they are trained for two years. Sometimes, you do not even get everything that you are trained on within the two years. Some people even get retakes. What about a person who is trained within three days and you expect this person to go and train other teachers? Of the 14 subjects, only four are picked.

I would like to know from the ministry how much time they have given for the four, half-baked people who have trained to go and train other teachers of the 14 subjects. Honourable minister, Kamuntu is engaging the education minister so she is not getting what we are saying. It is a very sensitive area, honourable minister.

Madam Speaker, Senior One students have started reporting but the teachers are not yet trained. For how long are these Senior One’s going to sit in school, waiting for the teachers to get trained? We really need to know. You better put that clearly to us so that we also plan for our children. 

There is no needs assessment carried out in this very important subject. It is something that touches the lives of all Ugandans, including you, honourable minister. We, the stakeholders, are not aware. There is no needs assessment even carried out on the learner. You did not know what the learner wants.

President Museveni has time and again talked about industrialising the country. How are you going to industrialise the country on agriculture in particular? We want to employ more youth. He wants to provide many employment opportunities. Most Ugandans rely on farming. If agriculture is left optional, that means children will take whatever subjects they want to take; the easy subjects and so on. How are we going to industrialise our country? Are we really supporting the President?

For that matter, I would like to know from the minister; within their manpower plan, how many teachers have they trained to particularly handle Kiswahili in this country right now? I see there are not many teachers for particularly Kiswahili. Kiswahili should not really be compulsory; for what? 

What is our need? What do we want? Kiswahili is becoming an international language but we need something that can touch the lives of the rural person down there. I read and even went and spent some little time when they were training people in Nabisunsa. They said they have reduced the time for face-to-face contact because they want students to have enough time for research.

Go to Yumbe. Out of all the students in Yumbe, hardly 100 have got smart phones to do research and not many schools have got computers. How do you say that these students are going to use all that time for research yet for some of them, where there are no computers, they use smart phones? Honestly, that is being unfair to Ugandans. The biggest part of Ugandans lives in rural areas where it is very difficult for them to access most of these modern facilities. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to tell the ministry that –(Member timed out.)

8.14
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate you specifically, for giving honourable members ample time to air out their views. I thank you very much. This is the beauty of having a good Speaker of Parliament. I thank you very much. (Applause) 

The strength of a nation is judged by the quality of the people who are educated. We may have millions and millions of people but if we do not give quality education, that population is rotten.

Therefore, on the new curriculum the ministry is introducing; I am happy that at the beginning, the minister stated clearly that education is the process. It is true – as a teacher – that when you are imparting knowledge to a learner, it is a gradual process. You do not learn in a day, a week or a month; it is a process.

Therefore, honourable minister, your intention or idea for the new curriculum is wonderful but the loophole that you are seeing now is the implementation. That is why as Members of Parliament, we are asking you kindly to go slow. Since it is a process, everything will go slow.

Honourable minister, if I may ask you, you have now introduced many new subjects, for example, food and nutrition. If we are to ask you now, how many teachers have you recruited for those subjects and how many teachers who teach those subjects have you posted to all the Government schools?

Honourable minister, when you are introducing new things, please make sure you have the necessary teachers in place. How many teachers for Kiswahili have you posted in all the Government schools? Aware that because of the UPE –(Member timed out.)

8.17
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for a very serious attempt to come and give this statement in the House. 

When you listen to the statement the minister gave the House, you would start wondering whether hon. Nansubuga is running an ad hoc skilling programme for Uganda or what else she is doing. 

Let me just read one paragraph of the reason for the review and listen carefully:
“The current curriculum was designed in the 1960s to address mainly the production of the human resource for white collar jobs. The Government currently has different development agenda to address the country’s transformation.” 

That is a fallacious statement to say the least. How do you even bring such a text to Parliament? It means the way the programme is hurried is how this statement was also quickly cooked and run with here. 

When we talk about implementing a learning programme that is based on practical learning or innovative and creative thinking, it is not just about a theory. We have a few schools here and some of the members might be privileged to take their children to international schools. 

Practical and innovative learning means you have a class that has 20 students at maximum and each of these learners probably has a desk of their own. They also have all the facilities so that they can be able to try out the things and read from the books what they have been taught. It is not just about putting 100 hundred students in a classroom thinking they would do any learning. 

Down there in Soroti, you have probably about 90 or 100 learners in one class. Some of them sit on stones. A poor girl is trying to dodge a sharp edge of a stone while the teacher is making a statement. How do you say these are the people who will learn on their own? 

The ratio of students to teachers must first be addressed. The minister, at one moment, is saying everybody must have a degree in order to be qualified as –(Member timed out.)

8.20
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Even the LDUs that we recruited took nine months to be trained but here we are trying to train teachers in three days to produce the human resource for this country. It is so perturbing. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked the minister on how much money has been budgeted for this financial year and the minister told us Shs 47 billion. In your statement on page 4, you said a sector requires Shs 143 billion for the next five years for the rollout of the reform. However, Government has provided only Shs 10.3 billion to kick-start the rollout. Then again you said Shs 7 billion has been provided. What a contradiction in your statement. 

If you look at this book - I have never seen in all my life a text book of this nature that is not paged and yet this is the document that we are going to use! I would like you to look at the book. What type of curriculum is this without page numbering? This is what hon. Katuntu was saying that this is a product of counterfeit. 

When the list of the 30 schools was released where the three-day training was going to take place, in the statement that says “here below is the new curriculum”, I would like to read it because it has been left out such that we understand what we are being led into:
“ 1. Examinations are to be given at the end of year class. No more examinations in first and second terms.” 

The only country where there is such a curriculum is Singapore. Are we at the level of Singapore to eliminate exams in first term and second term?

“ 2. 	Terminal exams are no longer considered.
3. 	Objective questions have been phased out in all subjects.”

Professional courses like ACCA still have objective questions. How dare we say that we are going to remove them. 

“4. Students will be expected to produce field work report after the real fieldwork.” 

I do not know which one is not a real fieldwork.

“5. 	Fieldwork studies to be school based. 
6. 	Teaching to be learners-centred and not teachers-centred.
    7. Formative assessment contributes 20 per cent and summative assessment; that is USE contributes 80 per cent.
    8. Senior One students are to do 12 subjects; 11 compulsory and one elective.
    9. In Geography, Rhineland and North America have been phased out, remaining with the rest of Africa.” 

Is that the reason why we are going to remove Geography? Geography is very key in fields like aviation. Right now we are talking about rains. How do we learn this when they are phasing out Geography?

“10. They say there will be two physics papers; a candidate’s performance on examinations shall be assigned to a grade on Grade 7 point’s scale; that is from 01 to 07.
    11. History has two papers; that is History and Political Education of East Africa since 1000 AD.
    12. UCE changed to Uganda Certificate of Lower Secondary Education.” 

This is so demeaning. Why do they even change it from UCE to UCLSE?

“13. General Science for students with special needs only.
    14. Examination papers reduced in all subjects. 
    15. Agriculture as a topic has also been phased out from Geography syllabus.
    16. Terminal exams changed to activity of integration.”

Madam Speaker, it is very disappointing that that is where we are headed. Is that, however, where we would like to take our students? Honourable colleagues, how do you substitute Arapai Technical College or Busitema University with the teaching of History? That was not what they were intended for? Prof Kamuntu knows that. Why are they killing vocational schools like Bukalasa Agricultural College and Namalere Agricultural Centre? Where do you expect our children to go?

It is because of the education that you got at that time that today you can be able to find someone who is all round. It is because you would learn Home Economics whether you are a boy or girl such that you are able to cook, do tailoring, stitch and do metal and wood works. You said you are bringing these subjects but do you have metal and wood workshops? How many schools have workshops?

I went to a school where we learnt Technical Drawing and Metal Work in Teso College Aloet but how many schools have such facilities? They are not there. 

Today, however, it is so embarrassing that we are doing things in an ad hoc manner. That is why you find some ministers even have ad hoc skills.

Madam Speaker, finally, members have talked about Kiswahili. It is very important. If you read Article 6(2) of our Constitution, “Swahili shall be the second official language….” I agree with you that you must implement the command of the Constitution here. However, on the other things, the best we need is to stop and stop now. What you have stated in your statement and prayer here, you need to withdraw honourable minister; I do not need to read it. Thank you. 

8.27
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. We really regret the decision that the Ministry of Education and Sports has taken to implement this curriculum.

Honourable minister, you are aware that in 2000-2004, you tried to implement what you called the “cumulative assessment” in primary schools where I was a teacher. This was a policy which was only brought to make projects for some people and this assessment died instantly. A lot of money was invested by this Government and the programme could not succeed. Today, you are saying that in this curriculum you are going to have summative or cumulative assessment where there are no examinations.

Honourable minister, just got to Law Development Centre here, they went on benchmark in the University of Nairobi that they want summative evaluation without examinations. If you go there, the situation is that students are not attending classes because there are no examinations. They say we are going to have examinations at the end of the year; just here in LDC.

Now, if that is what is happening in LDC where we expect students to be mature, how worse will it be when you bring it to the secondly schools? Therefore, honourable minister, we are not prepared.

Honourable minister, we are so much disturbed in the rot in the education ministry because you are grappling with so many things which are substandard. You came with thematic curriculum which has failed; we have UPE where all the people who have the capacity cannot send their children-

I would like to say that honourable minister, you have the opportunity to inform all the secondly school teachers being trained that the curriculum is over held, let it be stayed until proper sensititsation is done. I thank you.

8.29
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. We have discussed a lot here and I hope the minister has benefited a lot. You will definitely have an enriched position when it comes to the final decision as far as this rollout is concern.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, I encountered a problem about this curriculum rollout. One elder in my constituency where I had gone to attend burial was asked me how this new curriculum is going to help the students and pupils who have not been doing well to pass examinations. Therefore, it is being misunderstood that this is a new tool and programme that is going to help to improve on poor performance in our schools.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that recently the President issued a directive to the Ministry of Local Government to go and consult as far as performance in the UPE is concerned. Therefore, with this one coming on board, we are again adding ourselves problem where consultation should be rolled down such that we can enrich ourselves and come up with a programmes that will be good for all of us.

Honourable minister, as far as I am concerned with the little assessment that I have done; especially with the science teachers in the country, I am reliably informed that we have up to only 40 per cent of the teachers we need to cover up all the science subjects in the country. 

Now, we are rolling out this programme with emphasis in that direction. We should put ourselves in a position to first fill such gaps to 100 per cent such that we can be assured that when we rollout, we are rolling out with minimal challenges. Remember that is a very big problem that we need to consider.

You have only Shs 10 billion and -(Member timed out.)

8.31
MR OSCAR OMONYI (NRM, Youth Northern):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you so much honourable minister, for attempting to bring a review on education. I would like to speak very seriously on the issue of education in this country; the reason why the young people are lacking in employment. The biggest cause of employment in this country is due to the poor system of education that we have been having all these years.

Madam Speaker, what I would like to tell you is that –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural problem. Do we allow strangers in the House? Is it procedurally right? The procedural issue I am raising is that I know Members of Parliament very well but I have never seen that gentleman speaking. Is it procedurally-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member is a Member of my committee on Appointment and he is the youth representative northern.

MR OMONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala Mafabi, I am the youth Member of Parliament for northern Uganda and I have spoken in this House before; it is not my first time to speak.

Madam Speaker, I come from Nwoya where we rely a lot on agriculture. When you look at the employment level, what the young people and the people of Uganda depend on is agriculture. As a young person who has been representing the youth all these four years, there are programmes that the Government has tried to implement like the youth livelihood programmes. I have always criticised that there is no way you can send cattle to Arua when Arua people are mainly traders. How are they going to look after these cattle?

Government is wasting a lot of money on some of these projects. Why are they doing this? And you need to train some of these young people on what to do. I personally train some of the young people where I come from and you find somebody who has not gone through education and you take him through that critical training and these young people are doing so well. We are wasting a lot of money coming with programmes that do not benefit people in this country.

Madam Speaker, another issue is that we are in this service industry. In the north, people like hon. Odonga Otto own hotels, see what is happening in the service industry. We are seeing Kenyans taking over the running over these hotels in this country because our young people are not trained by the Government system. We had Jinja training school which I do not know whether it is still working; where young people would go and get some skills. But now, it is becoming a problem.

I would beg the honourable minister to please withdraw this statement. We need to take a critical look into this statement and all the stakeholders should put an input. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 53 members have contributed. Honourable minister when you were closing, there is something you said that the process will not be halted. However, that was before you heard the statements of this House. This programme is not just for the ministry, it is for the country.

In fact, you had intentions of just proceeding until we insisted. Your ministry had no plans to bring it here until we insisted and yet we are stakeholders. Therefore, how are you going to move now?

8.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Honourable minister, you are for quality education but what you have presented here has defeated that purpose. It is probably because you are in charge of primary education yet this is secondary.

In education, we need quality human resource but we are disappointed. Right now, over 70 per cent of our population is in Agriculture. We only contribute one per cent to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Why? It is so because we are largely on subsistence. We need to know where our people are best in and develop that area. This curriculum is not right at all. 

Honourable minister, we should probably know from you; how was this one produced? Did you have an educational policy review commission? If you did not then I think this is not right.

We need the Committee on Education to present to us a report other than you giving a statement. This statement cannot satisfy us. We are supposed to be part and parcel of this review. If we are not, it is already being done. 

I would like to inform you that as I was coming from Gulu today, a teacher called me about the training. It is already marred by corruption. The teacher said, “We are going to demonstrate if this is not cleared. We were here for this number of days and were promised Shs 25,000 as allowance per day but they have not given us the money.”

Instead, irrespective of how far you come, they were given Shs 30,000. That is in Gulu. He said they were going to demonstrate.

I said, “Please do not. Allow me to go and get clarification from the minister.” The training is not right. You bring for us to rubber stamp; how do you proceed without us endorsing?

What you have done and the money you spent for the training of those teachers was not done rightly. It is wrong to train just three teachers. In secondary, you do not do all the subjects. There are specific subjects you focus on but not more than three.

Those days when we were training, you would do two teaching subjects. The rest would be Educational Psychology and things of that sort. How did you pick those four teachers from the whole school to cater for all the subjects that you have brought up in the curriculum?

This is wrong. We are not refusing but we need a review of this. You are to do it rightly so we are not going to accept it. Take it back to the technical people. They should not abuse Uganda. We do not want counterfeit people and a very poor population. We need a quality population so we need to do the right thing.  Thank you.

8.40
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There could be no doubt about the centrality of education to the development of our country. This is definitely a subject, which cuts across both sides of the House.

Consequently, there are three issues I would like to clarify if you permit me. First, Uganda as a country can only be as good as the quality of its people. That quality is very much dependent on the quality of education we get. Since circumstances are always changing, there is every need for us to constantly evaluate the relevance of our curriculum to the transformation of our country. 

Therefore, the purpose of having a competence-based curriculum is precisely because the country is transforming from peasantry, subsistence to being an industrialised country. From economic history, the moment you shift from subsistence and peasantry to more industrialised, Agriculture is going to be increasingly superseded.

If we are training for the future – colleagues, look at developed countries. If you go to Britain, they are about 60 million people and only 1.4 million are in Agriculture. The rest have moved into industry.

I would like to make the clarification that much as Agriculture is still very important for Uganda today, in future it is going to be less and less superseded.
 
Secondly, my colleague is going to give a comprehensive statement but I would like to clarify that hon. Seninde is a minister –(Interjection)– no; you have given me a few minutes. I would like to clarify a few things before I sit. 

In accordance with Article 117 of the Constitution of Uganda, hon. Seninde as the Minister of Education and Sports has both individual and collective responsibility. Under the collective responsibility, she can clearly answer on behalf of any minister in the ministry.

Furthermore, issues have been raised about Kiswahili. I would like to thank hon. Elijah Okupa for pointing out something in the Constitution. If you look at Article 6(2), about the official language, it states:

“Swahili shall be the second official language in Uganda to be used in such circumstances as Parliament may by law prescribe.” 

It is not only that but also, if we aim at regional integration, it becomes very – (Interjections) - Thank you. I rest my case.

8.44
The Ministry of state for Education and Sports (Primary education) (Ms Rosemary Seninde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mawanda who raised the concern and Members of Parliament for their discussion on this matter and the contributions they have raised.

Like I have said, the Members of Parliament have raised quite a number of issues. All of them are very pertinent and for our good. Like I have requested, since these concerns are pertinent and many, I request that you allow us to respond to all of them on Wednesday, next week.

I request that you allow us to present a comprehensive report on Wednesday. This statement was basically to respond to the concerns that were raised by hon. Mawanda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MUKITALE: Given the depth, the relevancy and the urgency of this matter, aware that Parliament, who represents all regions were not consulted - 

Now that you have found out in terms of scope, content and timeliness how this programme is being rushed, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the ministry – Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that you give us a full day of engagement with the ministry in the Conference Hall – (Interjections) – I am making a request and the Speaker will rule. 

Madam Speaker, I rose on a point of procedure and I am seeking for a caucus of the whole House in the Conference Hall. When we come back here - we need a lot of information. Even as we argue now, you can see every member – hon. Okupa has just given out a script which was not presented here. 

Therefore, the technical team has been absent from the beginning. They are even not aware of what we have debated. I have been watching from the beginning. Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence that you guide us. Before we come back here, we need to first have more information, as a House. Then we shall come back here after digesting the content. I seek your guidance because this is very important. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The moment something is in the House, unless it needs real graphs and whatever, that is when you can go to the Conference Hall. 

However, this matter we are talking about is a national issue and it must be dealt with nationally. Madam Speaker, I would like to quote the Constitution and I know the minister knows it. Article 21 (4)(a) says, “Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from enacting laws that are necessary for implementing policies and programmes aimed at redressing social, economic, educational or other imbalance in society.” 

What I am trying to put up here is that education has been picked and it is one of those which are treated as a fundamental right for every citizen of Uganda. From what I see, wouldn’t it be better, with a resolution of Parliament, that we come here and make a decision probably tomorrow? – (Interjections) - It is okay. Colleagues are right.    

I think we need to take a decision. Personally, I am a teacher and I am not going to dodge like my colleague. I am a Postgraduate Diploma holder in Education and I am a teacher of both secondary and the university. What we do is that you plan a lesson and then you do a scheme of work. It is on that basis that –(Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for yielding the Floor. The programme has not yet even rolled out so even if you were to halt it now, it is not like we have done so much that if you halt it now, it will lead to disaster. They have just tried to train only three or four – those ones must also go and train others. We even do not know whether they have really been properly trained. Our view is that they have not.

The information I would like to give you, colleague, is that there is nothing that is going to be disrupted by the ministry halting this process, until we have had a thorough debate about it. I thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable member, for yielding the Floor. The information I would like to give you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is, when you even look at the budget they have presented, Shs. 140 billion for five years, is purely a joke. 

South Korea budgets for education in a year and spends USD $486 million, yet for us in Uganda, it is Shs. 140 billion for five years. That is the information I would like to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, colleagues have talked about people – I have been informed that people have already started printing books. Those who have printed books should be arrested. They had inside trading knowledge.

In fact, we should get all those who have printed books and arrest them because it means they got inside information. They went and printed books and they paid these people in the ministry to fast track the curriculum. I think that is criminal. 
	
Madam Speaker, from what my colleague has told us, nothing has been implemented and education is a fundamental right to all of us. I think, as Parliament, it is important that we now take a decision because we are the ones who give you money. 

As far as we are concerned, we have not given you money to implement that programme. Anybody who implements it will have done what we call, “misjudge” and stolen public funds, which is a criminal matter. 

In that case, I would like to move a motion that this so-called programme of four or two days, which involves changing and drawing up a new curriculum - and for information, what my colleague was talking about – he made a mistake he should have told us that that was a curriculum review report of 2016 so that members can also go, read and confirm what he said. 

I would like to move a motion that this so-called new curriculum, which has not been approved by the people of Uganda, be halted, until you have brought it up very well with the commission, studied it, discussed it and passed by Parliament for purpose to be implemented. (Applause) 

8.54
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I second the motion. Madam Speaker, these are our children and we must protect them so that they are able to get quality children. It is not any other person’s child but it is mine and yours and we must ensure that they get quality education. 

Therefore, I stand here to second hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s motion that we do not want our children to be half-baked. We do not want counterfeit children or counterfeit education but we want quality education. 
	
In principle, we agreed that there is need for review but not in the way the Ministry of Education is moving. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I second the motion that this programme be suspended until further notice. 

8.55
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also stand to second the motion that has been moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that we halt this curriculum review process and roll out, until all the stakeholders of this country have participated and we take a decision. 

Madam Speaker, I was offended by the conclusion of the statement that the minister presented. I was asking myself, where is the place of Parliament? Where are we? Are we not supposed to contribute? We represent the people it is going to affect and yet they are not represented. How can we proceed? Therefore, honourable minister, with all due respect, I second the motion and we should halt. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

8.56
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in seconding the motion moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the process of rolling out the new curriculum be halted until comprehensive consultation are made and we take a decision as Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, the education system in Uganda right now, requires a serious revolution. Not from senior one but right from primary up to university, Madam Speaker -(Applause)

Madam Speaker, the statement by the minister that the curriculum is to address our current economic issues - when you look at the subjects selected and our current challenges in this country, it leaves a lot to be desired.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the motion that the process be halted. Losing the little money that we have so far spent is not equated to losing a generation of Ugandans. (Applause)

8.58
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you Madam Speaker. I am sorry but I have to support the motion to halt the implementation of this policy. It is the first time that Parliament is debating this. However, this matter has come up several times and Government has been forced to halt it.

What is being rolled out now should have been done in 2015. However, at that time, when it was first announced in 2012 that this is what is going to be rolled out, there was a public outcry by the number of stakeholders involved that they had not been consulted. They were wondering about the haste. They were wondering about the actual consultation process. Who had initiated these changes? If there had been any consultation, what did the stakeholders say? All that information was missing.

I am actually surprised with what is being presented now. Because from the questions that were being asked then, I would have expected to see something more robust than what the minister has presented.

I would have expected actually the minister to address, for instance, the contextual issues of how this is going to be implemented. For instance, we have problem with teachers in schools. It is very difficult to attract teachers in some schools. Now we are talking about attracting specialized teachers. There are issues of infrastructure in schools which we do not have.

There is actually a problem if investing in actual education system - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I wanted to propose that you add the word “preparations” after “consultation”. The preparations have not been done. In that motion, there should be adequate consultations but it is not just consultation even the preparation for rolling it out has not been done.

Honourable members, I put the question that-

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to request, when I was presenting I requested that we find time and we have a meeting with Members of Parliament like hon. Mukitale has requested in form of a workshop, and we take members and raise all these issue for their understanding so that this helps them and all of us for the good of our children.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that meeting will be part of the consultation. I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House agree with the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising this procedural matter regarding a decision that this House took some time ago. There was a very urgent matter concerning Makerere University and our committee of the House was asked to investigate and report to this parliament.

The semester has begun and students at Makerere University are asking what Parliament has pronounced itself on. Madam Speaker our rule 215, gives committees a specific date that they must comply to bring back their report if they have not, they have to come back to this House to seek for an extension.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore you to use your office to direct that committee to report here about issues of Makerere University, so that Parliament can debate and take a decision. We do not want to come back to issues of Makerere when a strike has happened. I wanted to raise this matter so that you could guide us.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is important. I had already directed the Clerk to bring it up on the Order Paper to move it forward. If we had not had this log debate, I think we would have got there. So, either tomorrow or Thursday, we shall have the report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue again. Last year, I cannot remember if it is last year or in 2017, you directed the Minister of Foreign Affairs and I remember hon. Okello Oryem was directed to bring the status about Missions outside the country because at that time our properties like in Paris were being taken and as we are talking now it is in danger.

Wouldn’t it also be procedurally right that you remind the Minister of Foreign Affairs, after somebody has extracted the exact date he made the commitment, that he brings a report on the status of our Foreign Mission because they are in a bad state.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, extract the date and we shall communicate tomorrow. Thank you very much members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 9.04 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 February 2020 and 2.00 p.m.)

