

Wednesday, 15 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
	
PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, today is a Wednesday and we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time starting at 3 O’clock. We should be able to finish the business that we have before then. 

Tomorrow is St Janan Luwum Day; the celebrations will be in Mucwini and all members of Parliament are invited. There are arrangements to take you there. Those of you who intend to participate in Mucwini, please contact hon. Beatrice Anywar and hon. Oryem Okello so that arrangements can be made for you to travel to Mucwini.

Mucwini is not too far; it is only a few kilometres after Kitgum. You will be able to go and come back because that is what I intend to do myself. Let us get to business and see how we will proceed.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a brief on how we proceed with this matter?
 
2.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, I do not have a brief from the relevant minister. However, Cabinet is right now sitting in Entebbe. I am sure they are trying to make arrangements to break and be here in time but perhaps because of the traffic jam, my colleagues are a bit late. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AT THE 44TH SESSION OF THE ACP PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY AND THE 32ND SESSION OF THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY HELD FROM 14TH TO 21ST DECEMBER 2016 IN NAIROBI, KENYA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see hon. Nokrach here and I do not even see any Member who participated in this meeting. Is the document here?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED “THE LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is hon. Nsamba Patrick here? How do we proceed? It is not yet time for the Prime Minister’s Question Time, which comes at 3 O’clock. 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 17.1 MILLION (US $24 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA HIGHER EDUCATION CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular request was brought to Parliament and submitted to the Committee on National Economy and to facilitate this motion, we will be receiving a report from the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy. Is that report ready for presentation? Is there any member of the Committee on National Economy in the House who can proceed with this report?

2.13
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Mr Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. I know my chairperson was more than ready to come here and present; unfortunately, I do not know his whereabouts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you proceed to present the report as a member of the committee?

MR NAMBESHE: No.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate you for keeping time and being time conscious. I think it is in the mind-set of Members to always come late.

Mr Speaker, on the Order Paper, almost all items from 7 to 11 require the chairpersons of the different committees, who are not here. If it is procedurally right and also to cause shame to these people who always come late, you would suspend the House for some 15 minutes and then we resume.

Today being the ministers’ day for the Cabinet meeting, maybe most of them have not yet reported and are on their way and Entebbe Road has high traffic jam. Let us give them some time. Thank you. 

2.15
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SEPAKER: Are you the Leader of Opposition now? 

MR KASIBANTE: As it is now, I am. Mr Speaker, sometime last year, I rose on a point of national importance regarding the brutality that was being meted on the street vendors in Kampala. Subsequently, you ordered that the minister comes and makes a statement to that effect. You repeated the order after some time when the minister failed to turn up. 

It was put on the notice of business to follow till last week when it just disappeared. The minister has never made the statement and the matter no longer appears on the business to follow on the Order Paper.

Is it procedurally right to leave the people of Kampala without any answer in the first place and even when you ordered that the minister comes to make a statement, she has not come and it is no longer on the Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the Clerk, please, see how to activate this matter so that it is brought back if it was not discussed.

Honourable members in the circumstances, I will cause a suspension of this sitting for 20 minutes. If after 20 minutes we are still unable to proceed, this House will be adjourned.

(The House was suspended at 2.17 p.m.)

(On resumption at 2.35 p.m., the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have Prime Minister’s Question Time starting at 3 o’clock. Therefore, let us receive the statements so that we can receive limited responses to them. Proceed.

2.36
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would like to be on record to thank the Office of the Deputy Speaker for starting parliamentary business on time. This is a wakeup call to all of us, Members of Parliament, that 2 O’clock should be 2 O’clock. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to be on record that the Speaker was in the Chair at exactly 2 O’clock and the delay of execution of business was more from the Members of the front bench and the ordinary members of Parliament. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Mr Speaker, as you are aware, Government has been undertaking reforms to ensure efficiency and effective service delivery and to particularly provide for timeliness in processing and paying pension and salaries and the elimination of unverified records from the payroll.

Consequently, in October 2014, the ministry integrated the pension payroll and the Pension Information Management Systems (PIMS), with the payroll system and the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS), thus decommissioning the old legacy system.

Implementation of the pension module of the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System created a platform for automatic transition from the active payroll to the pension payroll for pensioners who are retiring now and synchronisation of information resulting into data integrity.

The ministry subsequently undertook preliminary verification of all pensioners and decentralised the management of pension to votes of retirement. Decentralisation therefore required every pensioner to be identified and owned by their respective votes of retirement, thus guaranteeing continued payment.

Roles of stakeholders under the decentralised management of pensions and gratuity

Respective ministries, departments and local governments under the decentralised management of pension and gratuity votes take full responsibility for budgeting for pension and gratuity, processing of pension files, payment and accountability of pension fund.

The Ministry of Public Service as the pensions authority remained with the responsibility of policy guidance, functional and technical support, monitoring the implementation of the decentralised pension management, varying any of the provisions of the Pensions Act, Cap 286 and approving requests for early retirement in accordance with the Forth Schedule to the Pensions Act, Cap 286.

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is responsible for the allocation of funds for pensions and gratuity payments, release of funds and ensuring compliance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The verification exercise which began in June 2015, however, has taken more time than anticipated. A total number of 2,181 records worth Shs 997.4 million per month, as at December 2016 remained unverified. Those records of 2,181, last received pension in June 2015. The total number of verified pensioners on the payroll as at December 2016 was 70,085 worth Shs 249,196,049,172 per annum.

Despite the decentralisation of pension management, a number of votes have not fully verified the records on the payroll for lack of data, personal files and failure by pensioners or claimants to appear for verification. This has on many occasions affected timeliness of pension payments to bona fide retirees and planning for the allocation of funds. In addition, the Ministry of Public Service does not have a national register of pensioners. 

Delays to commence biometric validation and rescheduling of the census exercise

Mr Speaker, as a result of the above, coupled with the need to have a clean payroll and link all Government databases, the ministry has scheduled a census biometric validation for all pensioners or claimants and estate administrators that was initially scheduled to run from 13th February to 24 March 2017, at all district headquarters in the country. 

However, due to delays in securing a contract for the biometric kits and update the biometric software in time, the service provider, Face Technologies, requested for a shift of commencement date to 20 February 2017. The ministry has since rescheduled the validation exercise to run from 20th February to 30 March 2017.

The affected centres are those scheduled to start from 13 -19 February 2017, while the rest of the programmes remain unchanged. The validation dates for the affected centres were accordingly shifted to later dates of the schedule to ensure dates for other centres remain unchanged. 

The changes were communicated to all Chief Administrative Officers (CAO) of the affected local governments on time. The affected local governments are Mukono, Masaka, Kamuli, Bukwo, Kween, Kapchorwa, Nebbi, Lamwo, Kitgum, Kyankwanzi, Kiboga, Buliisa, Soroti, Apac, Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo. 

Local radio announcements were aired out including on national radios. Where some pensioners turned up because they had not received the radio announcements. The respective CAOs stepped in and communicated the new dates. The ministry also sent officials to Mukono where some pensioners had gathered and briefed them about the changes.

The New Vision, the Daily Monitor publication and the Red Pepper newspapers have accordingly revisited the schedules attached in annex one.

Objectives of the Information Paper

The objectives of this information paper are to inform Parliament about the status of the pension payroll, verified records, and outstanding gratuity and pension arrears;

The implementation strategy of the planned census and biometric validation exercise to support the achievement of a clean pension payroll;

Another objective is plan for matching the pension payroll and biometrics to the National Identification Register at NIRA. 

Problem Statement

Since early 1990s, Government of Uganda has been implementing various Public Service Reforms geared towards enhancing accountability and improving service delivery. One of the reform objectives focused on achieving a clean pensions payroll.

Prior to the decentralisation of pension management of votes of retirement, the ministry had been relying on submissions from claimants or human resource officers at votes, retirees or other persons on behalf of retirees, therefore, making authentication of records difficult. 

The Ministry of Public Service is still mandated to undertake annual verification of pensioners to ascertain if they are alive. However, due to funding limitations and lack of clear addresses, validation has not been done for over four years. Lack of verification has consistently attracted queries by the Auditor-General since financial year 2013/2014 besides highlighting the risk of keeping unknown records on the payroll.

Since decentralisation of the management of the pension and despite the various Government initiatives/interventions and payroll cleaning exercises undertaken overtime, a clean payroll has been a difficult milestone to achieve. Currently, a total of 2,181 records worth Shs 997,462,131 remained unverified. Monthly returns from the accounting officers have also reported difficulties in verifying pensioners on the payroll under their votes.

It is on this basis that the Ministry of Public Service has planned the census and biometric validation exercise of pensioners with the objective of cleaning the payroll and generation of data to link it with the National Identification Register and other Government databases. This is expected to stamp out any irregularities on the payroll.

Objectives of the Census and Biometric Validation Exercise

    1. To establish the total number of valid pensioners’ records for each category.

    2. Capture the biometric details of all pensioners and beneficiaries with valid letters of administration for proper identification on the pension payroll.

    3. Identify and remove invalid pensioners’ records from the payroll.

    4. Link the pensioners’ record to the National Identification Register for faster and easier                        verification of pensioners in future.

    5. Establish a national register of all pensioners.

Status of the Pensioners Payroll

Mr Speaker, you may wish to note that the pension payroll is categorised into three:

    1. The Teaching Service

    2. The Traditional Service 

    3. The Veterans and survivors

The number of pensioners on the payroll as at December 2016 was 70,085 and the government’s pension obligation has also been mentioned as shown in Table 2. A summary per vote is in          annex 1. The number of unverified pensioners who were last paid in June 2016 is 2,181. The tables are there with the figures. 

Status of Pension and Gratuity arrears

Regarding the status of pension and gratuity arrears, the following were undertaken by the Ministry of Public Service: 

Computation of all outstanding gratuity arrears 

The ministry computed pension and gratuity arrears amounting to Shs 236,628,355,759 in financial year 2014/2015 and prepared 46 payment schedules which were audited and presented to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for payments.

Payment of part of the arrears amounting to Shs 37,480,190,863

Prior to decentralisation of pension and gratuity processed in that year, the ministry received - (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was here yesterday when that matter was raised. The spirit in that statement was that the Ministry of Public Service runs an advert calling pensioners and managers of estates to report to district headquarters for verification. Some of these people are 80 and 90 years old while some of them have various sicknesses. They have been coming to the district headquarters and the team from the Ministry of Public Service was not there. They spent money on transport and they went back without lunch and yet the people who were supposed to attend to them were absent.

What the minister is presenting here is a record of how many people they should pay. The way he is proceeding needs your guidance, Mr Speaker. Therefore, the point of procedure that I would like to raise is whether the minister is proceeding rightly to provide for us information that is absolutely not necessary at this time. The matter at hand was whether they are prepared to conduct the service and what happens to our old people. Thank you.

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Another issue of procedure is that last year from April to June, a similar exercise was conducted. The team was composed of ministries of Public Service, Education and Sports and Finance, Planning and Economic Development and because they were not there on time, they did not capture the data. This time round, if the Ministry of Public Service officials fail to turn up, those people who reported on 13th and 14 February 2017 may not come back because they are elderly and they already spent the little that they had. They are getting frustrated already.

Therefore, the issue at hand should be how we address this anomaly. In 2014, there was an agreement of moving the pensioners from the active payroll to the pensioners’ payroll because at that time, they already know the people who have been working. The civil servants are usually reminded six months before retirement. They keep putting information on payment slips stating when the civil servant is going to retire.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural point?

MS RWABUSHAIJA: We are interested in knowing how they are going to address it rather than the data they are going to capture, which was done even last year. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPAKER: Honourable members, we need to go back to our Rules of Procedure. On this, I ask the government frontbench to help this House do its work. We are getting into this situation because we are now trying to ad hoc with the procedure to deal with issues that are urgent.

Now, the specific urgent issue that was raised yesterday falls under Rule 39: Notice of urgent questions. Questions that do not require notice; all you need to do is give notice to the Speaker that, “This is urgent, can I raise it this afternoon?” and the question is raised. However, the answer should be instant and specific, dealing with that matter.

It is very different from statements that are made under rule 34, a minister’s statement. Therefore, you cannot be prompted to make a statement on a specific issue and then use that opportunity now to make your ministerial statement on policy issues –(Applause)

This was a very specific issue, people have been summoned to appear and register. Some are old and some are bound and cannot come back. What are you going to do to help these people whom you have called upon to register to do it properly? Now you are proceeding under rule 34 to make a ministerial statement in which case I might have to allow people to debate for one hour, which is not the case as I will not allow that to happen.

You need to tell us about what is happening right now about the people who are reporting to register for pension so that I only seek clarification and we close this matter and go to the next item as we have the Prime Minister’s Question Time coming at 3 O’clock. Honourable minister, what is it with the people registering? How are they doing it? How is the correction going to be done to help those who have already suffered some problems?

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I was trying to give a background but as I said, the ministry got a communication from the service provider but of course what we need is a service that the ministry does not offer. The service provider communicated that they were unable to handle the issue. They requested for an extension. We immediately communicated to the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) and those districts in that schedule which had been affected were informed.

We were informed and we have rescheduled the pension’s verification exercise ahead such that those who were not in the first schedule in line with the service provider’s request, will not be affected. However, I have a conclusion which was clearly putting it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let him make the conclusion before you raise the clarification.

MR KARUBANGA: Mr Speaker, the conclusion was to request Parliament to note the status of pension’s payroll of 70,085 records; comprising 30,338 traditional service pensioners, 16,264 teaching service pensioners and 23,483 veterans and survivors’ benefits as of December 2016 and for Parliament to note that 2,181 records for the traditional service pensioners and 1,466 non-teaching service pensioners, remained unverified as of December 2015.

It was also for Parliament to note the implementation strategy for the planned census and biometric validation exercise to support the achievement of a clean payroll and to note the plans of matching the pension’s payroll and biometrics to the National Identification Register. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there some issues of clarification? This particular procedure would require supplementary questions, which would come from the Member who raised the matter. If there are no supplementary questions from the Member who raised the matter, then I will take one or two supplementary questions only, to which the minister will respond. This is not a debatable statement. Is there a supplementary question that can be raised to the minister?

3.00
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have perused through this brief and to me, there is more than meets the eye. The minister is talking about hiring Face Technologies to do the biometric validation and the census. In his conclusion, he says that they are going to get all this information and link it to the national information centre now under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

We passed a law to facilitate this kind of process and all districts have biometric equipment up to sub county level. I do not see why we should be talking of hiring or procuring another company to do work for which Government has already provided facilities and of which we already have stored information. Therefore, I see some duplication here if not misuse of resources. Can the minister clarify on this?

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Atiku has said that there is equipment in the districts; however, there is a central database which is managed and owned by the Ministry of Internal Affairs under the agency of the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). That is the only authority which is now recognised.

I do not know whether the districts have their databases and this equipment was from the Ministry of Internal Affairs but used by the districts. Therefore, I do not think the districts have the capacity or the equipment. He needs to confirm to the House if he is sure.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I need to put to the minister that section 9 of the law that we put in place gives NIRA as an Authority mandate to gather all information for the use of any department or agency of Government. Just like now, the Ministry of Public Service is in need of this kind of information; they should just be able to walk to NIRA offices here in Kololo and give them their area of interest and the information is sieved.

Mind you, the equipment that I am talking about is what captured the information that we now have on the national identity card. Therefore, all adults particularly those who are in the pension age or retired civil servants have national IDs. It is just a matter of searching and getting the information that is required instead of doing a roll call or census and whatever. Therefore, the starting point should be Ministry of Public Service linking up with NIRA to simplify that matter.

MR OBIGA KANIA: I would like to give some information on the status of the data which is available with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). Well, NIRA collected all the biometric data which is now stored with them and to access that data at the moment, you will need to do so by interfacing physically but they are in the process of acquiring an automated interface process where all the agencies that wish to do so will be able to access that data at any given time and point within the country.

At the moment, if the Ministry of Public Service wishes to use that data which they have done before, they will need to identify the personnel in their own way after which NIRA will verify the authenticity of those persons whose particulars they have collected and are stored in NIRA.

The second issue is about the equipment; there is some equipment available at the district level for the continuous registration of persons that NIRA is doing. This would require an arrangement between the Ministry of Public Service and the authorities in NIRA to use that for the purpose of their registration. If that is done, it is possible as long as the equipment is working at the district. 

However, some of this equipment is not working and we need to verify which districts have it – (Interjections)– I am just giving you information. 

You may talk about repair but it involves money and if the money is not there, it cannot be repaired. That is the information I had to give.  Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you please help us? You talk of the Ministry of Public Service going to the districts and registering. Would they be registering people who are not yet registered or would they be using it for purposes of verifying their identities?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, when the identification and registration was done, the entire data was submitted and stored at the NIRA headquarters of Kololo. So when you get a physical machine in the district, you will not have all that data of everybody in that district. Take for example Gulu District where people registered as individuals and the data was evacuated to NIRA; there is no interface where Gulu can access that data online from Kololo. This is the arrangement that NIRA is working to make possible by purchasing the equipment.

Again using Gulu as an example, there is a machine for the continuous registration of persons for purposes of the identity card. Not everybody who is registered for an identity card is going to retire now and is a pensionable person. Therefore, to verify whether an individual registered on the identity card docket of NIRA is a pensioner, the Ministry of Public Service will help to make a second move to identify those people. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, how are we proceeding with this matter? Pensioners have been called upon to come to their districts and be verified and the process is being done by the Ministry of Public Service, which has opted to hire a firm to do it and that is where we are. 

We are not talking about the national identity card because it is not important for us now as it is outside what we are discussing. They are saying the process has suffered some problems – people have come and they have not been verified, there are no people and there is an issue with it. That is all for now. 

The issue of NIRA or whatever else comes at another stage. Can we deal with that issue because that is what was raised by the member for Workers?

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, the programme was rescheduled. We communicated to the CAOs and various media houses were informed. It is very unfortunate that some of these old civil servants did not get the announcement. We are committed to making sure that the exercise is complete. We take the submissions of the members – (Interjections) - yes we do. 

The other issue that I wanted to talk about is software. There is hardware being the equipment and software for doing the work. So colleagues who spoke about –

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I am not in any way being persuaded by the dull presentation by the minister. This is a very serious matter and the minister is talking like he has not had lunch. (Laughter)

Since the Vice-President is here and the minister has asked for time, can he tell us the date that the pensioners will be paid and we wait for that date? I am not being persuaded by this lullaby. Your speech is actually making me doze. 

May the Vice-President, through you, Mr Speaker, tell us when they will pay the pensioners so that we can tell them over the radio and we bring this story to an end? We are tired of those endless stories. 

Somebody has worked with you for 33 years and then you say that you want to validate him or her. What are you talking about? Why did you not validate them in the 33 years that they were working? Can we be told when they will be paid after this exercise is done so that we get you in the House? 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sincerely, we are not impressed by the way the minister is presenting this to us. 

Mr Speaker, as you may realise, we have pensioners and some of them who were on the payroll have had their names deleted and therefore are not earning their pension. There are others who ‘chased’ this pension for so long and yet the minister is submitting just like that.

The papers say some of those people died but have been on the payroll for the last nine years, fetching their pension. We would like for him to assure us how this process is going to clear all this so that ghosts do not appear in this one. Is it procedurally right for him not to disclose what he wants to do - believe me we got this information and we were supposed to inform our electorates. We did not even get any information about this particular one. Is the minister procedurally right to go in that way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the issue is very clear. You want to pay pensioners but you do not have the proper records to do that. 
The process that you are now engaging in is to get that record straight. When will this process end and when will these people be paid?            

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, the Ministry of Public Service has the mandate of ensuring that the payroll is clean and proper.

We have given a schedule of getting that clean payroll where we shall link it to the National Identification Data Base - (Interjections) - the issue of payments -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you were very clear on the question you put to the minister but we see the minister meandering. Is he in order to try and formulate his own questions and avoid your question instead of answering it? When will the exercise start and when will it end and when will the pensioners be paid? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to tell this House when the process of verification will end and when these people will be paid?

MR KARUBANGA: The proposed end of the verification exercise is 30 March 2017. After that, we shall give a clean payroll to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which has the framework of payment because that is not our mandate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is what we know now; that by the end of March, the verification exercise will have been completed and thereafter, we shall be expecting the payment to commence including the arrears. Whatever is due to the pensioners, we now expect it to be paid because everything will have been cleaned up and the payroll would be proper. So, can we take it that the committee responsible for this sector will follow up this matter? Come end of March, we see what stage we are at such that we take it up from there.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE 40TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARTYRDOM OF ARCHBISHOP JANANI LUWUM

3.17
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Mr Speaker, I rise to issue a statement on the forth coming commemoration of the 40th anniversary of the martyrdom of Archbishop Janani Luwum.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, tomorrow 16 February 2017, the nation will hold the national commemoration activities at Mucwini, Kitgum District to mark the 40th anniversary of the Archbishop Janani Luwum. His Excellency the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta, is expected to preside over the commemoration activities.

Tomorrow, 16 February 2017 has been declared a public holiday in honour of the martyrdom of Saint Janani Luwum.

Mr Speaker, allow me to give a brief recount of the life of Janani Luwum. The late Archbishop Janani Luwum was born in 1922 at Wii Gweng in Mucwini in Acholi. He spent his childhood and early youth tending to goats but earned a reputation as a quick learner when opportunities arose.

The late Archbishop became a teacher and was converted to Christianity in the East African Revival on 6 January 1946. The late Janani Luwum became a Ugandan parish priest in 1956. He faithfully served in the position until 1969 when he was elected to serve Northern Uganda as a bishop and was consecrated to a function attended by Amin and then Prime Minister Apollo Milton Obote.

In less than two years after becoming the Bishop, the reign of terror perpetuated by President Idi Amin then began on January 1971. It was in 1974 that Janani Luwum was chosen as the Archbishop of Uganda. He made it his business to confront the injustices and atrocities of the then President of Uganda, Idi Amin. He took his criticisms public and read a radio address in 1976 on Christmas day, until someone chose the power of censorship before he even finished –(Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information that the minister is giving is very important but honourable members are not able to follow what she is presenting because it is not on our iPads and even the hard copies were not given to us. Is it procedurally right for us to continue when the honourable members are not following what is going on?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those statements that does not attract debate. It is just for information.

However, honourable members, you will also recall that the first time that the day was commemorated two years ago, there was a motion in this House and I was presiding. We debated a full tribute motion to St Janani Luwum; so, some of the information that the minister is giving us is already part of the record of this House. The Minister is informing this House that tomorrow this commemoration will take place. Can we just receive this information because we are not going to debate it today?

MS MBAYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. On 16 February 1977, the most Reverend Janani Luwum, Archbishop of Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi and Bwoga Zaire was murdered by Idi Amin, the then President of Uganda.

He had been falsely accused of being involved in a plot to overthrow the Government. Although his home was invaded and ransacked by soldiers, no evidence of treason was found. Nevertheless, he was stripped, beaten and abused while all the time he continued to declare his innocence.

Mr Speaker, embassies, churches, relatives and friends invited the Archbishop to flee Uganda to which he replied; “If I the Shepherd flee, what will happen to the sheep?” 
On 15 February 1977, he was taken before the military who decreed that he must die. As they were taking him away to the then dreaded Nile Mansions, he said to his fellow bishops; “I am not afraid; in all this I see the hand of God.”

Mr Speaker, the Archbishop was finally shot dead on 16 February 1977. He was buried at his ancestral home in Mucwini in Kitgum District. 

His selfless sacrifice; his love for his flock and his commitment to put his love for God above all else is a big lesson to all of us, Ugandans. May God give us the same commitment to serve Him and our motherland.

Mr Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, this year, on 16th of February – and that is tomorrow - we will celebrate the 40th Anniversary of the death and martyrdom of Archbishop Janani Luwum. The commemoration will be held from 9:00 a.m., at Mucwini in Kitgum District and will be presided over by His Excellency, the President of Uganda. 

We shall, on the same day, unveil a master plan to transform the burial site at Mucwini into an international religious tourism site complete with a prayer arena, education institutions – that is primary, secondary, vocational institution, hostels, a museum and a facelift of the Janani Luwum Monument.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is not a celebration for only the Anglican Church, it is a special pride for all Ugandans. The statue of Janani Luwum stands at the entrance of Westminster Abbey in England as one of the 10 martyrs of the 20th Century. 

Indeed, it is not a celebration for only Ugandans but for all believers in God. I, therefore, appeal to all of you, honourable colleagues, and believers in God, to attend the celebrations at Mucwini, Kitgum District tomorrow, the 16th February 2017, beginning at 9 a.m.

Mr Speaker, allow me to extend my sincere appreciation to the following: 
    (i) His Excellency, the President of Uganda, for declaring the day a public holiday and for accepting to preside over the commemoration; (Applause)
    (ii) The Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, for the oversight role, which has led the organisation of this year’s commemoration;
    (iii) The Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, the Most Reverend Stanley Ntagali;
    (iv) The Provincial Secretary, Rev. Can. Amos Magezi; and
    (v) All bishops and all the clergy for organising this year’s commemoration activities, which commenced on Sunday, 5th February 2017 at Namirembe Cathedral.

I also want to appreciate the permanent secretary, Directorate of Ethics and Integrity, Office of the President; all permanent secretaries together with their technical officers who have worked hard to ensure the success of the celebration.

I wish you all a safe travel to Mucwini and an inspiring commemoration event. For God and my Country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, that is the information that we needed to receive. The national organising committee has been meeting, chaired by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister; the day is tomorrow. So, please make time and be there.

Honourable members, the time has come for us, even if it is late, to handle the next item, which is, by Rule 34, what we should be doing.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister’s Question Time will take one hour; we are starting at half past and so we shall close at half past.

MR OKOT-OGONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence about the celebration, which is taking place tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have closed that matter; let us leave it like that, please.

3.31
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, under Uganda’s foreign policy that is enshrined in our national constitution, what is Government doing to shift from whine coughing in international diplomacy into commercial and economic diplomacy by the diplomats we are posting to our foreign missions?

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, that is a central question especially in the current economic challenges. For quite a number of years, Government of Uganda has prioritised commercial diplomacy. It has not been possible to appoint commercial attachés to many embassies. Nevertheless, the current staff and ambassadors heading missions have been oriented and re-oriented to increase their knowledge on handling commercial issues and to prioritise them in their work; so it is a big priority.

3.33
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is: Can you please tell us how many pupils got aggregate four in PLE from Busia district? For more information, the 15 who got four aggregates had to come to schools in Kampala; do we have to move all the way from Busia to Kampala in order to benefit from UPE? All the schools that President Obote had given us and were doing very well have died out. Former President Obote had given us quality education and health services. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, like the guidance we keep giving, there are questions that you can ask a minister. But this particular time we use to ask questions on broad policy issues because we do not expect the Prime Minister to know about a pothole in a road in Omoro and respond to it now. (Applause)

Similarly, he would not know the number of pupils who have passed with aggregate four in Busia district. So it will not be useful to ask that question to the Prime Minister at this time. But if there is a minister who can respond to those specific issues, I will give the latitude to the minister to respond to this. If not, we will capture this because certainly the Prime Minister would not know. And we will want that the question is received and the Government Chief Whip will take note of it and at an appropriate time a response will be given to this House.

3.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, two weeks or so ago, we had elections of the AU Chairperson in Addis Ababa. Thereafter, we had the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Kenya, who lost, accusing Uganda of betrayal. We do not know how to respond when we are asked this question. Would you like to tell the country what happened in Addis Ababa during that election? Did Uganda betray its neighbour or not?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, unlike hon. Okupa, I do not have all those details. But what I know is that Uganda performed well with regard to her regional obligations to support the candidate that Kenya presented. Uganda also performed well to ensure that African interests became supreme.

3.35
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inquire from the Prime Minister about the policy of putting into use the equipment procured by Government. 

Mr Speaker, when it came to Parliament, as we played one of our roles in the committees, we went to KCCA that was in August and found they had procured graders and road equipment - in fact if one was in the Parliamentary canteen, they would be able to see them but to date they are not in use. 

Therefore, may I know from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister, having procured the road equipment, how long does it take for the people to use them because people from Omoro and Butaleja have roads with potholes yet the equipment are just rusting from there. May I know after how long can one use the equipment because for over six months they are just lying there idle?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have had occasion to respond to something close to that question. It is true that equipment from Japan was brought and assembled into the country. However, at the same time, the personnel and other related issues are being prepared to ensure that the investment in this equipment is optimally utilised and the equipment has adequate well-trained personnel to protect and use it for the interest of the country.

3.37
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, reports from the Auditor-General, the Civil Society and public opinion reveal that there is a lot of waste and mismanagement of public resources, hence poor service delivery. There is a challenge in the implementation and monitoring of Government business across the board. Many Government programmes are implemented without proper feasibility studies, for example, Operation Wealth Creation. 

However, you are now advocating for local content and this goes beyond telling me to buy the furniture along Nsambya Road where I pass every day on my way home. But we need proper guidelines and policies on local content. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, where is the policy framework for building capacity for local content?

Concerning the whole system, poor service delivery needs broader policy reforms in institutions and institutional reforms need consultation. Parliament is a big stakeholder in such consultations; are you planning to invite Members of Parliament to carry out consultations on how to reform institutions? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is a very important point that our sister has raised. It is true that a number of things have not gone well as we expected in Government. But it is also true that we now have renewed efforts to ensure that things are streamlined hence the slogan that we are now using - and we mean business Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo – so, my sister, under these arrangements, we will ensure that things get better.

It is true that Parliament is not just there to be consulted but Parliament is supposed to discuss and approve the general policy framework. Therefore, Parliament without any doubt will play its rightful role.

3.40
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt. hon. Prime Minister is: Uganda’s Vision 2040 aims at transforming the country from a peasant and low-income country to a competitive upper middle income country. Projections indicate that Uganda is supposed to achieve its lower middle income status by 2017.

According to the World Bank, countries in the category of lower middle income has a gross national income per capita of more than $146,000, but less than $4,125. Those in the upper middle income have annual income levels of between $4,126 to $12,735. 

Can the Prime Minster update this House on how far the Government has gone in achieving Vision 2040 and on that note, what is the country’s gross national per capita income? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, in as far as pursuit of the Vision 2040 is concerned, the country is on course. With regards to the details of the per capita income, I think that the exact figures may be got from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but they are within the range of $700.

3.42
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, the Committee on Local Government and Public Service, a month ago, submitted a report to this august House indicating the need to carry out national elections for LCs I, II and for women. 

You are aware that during Christmas until 1st January this year, our faces as a committee were all over in the media. This attracted the public to wonder about when and whether we will have these elections. 

Recently, we were confronted by the civil society asking us as to why and how far the Government has gone in carrying out these elections. Before I came into this House today, a Member from my constituency asked me whether it is true the elections will be held in March. The guidelines from the Electoral Commission are not out and the Government is silent and Parliament is equally quiet. 

Can you tell us how far the Government has gone and whether we will achieve our target of having our people elected in March? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is statutory right of the Independent Electoral Commission to announce dates for national and other elections. We will, therefore, wait for the authoritative body to do so. 

Nevertheless, as far as Government and Ministry of Local Government are concerned, there has been an adjustment of the original indicated time and we are working around the elections being held in March or April, but the actual date will be announced by the Independent Electoral Commission.

4.44
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, we are happy we got some new town councils in the Ninth Parliament in Kanungu and Kigezi sub region as a whole and we really appreciated it. However, there is a great challenge there. We have learnt that the hard-to-reach allowances earned by primary teachers were scrapped off. The fact is that much as we got these town councils, the situation did not change because the environment, the rent and expenditure remained the same. 

Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, is it okay for you to help us and look around to make sure these teachers get their hard-to-reach allowance again? They are in town councils but their situation has never changed. Thank you very much.  

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is definitely okay. 

3.46
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy (II)(iv) states: “The composition of Government shall be broadly representative of the national character and the social diversity of the country.” 

Is the Prime Minister aware that the Head of the Executive, Police, Army, Prison and the Leader of Government Business are all from one region, which is contrary to the National Objectives and Directives in the Constitution? Are you aware of that? What are you doing to correct this kind of imbalance? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that my brother should have also included the Leader of the Opposition but I was not aware of those specific details. I will look at them a little more closely and if there are distortions, it is the issue of Government to correct them. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am a backbench Member of Parliament and not the Leader of the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition is hon. Winnie Kizza from Western Uganda. 

Is the Prime Minister in order to say that I am the Leader of the Opposition, when this is also part of the existing imbalance in this country? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Prime Minister was just saying you should have completed the list by including the Leader of the Opposition too because she also comes from that region. 

3.48
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question to Prime Minister is in regard to a policy or law on international wildlife movement. If it is in place, why isn’t it being enacted because we have elephants crossing over from South Sudan and Ethiopia and are destroying people’s crops and property in Uganda? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this is an important question because man has interfered with natural habits of elephants with colonial and neo-colonial borders. Therefore, it is them that are being inconvenienced. 

Nevertheless, the Uganda Government has a responsibility to work with her neighbouring countries to do whatever is possible to protect the crops and interests of our people.

3.50
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, my question concerns the Youth Livelihood Fund. Recently, we heard from the press that 80 districts had failed to pay back what they were supposed to pay. We also saw nasty and scary pictures broadcast on the television of some youths being handcuffed from some district in Busoga. 

Therefore, if that is the situation that our youths are being arrested for failure to pay back – and it was also reported that some officials had asked that group to pay Shs 2,000,000 before they released their funds; Rt hon. Prime Minister, my question is: What is the actual future of the youths using this programme? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the aim of Government in establishing the Youth Livelihood Fund was to liberate the young people from poverty and to give them a meaningful living. It is true there have been a number of implementational challenges. 

The solution, however, is not to round up these young people and just dump them in prison. Government is endeavouring to make a proper diagnosis to see why the end result is failure by some districts to recover the money. 

We also need to further educate these young people and to ensure that some possibly corrupt officials in the system, who may be the road blocks to a successful Youth Livelihood Programme, are dealt with decisively. 

3.52
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For domestic animals like cows and goats to be moved from one place to another, one must acquire a movement permit. 

In Bulambuli District right now - and I think some other parts of the country too - we have seen cows with long horns being moved all over the place without a movement permit. You do not see them coming during day but when you wake up in the morning, you find them there. An example is our land of Bugisu Cooperative Union, which has 90,000 cows with long horns. The people walk with guns and the language they speak is neither Lumasaba nor Ateso. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, what policy is being applied to this cattle movement without permits? Does the Government know if it is a security problem or not? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother the hon. Nandala-Mafabi has raised an issue which the district security committees should handle. Nevertheless, all of us know that the country and the region is facing drought and that people are moving from place to place looking for some food. Some even come from our neighbouring countries. It would therefore, not shock me if some animals in pursuit of water and grass go beyond their normal areas of grazing. So, let us tolerate this temporary situation. 

3.54
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I just have a simple but very important issue. We all know the Finance Management Act specifies that on every tenth day of the first quarter, grants should be sent to the districts. However, as we talk now, Mr Speaker, Ngora District has not received some of these grants from Government. The schools have opened but there are no grants. Those are all challenges. I now ask the Prime Minister when these grants will be sent to Ngora District. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if the grants have not been sent as indeed stipulated, it is something serious that the Prime Minister will today take up with the Minister of Finance.

3.55
MR ALLI OGAMA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. As you are aware, on 13 October 2016 the President hosted a delegation of leaders from West Nile to discuss the security situation in the region. Among the issues discussed was the border conflict within the sub-region, and the President accordingly directed that your office handles the border conflict that is prevailing between Yumbe District and Arua District over the disputed sub county called Ewanga. 

In the same year in November, we came with a delegation from Arua, including the then Resident District Commissioner and the Chairman LC IV, to see you about the same. However, to date, we have not received any response from your office yet the people at the grassroots would like to know the fate of this sub county in terms of the service delivery required. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that what the honourable member has raised is true. After those meetings he has quoted, the honourable Minister of Local Government and I had discussions pertaining to the matter. We resolved to send a team of surveyors to go and re-open the disputed border so that there can be a rational basis for getting a lasting solution. This is in the process of being done.

3.58
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the year 2010, Government came up with a plan to ease and increase the cost of doing business, and they came up with a provision to build an inland port at Malaba. The President commissioned the construction of the dry port in the year 2010 but up to date, not even a shade, let alone a spade of sand, has been seen on the site that was provided for the construction of the inland port. What is the fate of this port?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the programme is on course without any doubt. Arrangements are now being made to ensure that the land is properly vacated and the rest of the work follows. 

We have had one or two areas of problems, actually of a legal nature, where there has been an injunction. However, the Attorney-General is pursuing the matter to get a solution in order for the actual work to start. Otherwise, Government is ready.

4.00
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka County South, Luuka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. A few years ago, the Government of Uganda rolled out the Senior Citizens Grant as a pilot project. It was eventually implemented in a few districts. However, as a result of this, the senior citizens neighbouring the benefitting districts are complaining about Government’s discrimination and neglect of the welfare of the elders. 

Some Government officials are actually moving towards that particular age bracket and they are equally lamenting that the other social groups like the youth and the women are being considered in the whole country, particularly in terms of improving their livelihood. There are some districts that had started benefitting but this thing is not forthcoming up to now. May I know when this practice will end and when the other districts will benefit from the same? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is not only the districts neighbouring the benefitting districts but even those which are rather distant are complaining. Indeed, this has been a good programme, enjoying full support from the Government. Therefore, Government intends, with resources being available, to roll it out to the rest of the districts. The only constraint has been resources and as soon as they are available, this good programme will go to the districts where it is not yet in action.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Butema Child Development Centre, Bugiri District, represented by hon. Gaster Mugoya Kyawa and hon. Agnes Taaka Wejuli. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

We also have visitors from Gemakumwino Travel Group, Buyende District, represented by hon. Babirye and hon. Dhamuzungu. They have come to join us in the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

4.03
MR ROBERT KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Tororo District, we have got a scientific national agricultural animal research institute. One of your ministers was quoted in the newspapers saying that this institute was going to be relocated by Government to an 8000-hectare farm called Maruzi Farm, which is one of the several farms under the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre. I would like the Rt Hon. Prime minister to give clarification on this.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have factual information on the transfer. Nevertheless, the most critical point is to ensure that we support research and it goes on so that we can answer the challenges in animal production.

4.04 
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): (Expunged.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, some of those matters touch on foreign relations of countries. We cannot competently raise them in the form you are raising them.

4.06
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is about food relief to hunger stricken districts in this country. I am aware that your office is already helping districts that are in dire need. What is the plan for West Nile because the districts there are among those that are badly hit by drought and the people are about to die due to this hunger? What are you planning for the people of West Nile?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, food shortage has actually hit a majority of areas in Uganda, but we already have reports about West Nile. The ministry responsible for relief has plans already to assist those badly hit areas in the West Nile region.

4.08
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few months ago, the Committee on Natural Resources brought a report to this House, which was elaborate, on the land degradation that was taking place in Lwera. The House discussed the report and gave good recommendations, which I believe are on record. However, the same business happening in Lwera is now happening all over the country; if it is not sand, it is gold mining, tree cutting and the like.

Today, we are facing the challenge of drought. I do not know whether the Government is aware that this business is the one bringing the drought that we are facing today. What is Government planning to do in handling this problem? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government is aware that environmental degradation in different forms is taking place in a number of areas in the country. As a result, the Ministry of Water and Environment, on behalf of Government, is raising a campaign to plant more trees and to deal with those who are degrading the environment as the laws of the land allow.

4.10
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister tell Ugandans whether it is part of the training of the police traffic officers to beat up people at roadblocks? One of the notorious places is Doko roadblock before one gets to Mbale. People have been beaten up and kicked and complaints have been raised. 

If one has committed a traffic offence, give them a receipt so that they can go to the bank and pay. However, they lock up people and beat them. Everybody who drives to Mbale goes through hash punishment at that roadblock. A person’s indicator could have stopped working or the bulb could have just blown, or a stone hit their glass or side mirror but when they reach there, they go through roughness, beatings, kicking and they are locked up. Is that part of the police training, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Can you tell Ugandans?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the police are supposed to enforce the law and to the best of my knowledge, beating up of people is not part of the authorised enforcement mechanisms. Therefore, if any police officer was involved in the type of punishment you have talked about, it is a criminal offence and I would have expected you, honourable colleague, to straight away report this matter to the police for investigation and action.

4.12
MR JAMES NIYINGIRIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kinkizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is aware that in May last year, Government of Uganda procured a consultant by the names of Semac to supervise the construction of the road from Rukungiri to Kanungu. Had it not been the problems encountered in procuring that civil works contractor, the road was supposed to have started in September.

However, the people along that road have not been compensated up to now, although Government had promised that they would have been compensated by December last year. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are these people going to be compensated as Government procures the civil works contractor?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true the project was delayed and the procurement had to be done again. I expect that with the procurement being done, the citizens who are due to be compensated will be paid as part of the implementation of the project.

4.14
MR FRED ODUCHU (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it has been a Government policy that each subcounty must have a seed secondary school and a health centre. However, in one of my subcounties, ever since it was created five years ago - Kanginima Subcounty - there is no health centre and no seed secondary school. The only private secondary school that is there, and which Government partners with, charges people exorbitantly. 

We tried to create a community school so that the Government can take it up but up to now, nothing has taken place. Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister give us advice on how we can have Government take over Kanginima Community Secondary School for the good of our people? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable colleague is right about the Government policy of having a health centre III and a Government aided secondary school per sub-county. 

We are, however, aware that at the moment there are quite a number of sub-counties that do not have either or both. It is the commitment of Government within this very kisanja to ensure that the schools and health centres are built in accordance with the Government policy.

MR NAMBESHE: Mr Speaker, with all due respect to the honourable Prime Minister, our Constitution recognises two languages that are officially used, English and Kiswahili. However, several times I have heard this mantra, “Kisanja hakuna muchezo” –(Interjection)– I am entitled to my opinion and I request for your protection, Mr Speaker.

In Kiswahili - I have a whole thesaurus - when you search for the word “kisanja” you will not find it. I have also gone through the Hansard and realised that the editors have captured that same mantra, “kisanja hakuna muchezo”. Is it procedurally right and correct to import that word, which is non-existent, into Kiswahili? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We know that the language of this Parliament has always been English and the second language is Kiswahili. Any statements that have other terms from other sources should be defined for purposes of the record. If they are not, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will have an opportunity to tell us what that particular word means because it is neither Kiswahili nor English.

However, in the procedure in court, when a particular word or something gains that level of notoriety that everybody knows it, court takes judicial notice of it. I am not sure whether Parliament also takes parliamentary notice of things but this word keeps coming up. Let us confine ourselves to what we all understand. I think by definition, we already know what that word means in that context. Let us be more elaborate for purposes of those who read the Hansard later. 

4.18
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just last month, the Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) results were released. According to observations, I think rural private schools performed better than the Government aided schools in those rural areas, more so in my constituency. However, to my surprise, the Government is closing down those private schools. 

I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister if there is any plan for the Government to help and give advice to private schools since they are offering good services to Ugandans. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as all colleagues know, the private sector has made enormous contributions in the field of education at all levels. It is the policy of Government to give them active support because they are helping the country and complementing the work of Government. This, however, does not rule out the need for Government to ensure that all institutions where children are studying are safe, healthy and meet essential standards of education.

One would need to get the exact details as to why some of the schools have been closed. However, it must be on the basis of them not meeting some of the essential requirements that any normal school should meet, especially concerning the health and the safety of the young children. 

4.20
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to inform this august House - I was here in November and I come from one of the mighty constituencies that are surrounded by Lake Victoria. Our concern then was about those who invaded our lake. We were promised a full report within two months but since November to date, there is no information about Lake Victoria or Lake Kyoga in regard to the outcry of the people that is ongoing. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry that the report has not come but I will ensure that within the next two weeks, it will be in the House. 

4.22
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the cost of educating a child in Uganda is highly increasing and is becoming unaffordable to most Ugandans, especially those in rural areas. I am very sure you are aware that the cost of taking a child right from kindergarten to primary, secondary and university is very high. 

Mr Speaker, some schools charge for unnecessary requirements. Other than the high school fees, they also charge for unnecessary requirements including asking parents to buy text books for their schools and also pay for development fees to construct their schools. Some of these schools, if not most of them, are private schools that are doing business. This situation makes Ugandan children, especially those from rural areas who are very bright, unable to access education in good schools. 

Is Government coming up with any policy to regulate schools fees in this country, especially regulating to ensure that even children of the poor can afford quality education?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we all know that education is liberalised. Whereas Government can give guidelines about school fees in Government-owned schools, it becomes difficult for it to have blanket regulations that govern private schools.

I agree with my sister that there is a wide range of school fees being paid. However, I also know that people go to schools where they feel they can afford the fees. For private institutions, Government urges them not to raise their fees but at the same time Government’s hands are tied. For Government-owned institutions, we endeavour to give guidelines. 

Nevertheless as leaders, parents should ensure that schools do not charge exorbitant or distorted fees. However, there is no plan by Government to put a restriction on the minimum or maximum fees that should be paid by all institutions because of the policy of liberalisation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, time is closing in on us, but I would like to accommodate Budadiri East, Kioga County, Dokolo District, Lira, Otuke, Bukooli Islands and hon. Tayebwa. Please, let us make the questions quick so that we can use the time properly. Our questions have been very long with a lot of preambles and that takes a lot of time. Let us have sharp questions so that we can use the time properly.

4.25
MR VINCENT WABOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, it is a Government policy to have a secondary school in each subcounty of this nation, but we are still waiting for that to happen. In Sironko, we requested the Minister of Education and Sports to support us, particularly in three subcounties located in hard-to-reach areas. For the record, I am talking about the subcounties of Bukyabo, Butandiga and Masaba. In those subcounties, it is very difficult for a child to commute from the mountain to come and study. 

We requested that the community schools, which have been started in those areas, be taken over by Government. May I know when you plan to ask the Minister of Education and Sports to respond to the plight of the people of Sironko? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, again, the point is well taken. Actually, the Ministry of Education and Sports is systematically tackling this issue. This particular academic year, 120 secondary schools are being taken on by the Ministry of Education and Sports. Over the next few years, more schools will be taken on. Therefore, the programme is on course.

Mr Speaker, I indicated to you that I would follow up the report on fisheries. Fortunately, I have been given information by the Government Chief Whip that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Mr Vincent Ssempijja, on the 9th of February 2017, presented to this august House a report on fisheries management. Therefore, this has been done and in case the honourable colleague may not have been in the House, he could consult the Hansard or we could make another copy of the report available to him.

4.28
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Mr Prime Minister, my concern is on the effect of the long dry spell that has had a negative impact on ground water. 

Aware that ground water is a finite resource, has Government taken any deliberate or technically guided effort to undertake a comprehensive study on the impact of climate change on our ground water potential so as to inform planning?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am aware that some years ago these studies were done. Nevertheless, we are in a dynamic environment. The climatic changes are clearly hostile and regular assessment of our water resource is necessary. It is a good point that will be pursued by the Ministry of Water and Environment.

4.29
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, the issue of Migingo has been in the press for some time now. I know how fragile and strategic it is. Recently, we were told that the army would replace the police there. As an MP who represents that place, I would like you to give us information about what is taking place at Migingo. 

We need to go there because we have voters there and Kenyans are also there. We are still waiting for the results of the work of the committee that the two countries put in place to tell us where it belongs. May I now get some information in that regard, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue of Migingo continues to be diplomatically handled by the two friendly countries of Kenya and Uganda. The solution will be found, basically through proper surveying. 

With regard to the army being in charge of Migingo instead of the police, this is part of the general policy of Government. Government has decided to tighten security on our lakes, especially on Lake Victoria, mainly to combat illegal fishing so that the lakes can be more productive, helpful to the people of Uganda and bring more money to the economy. 

It is true that a marine section has been put up, headed by an officer from the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). However, the second in command will be from the Uganda Police Force to ensure that the security forces work together to improve the security on our lake.

4.32
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, District Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Prime Minister to explain to the House why we have asked – very many times – to have the report on the climate change negotiations and we have not received any response. 

We are asking for this because yesterday we got a very depressing report about food insecurity and water stress in the country. I know all this is traced to the climate change disasters. So, can we know what the Government has in hand, which can help us carry out mitigation and adaptation activities in order to alleviate this kind of suffering we are going through? When can you produce this report to guide this Parliament on the way forward regarding climate change adaptation and mitigation? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if this report has not been brought to this august House, then it is obviously a mistake. What I know is that the ministry responsible for water and environment will be bringing it. We just need to give them a couple of weeks. I see the minister responsible for environment is here. 

I agree with my sister, Cecilia Ogwal, that these were important negotiations and indeed when the Paris accord was reached, Uganda was one of the counties that signed that accord. I was happy to represent Uganda at the signing ceremony in New York. Indeed, colleagues, Members of Parliament, and other key national leaders should be empowered with information on this accord and how best Uganda can use this accord to sustainably protect our environment.

4.34
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, a few days ago I was in my constituency and I found empty shelves with no essential drugs, especially Coartem, in health centres. I am told you have supplied other drugs but there is no Coartem. In some of our constituencies, we do not even have small private clinics and this means that people are dying of malaria as Coartem is the first line of treatment. 

I even went to National Medical Stores (NMS) but they said they wanted about Shs 55 billion but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gave them Shs 5 billion and that is why they are stuck. 

I think this problem is in most parts of the country and I could be speaking for many Members of Parliament here. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minster, can you tell us when Government is going to address this serious concern before it runs out of hand, like the hunger scenario? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, hon. Tayebwa is raising a valid point. It is true that there has been a shortage of supply of Coartem in our health facilities, mainly because of inadequate resources. However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Health have agreed with Cipla, the producers of Coartem, to ensure that within the next two weeks, our health institutions will have sufficient supplies of Coartem.

4.36
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to say to the Prime Minister that we appreciate that there is climate change and that it is biting this country very much. In a bid to curb its effects, Government is trying its best to come up with measures. One of the measures is that the Ministry of Water and Environment is going to the swamps, inspecting them and trying to stop people from digging in the swamps. 

Recently, there was a team of environmental police that was sent to Lira District to stop people from digging in the swamps and we appreciate that. However, their cry is that on their way to Kampala, they see swamps being refilled and construction taking place, among other things. They are saying, why are they doing this selectively?

Secondly, we, Members of Parliament, go to our different constituencies telling our people about this climate change. Has Government got any plan to give Members of Parliament some tree seedlings so that we give them to our people to plant in order to curb some of these things? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the observations by my sister are basically correct. The request for seedlings is a good one, so that as leaders, we can be an example to the wanainchi about restoration of our environment.

With regard to people who are assaulting swamps, putting up stalls, building and the like, Government’s policy is clear, and Government intends to rigorously implement it to ensure that wetlands throughout the country, whether in Kampala, Kaabong or Kisoro, are protected. Let us also raise our sensitisation and mobilisation so that the wanainchi can become protectors of our wetlands and forests instead of being the destroyers of the environment. Kampala will not be an exception in ensuring that the wetlands are protected.

4.39
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. My question is very brief. Last week, I was in my constituency and people living with HIV/AIDS came to my home and informed me that they find a problem swallowing their medicine because there is no food. They requested me to ask you if you still know whether they exist or not. It is as simple as that. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, indeed through you, my brother and all colleagues in this House, let our countrymen and women who are affected in one way or another by HIV/AIDS know that Government, Parliament and the people of Uganda are fully aware of their concerns and they have unequivocal support from the President, Cabinet, Parliament and all of us.

Secondly, in the supply of food that has taken place in the country - my brother, hon. Musa Ecweru, has been in charge - priority has deliberately been given to those who are sick. This is because, as you know, food is part of the treatment of diseases. Please, assure them that we will do our best, with your support, to stand by them and support them as we have always done.

4.40
MR ROBERT MUSOKE (NRM, Budiope West County, Buyende): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, in 2009, Government started a project of constructing an ice plant at Bukungu along Lake Kyoga and the project was completed in 2014. Altogether, the project cost Government UShs 2.58 billion but to my surprise, this ice plant has never produced even a single sheet of ice. When I visited the place as the Member of Parliament representing the constituency and asked the committee that took on the oversight role, they informed us that Spencon Services Limited, the contractor who was awarded the work, did not install a generator and up to now, no single piece of ice has ever been produced.

My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: what is Government planning? We must have a multiplier effect of this UShs 2.58 billion that was injected in this project. Up to now, it is redundant and nothing is going on. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am informed that this project also had money for operationalisation of the plant and this money was supposed to be managed by the local authorities under the district. Nevertheless, it is a shame that such a facility is there and is not being used purely because of a generator. It is something that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is going to follow up and we will let the House know within the next two weeks.

4.43
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is in relation to the conflict in South Sudan. The presence of the refugees in the hosting districts has caused stress in terms of the natural resources for the locals. 

The United Nations agencies and other implementing agencies are giving cash to the refugees to purchase food. There are also other lucrative businesses that are going on. We have people who are now supplying logs to the communities of the refugees and our forests are getting depleted in the process. More so, those agencies that are caring for the welfare of the refugees are drawing water from our already drying rivers, especially in Maracha. Our rivers are being drained to supply water to the refugees. I am now asking whether there is any affirmative action the Government has in plan for the host districts. 

Secondly, has that conflict in South Sudan attracted the necessary attention that it deserves? Those people who are suffering in South Sudan are our neighbours and in the spirit of the East African Community, what is being done to settle the conflict in the region? What are the other bodies like IGAD, the Nile Basin Initiative and the world at large doing to help resolve that conflict? Thank you, Mr Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, ultimately the answer is to stop the refugees from running away from South Sudan or the Democratic Republic of Congo. The Government of Uganda and our President in particular have been spearheading this regional effort to bring an end to that conflict.

With regard to the presence of refugees who are encroaching on our forests, water and other requirements, this is something that is easily understood. Perhaps you may not know that Cabinet passed a loan request, which will soon come to Parliament, specifically from the World Bank, and it will support host communities to the refugees. This money will be used in the host areas to restore the environment and also improve the earning capacity of the host population so that they are not disadvantaged because they are hosting the refugees.

Finally, let us do our best to support our brothers and sisters who are in distress. Today it is them but as you very well know, some years ago it was us. 

4.48
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My question is not very long. I rise on the usual issue concerning our brothers from Karamoja. As I talk, Otuke has become a supermarket for these people. A couple of days back, the Members of Parliament from Alebtong, Otuke and Lango as a whole brought this issue to Parliament. However, it has taken time and I do not know when it is going to be resolved. 

We do not hate the Karimojong. We love them because they are also human beings. However, the question is, what will Government do to compensate those who lost their cassava to the Karimojong during this huge famine in the country? Personally, two nights ago, two acres of my cassava was uprooted by them. It sounds very strange for a legislator’s crops to be taken.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the issue that my brother, hon. Acon, is talking about has partly been raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and others. The conflict and turbulence that our country has faced, either through natural disasters or conflict, has caused movement of our people. In the case of Otuke and Lango areas, we know and the House has been told of the movement of the Karimojong into those areas.

Fortunately, hon. Byabagambi, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, and his team have been handling this matter. They have held several meetings with political leaders in the Karamoja and Lango regions and the local communities and leaders are endeavouring to bring a peaceful return of our brothers from Karamoja back to their areas.

Therefore, let all the political leaders do whatever they can to solve the issue of our brothers from Karamoja who may be encroaching either on grass or on other things in their vicinity. We expect the weather conditions to change so that these friends go back in peace.

4.50
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the second time, I am asking the same question about gambling. I have tried to stop sports gambling and the machines by the Chinese back home. The children and young boys are becoming unruly because of gambling. However, it is now wider because even last Sunday, a friend of mine, Lt (Rtd) Kinyera, called to tell me that his brother had hung himself after gambling his school fees.

Kinyera is from Gulu and I am from Lyantonde but we are fighting the same people over the same thing. When you talk to these Chinese, they say that they have a licence from the Ministry of Trade and Industry. Local governments have no way of overturning resolutions about gambling and sports betting because the police and LCIs are in cohorts with the machine owners. 

I told the police that they are aiding and abetting crimes because these youth who gamble from morning to evening with nowhere to earn a living will break into houses. However, they do not feel concerned. They said they have no control because the LCV or LCII is the one ordering the machines to be opened. What is the answer to that, Mr Prime Minister? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the matter raised by Gen. Kuteesa is indeed of concern to Government and in many parts of the country. It is true that a number of districts have passed resolutions banning the gambling and gaming that we are talking about. 

Government has discussed this and agreed to tighten regulations and supervision. Therefore, it is a matter that we are considering. We will bring a report to the House so that we update you on the measures taken. We will also require you to play a critical role in educating the wanainchi and the administration of the different districts in order to tighten up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will notice that I extended the time by over 30 minutes to try and accommodate as many Members as possible but we have to draw this to a close and that moment comes now. I have noticed that the members for Kumi, Bulambuli, Kole, Mbarara and Koboko would like to ask the Prime Minister questions but we will not be able to take any more questions. I will have the Leader of the Opposition, who I am informed is represented by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi.

4.54
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I stand in for the Leader of the Opposition to make comments. 

The first comment is that the Rules of Procedure give the Prime Minister, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, liberty to make a statement. It should not be that every time it is a question and answer session between the Prime Minister and the Members of Parliament. The Prime Minister can optimally use this time to bring contentious meaningful national issues that Parliament can debate during this time. This can also be more informative and can pre-empt some of the questions that we can ask. Therefore, I implore the Prime Minister to use that time optimally. 

I have a few comments on local council elections. The country cannot be kept guessing. I think this is a small matter and Parliament has played its role. We set a date of 15 March 2017 but it is saddening to hear the Prime Minister now say, “Between March and April”. Governments all over the world move with certainty and predictability. I do believe in kisanja hakuna muchezo and that should be the minimum standard. However, for a Prime Minister to come here and say that it is any date between is quite old fashioned and I implore you to do better.

Regarding the question on local content, this is something that the Prime Minister cannot brush over. Many Ugandans are suffering and many youth are unemployed while Chinese and people from Lebanon and Pakistan have invaded this country as if it is nobody’s home. Therefore, Mr Prime Minister, I highly doubt if this will be kisanja hakuna muchezo. If you do not address these core national issues like local content with firmness, decisiveness and clear smart policies, you will not go very far and our dream of a middle-income status will remain as a dream.

Mr Speaker, this country is funny. We have the National Development Plan II but this country did not evaluate the National Development Plan I nor was there a baseline survey for this second plan. Therefore, on what basis are you dreaming about a middle-income status?

Mr Speaker, these were questions asked. On the question of equipment, especially in local governments, there was Chinese equipment like tractors and graders that were supplied to local governments but most of them are dead. The regional mechanical workshops are hard to reach because you will find that if the equipment is in my district in Butambala, I am sure it has to go to Jinja. The spares for this equipment are also very expensive on the local market. Therefore, most of our district roads are suffering simply because of some of this equipment. 

Therefore, the policy we would like, moving forward as we get new equipment, is that they must come as a full package with well-facilitated regional mechanical workshops. Otherwise, we will procure them with so many millions of dollars and that will be wasted funds.

On environment and degradation, Parliament has already passed a resolution to ban sand mining in Lwera and we were very clear and we spoke loudly. However, any Member who travels along Masaka Road, and I guess the Prime Minister, the President and these law enforcement officers all pass through Katonga, will notice that sand mining is ongoing across the road. How serious can a government be? I would have asked it the other way round but I would like to sound parliamentary. I would have said, “How unserious can a government be?” -(Interjections)- No, I have said, how serious can a government be? Otherwise, environmental degradation is upon us. 

Regarding forests and swamps, I come from an area, like hon. Rwakoojo and others, which has large forest ranges. I have made a headcount of who has destroyed forests in those forest reserves and they are not our humble peasants… (Expunged.)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. With due respect to the caretaker of the office of the Leader of the Opposition, the honourable member is making very serious allegations about people whose fate might be at stake, including Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we would be proceeding rightly without the hon. Muwanga substantiating and putting the record straight, so that we get to know who these big people in Government are that he is talking about. Who are these honourable members that he is making reference to? Let us know so that the records are straight and we put the matter to rest. Mr Speaker, are we proceeding rightly to make wild allegations without necessarily putting the records right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Parliament has enacted laws and it is the responsibility of all citizens of this country to enforce those laws. One such law is the Forests Act and the other one is the one that created the National Forestry Authority. They both prohibit the improper use of forestry materials and resources. Encroachment is one such prohibited activity and by doing that, you commit an offence and you can be prosecuted. 

Now, to make a statement that some Members are involved in criminal acts would not be a permittable statement unless the Member can substantiate. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, this will be a beautiful opportunity. Just give me two weeks and I am going to come to this Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the moment, before you come before this Parliament, please withdraw what you have said.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, just give me two weeks. I am going to come to this Parliament with a complete list -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, for now, you do not have the list or proof. Please, withdraw. When you have the list, you can then come with it but for now, withdraw.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to disobey your ruling on this issue - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would be dangerous. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: It will be dangerous indeed. I would like to delay –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please resume your seat.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to say that my colleague, the acting Leader of the Opposition, took the debate to many issues that we had not covered like issues of the National Development Plan I and II. It is true that Government made an assessment of the National Development Plan I and this informed us as we were discussing and agreeing on National Development Plan II.

Secondly, on the Chinese equipment that you are talking about, that was phase 1. We knew that the equipment that came could not handle very heavy work. Government has now imported more powerful equipment that will be able to manage complicated tasks. Therefore, the Government is on top of the situation and I call the criticisms levelled against Government uncalled for. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We will bring this to a close. However, let me give instructions in relation to the statement made by the honourable member for Samia Bugwe South County in relation to a neighbouring country. That statement should be struck off the record of the House. 

The second statement that should be struck off the record of this House is that by the honourable member for Butambala standing in for the Leader of the Opposition to the effect that some Members of Parliament are engaged in criminal activities. I order that struck from the records of Parliament.

Honourable members, as we proceed, I have received a request from hon. Esther Anyakun, Woman Member of Parliament for Nakapiripirit District, and hon. John Baptist Lokii from Matheniko County, Moroto District, representing the Karamoja Parliamentary Group on the passing of hon. Annie Logiel in Denmark. They are conscious of the fact that we will not be sitting tomorrow because it is a public holiday and then also on Friday. We also have a weekend after that and so there may be no opportunity for them to interact with Members.

They have requested all the regional groupings of the Members of Parliament to coordinate issues of building up support to help in the sending off of our honourable colleague who passed on. Please coordinate with hon. Esther Anyakun and hon. John Baptist Lokii to see how we can raise some support to help in the decent sending off of our colleague. The next time we meet is when we will be paying our respects during the tribute motion.

Her death was communicated yesterday and we shall wait for the day when the body is here and we shall deal with that. For the meantime, hon. Anyakun and hon. John Baptist Lokii are here for coordination to build support. Next item. 

Honourable member, do you need clarification from the Speaker? I handle procedural matters.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Perhaps mine could emerge as guidance or a procedural matter but from my perspective, I feel it should be clarification. 

You talked about an issue raised on the Floor by the member from Samia Bugwe and I heard you mention Samia Bugwe County South. Mr Speaker, I am the member for Samia Bugwe County South and so I wish to make the record clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Julius Maganda, you did not make this statement and you are the Member of Parliament for Samia Bugwe County South. 

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The statement that I have asked to be struck off the records of Parliament is from the honourable member from Samia Bugwe County North.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to offer condolences for the loss of our colleague. It is very unfortunate. Mr Speaker, you were talking of arrangements but I thought we have a budget in Parliament –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I communicated a request from Karamoja Parliamentary Group. What Parliament is going to do is different from my communication. My communication was a request from the Members of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group and we should leave it at that. Parliament will do what it has to do to deal with the passing of its Member but the Karamoja Parliamentary Group made a request that I needed to communicate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have now understood. I am also part of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group and at an appropriate time, we shall be meeting. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.10
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 44th Session of the ACP Parliamentary Assembly and the 32nd Session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held from 14 to 21 December 2016 in Nairobi, Kenya. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, time will be found for these reports from these different meetings that take place like the ACP-EU, IPU and CPA. They all have meetings that have recommendations that can help us, as a Parliament, to do our business better. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The member for Kassanda North? Let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 17.1 MILLION (US$24 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA HIGHER EDUCATION CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this particular request was brought to this Parliament. I do not recall the motion being substantially moved. This would be the proper time for the minister to substantially move the motion and justify it so that the committee can report on their findings. Can the minister move the motion formally? This is a simple motion. Can somebody move it?

5.13
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the committee presents –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like for you to move the motion for approval of the request by Government.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: I beg to move that the motion to borrow $ 17.1 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group be moved and approved. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The motion is seconded by the Chief Government Whip, the minister in charge of Karamoja and the Minister of State for Local Government.

Honourable members, because the substantive minister is not here, there may be difficulties justifying this motion. I will therefore ask the committee to present the report. Please report to the motion.

5.14
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report was presented yesterday –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was presented? So it is time for debate now?

MS BBUMBA: Yes, it is time for debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay; then I should not have asked the minister to move the motion. If the report was presented, then we can propose the question for debate.

Honourable members, I now propose the question for your debate on the request by Government to borrow SDR 17.1 million, equivalent to $ 24 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Eastern and Southern Africa High Education Centres of Excellence project. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now.

5.15
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Right now, servicing of our external debt is more than 11 per cent of our budget. That clearly shows that anytime, we are going to fail to service our debts.

Mr Speaker, we are not against Government borrowing but any time from now, we are going to be declared insolvent because if you cannot pay your debts, you are in big problems. I would like assurance from Government on the issue of servicing our debt.

Last year, World Bank stopped giving the Uganda Government money because of our absorption capacity and yet when that money is not absorbed, we are paying interest and surcharges, which are a cost to the country. These technical people just want to borrow and they have no problem with money lying there because they have well paid project offices that are doing very well and yet the people of Uganda are not getting value out of the money.

I would like the minister to tell us now what our absorption rate of the borrowed money from the World Bank is, as we stand. Before we add more debts, we would rather use the old loan funds, which are not being consumed, and then we borrow after finishing them.

Mr Speaker, in all the World Bank loans, Uganda is rated last in loan absorption. It has borrowed a lot of money, which is lying on the balance sheet. In fact, they are asking why we are putting in more requests for money when we cannot use the money that is available. Why doesn’t Government come and tell us that they are not able to use those loans and we return the money instead of them appearing as if they are committed and we contract new loans?

Mr Speaker, the science that you are talking about is very important to us. In fact, we should not borrow money for education or health; this should be the first call on our budget because for a country to develop, you need to deal with health and education. The money we should be borrowing should be for infrastructure like roads and dams because we may not have capacity for those but where we have capacity and a budget, I believe we should not go to borrow.

I am not against this loan but for now, I will not give my signature because there is too much money that we have borrowed and not used. Mr Speaker, whenever you say “aye”, the civil servants sitting behind there are the happiest because they know that more income has come to them. When you say, “The ayes have it”, they say, “These are fools; now we are going to make money”. It is important, my colleagues -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you make it sound as if it is only the Speaker that does that; as if there are no Members voting and it is only the Speaker who says, “The ayes have it” and then it is done. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry. It is because I am facing you. Whenever you put the question and we say, “aye” and then you say, “The ayes have it”, the happiest group of persons are those who sit at the back bench because they know that money has come into their pockets. While the people of Uganda are suffering, they are the happiest. That is the reason why I am saying that colleagues, we should not put our signature on this money until the Government gives us the absorption capacity, which led us to fail to get money from World Bank last year.

I got the Auditor-General’s report as I was going out. The money we are paying every year as commitment charges is not less than Shs 50 billion. Why should we pay such money, which we should have used for another purpose?

Mr Speaker, currently, debt service is the third after education and health. Any time from now, it is going to be the first. The moment it is first, it means we are not going to work on those other areas until we have paid the debt. Where will our country move to as we think of a middle-income status? A few minutes ago, the Prime Minister talked about hakuna muchezo. How will we move when we are not able to handle education and health?

Finally, Mr Speaker, I have looked at this loan request and I am a bit worried; the worst thing is capacity building. Every year we have capacity building. When are we going to stop capacity building? If you went to a district, in a week the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) sits in the district once; for the other four days, he is in Kampala on capacity building. When he is coming from there with his technical people, they come with about five cars.

I would like to ask Government, is there a plan on capacity building? Since all these years we have been doing capacity building, haven’t we had enough capacity that we can end here and use this money for production instead of consumption? Our big problem now is that the money we are borrowing is basically for consumption instead of production. If it was for production, I can assure you that servicing of the loan would not be the problem because we would have something, which we can use. 

There is a live example, which you can see for yourselves. We borrow money to build a road and the loan repayment period is 40 years but within 5 years or 10 years, the road is finished yet you are still servicing a loan for 40 years. If the loan is to match the investment, you should build a road for 40 years so that when you are paying, the road is also there, but now you pay when the road is – (Interruption)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I have been listening to hon. Nandala-Mafabi who started by raising issues of debt service and other issues, which I expected the committee, which this Parliament entrusts with the work - Once a loan request is presented and it is forwarded to the committee, that committee invites the minister and the relevant technical people. When the vice-chairperson of the committee read out the report and the recommendations yesterday, maybe hon. Nandala-Mafabi was not in the House because the recommendations in the report were answering such questions. 

I kept on listening to him but my worry was the time that he was taking, bearing in mind that you told us the time you are going to adjourn. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct to assign us time for submissions? It was like Nandala-Mafabi was using all the time there was to himself, repeating himself and even ignoring what the vice-chairperson of the committee reported yesterday. I wonder whether he has read the report very well. My procedural point is: shouldn’t it be right to apportion time to the Members so that we finish this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you yourself have taken four minutes raising a procedural matter, so you have not shown a very good example in that. (Laughter) 

However, we will have to limit this debate because we cannot have a very long debate. To the Member, it is not for the committee to approve this request; it is for Parliament. Therefore, the report of the committee is informing the debate of the House and the honourable member for Budadiri West was doing exactly that, except that he was not making his point within a short time, which is now going to cause me to allot time for Members to speak after me.

He made reference that those people at the back bench will be celebrating. The back bench of this House are Members of Parliament. What I suppose he was referring to is the technical bench, which is right behind the Speaker. As such, let the records show that the Member meant the technical bench and not the back bench.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for the advice. I will first apologise; I thought you had allowed me a few more minutes. 

Mr Speaker, I was not repeating myself and the record should capture that I was the last person here yesterday and I am the one who begged the Speaker that because of Valentine’s Day, we should leave early. (Laughter)

I wanted to tell the Government Chief Whip that I am the one who escorted her out of these Chambers. Mr Speaker, thank you very much but you are witnesses.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has been very clear. He said that he is the one who requested that the debate should be adjourned because people wanted to go for Valentine. He also said that he went with you so should we be debating that? (Laughter)

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for the issues he has raised. Those very issues have been of high concern to the committee and to cure those issues, we came up with guidelines, which I laid on the Table here. 

One of the biggest problems leading to low absorption is failure by Government to provide counterpart funds. We now require, before we process a loan, for Government to come up with an irreversible statement on the commitment to provide local counterpart funding. We even stress it further to ensure that the money is ring-fenced in the budget.

The other reason why there has been low absorption is the delays in procurements and we have come up with strong recommendations. I wish Parliament could find time to go through those guidelines because they answer all the issues, which he has raised.

Whenever we are analysing a loan, we take precaution to ensure that the debt sustainability is within the recommended bracket. For this loan, according to the debt sustainability analysis, which was done in November last year, we are within the recommended threshold of below 50 per cent. In fact, right now, it stands at about 36.5 per cent so we are not yet in that bad situation, which hon. Nandala-Mafabi is worried about that Government is insolvent. 

Of course, we have to be cautious. If we continue at this rate, we shall certainly get into that difficult situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I wanted to make that clarification.

MR ANTHONY AKOL: Mr Speaker, at the time we were debating the Budget Framework Paper, the Committee of Budget came out with a report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the absorption rate of the loans, as per now, is 26 per cent out of 100 per cent. 

Their recommendations were:
    (i) Any sector that has not used 50 per cent of the loan should not come to the Floor of Parliament to borrow more loans.
    (ii) The sectors must have done the feasibility studies prior. 

Are we proceeding in a right way? Has education, as a sector, so far consumed 50 per cent of the loan borrowed so far? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those tests are normally put by the committee and the committee has gone through that process and it has reported that we can go ahead and handle this matter. As Speaker, I have no means of verifying whether it is 50 per cent or 26 per cent but we rely on the committee to advise us because they interact with the other agencies of Government and the ministries asking these questions. Therefore, I think we are proceeding very well.

5.32
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the fact that the loan requested for is addressing areas related to climate such as agriculture. That is very critical for Uganda today, especially when we are talking about climate impact and issues to do with climate change.

Mr Speaker, you will realise that Uganda is a signatory to the Paris Agreement and that agreement states that all countries are supposed to come up with nationally determined emissions so as to address the impact of climate change. I would, therefore, imagine that this loan would be timely and paramount for the country.

However, I have some reservations that must be cleared in this House in regard to the centres of excellence. To me a centre of excellence should start from secondary school level because you cannot teach an old dog new tricks. 

Secondly, most times people think that as a Parliament, we pass loans without reading. This is serious. I would imagine that a breakdown would be very important for this House even when we approve this loan so that when we are looking for accountability and doing our oversight role, we know where the money has gone. Generalisation puts us at a disadvantage.

Mr Speaker, this loan is very clear on the amount going to capacity building – (Member timed out.) 

5.34
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek clarification on the roll-out plan for this very important project because while chairing the Committee on Science and Technology, I was part of Team Uganda that participated in the negotiation of this project with other delegations from Ethiopia, Rwanda, Malawi and Mozambique. There are countries that made specific commitments in terms of rolling out the programme because this one covers four universities: Makerere, Mbarara, Ndejje and Uganda Martyrs.

There are countries that made commitments that since this funding would only go to a few universities, they would find resources from within their national budgets to roll out the programme to other universities. 

I am interested in knowing whether we shall find resources to roll out these activities such that students in other universities like Gulu University, Lira University of Science and Technology and Busitema University, to mention but a few, can also benefit. This is because the report of the committee seems to be silent on this. Aren’t we making a commitment, as Government of Uganda, as made by Malawi, Rwanda and Zambia in that meeting? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.35
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am surprised and I think that the approach in research has changed. Normally, in research, you start from statement of the problem, you identify the objectives of the research and then you collect information or data to address the problem. 

However, in this project specifically, universities applied for the loan and three qualified. After they qualified, the country is borrowing the money that they applied and qualified for. I thought by the time they applied and qualified for the money, it was available for them to use.

Secondly, what problem are we addressing? The one who is giving the loan gave them the benchmarks through which they qualified for the loan and those are not the benchmarks that the country is aiming at. I have scanned through the report of the committee and the bigger picture is to address inefficiencies in research. 

However, in the case of Makerere, for example, it is a centre for materials, product development and nanotechnology. Makerere University also has crop improvements, Mbarara University of Science and Technology has firm biotechnology and traditional medicine and Uganda Martyrs University has agro-ecology and livelihoods. 

However, the committee notes that this loan will aid in building the capacity of researchers who will contribute to postgraduate programmes in universities. The relationship between the intention of the loan and the actual problem we are addressing on the ground is lost.

Thirdly, the –(Member timed out.) 

5.38
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is important that this Parliament not only relies on the information that the committee found out that we have not yet hit 50 per cent so we can always borrow. I think that is not right because even to maintain it below 10 per cent would be good for this country. Therefore, the justification that we are not yet there should not be encouraged.

However, since the Prime Minister is present in the House, last year he was quoted to have said, “Uganda loses Shs 92 billion due to the problem of absorption”. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development went ahead and said that we have a big problem. These are the people who will use this money and they themselves recognise that there is a problem of lack of capacity. 

The Ministry of Education was recently a subject of debate in Cabinet. There is a loan that is laying there and I do not know whether it has been used. Therefore, I do not understand why we should hurry to borrow when we have not even absorbed what we have. It is very bad manners in African society for one to borrow for basics in your home; you leave your home to go and borrow from the neighbour things that you need every day. This is what the Government is doing; borrowing for education and yet we have resources that we can employ internally.

Therefore, while this Parliament is very important, it should not subject itself to blackmail. Once the committee recommends and brings key sectors like education and health to put us in a corner so that they say, Members of Parliament are not willing to solve your problem - The committee should do more work and get assurance from people who will use it instead of telling us that we are not yet on the mark because even 36, by any standard, is already very high compared to - (Member timed out.) 

5.40
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have read through the document and I am very happy that we will facilitate capacity building for PhD and Masters’ holders and other researchers because the world is moving very fast. Countries like South Korea have prioritised nanotechnology, biotechnology and green technology for the next 10 years. Therefore, as Uganda, I think that we are moving in the right direction if we can get this money to facilitate nanotechnology.

Nanotechnology is basically technology for robots and that is where the world is heading. Biotechnology and green technology is where we are heading. Therefore, I think that we need this money to facilitate this process so that we can train our own researchers to be able to establish centres of excellence so that they can be able to train others who will also train those who can start from senior one.

In November 2016, I travelled to Netherlands and visited a laboratory for senior one students and they were already developing robots. Therefore, we need to move into this direction as Ugandans. I think that we need this money and we should utilise it if we would like to develop the technologies that will drive this country. Thank you.

5.42
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you look at the proposal in the loan request, $ 5 million is just for administration. I think this is a ploy by technical officers to misguide the ministers to swindle money. 

Mr Speaker, we should move in a systematic manner. There are people in Kaabong sub-counties without even a secondary school. You want people to have PhDs when a villager has not even acquired a senior four certificate. We are unfair to this country.

Mr Speaker, think about a child in Butaleja and Lamwo. I would like to propose that Parliament allows the borrowing of money but specifically for primary and secondary education. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That would be a subject of another debate because that is not the matter that is before us. (Laughter) 

5.43
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. However, when we talk about Uganda grappling with few people having Masters’ degrees in these universities, anybody who is seeking for a job in Makerere must have a Masters’ degree. I need to be informed about this because today we are talking about the same.

About the issue concerning 30 per cent of the graduates doing agriculture and science related courses and yet the emphasis is not put at the lower level, do you expect to produce scientists in this country without focusing on education at the lower levels? These stories are serious.

Mr Speaker, I would like to propose that if we are focusing on primary and secondary - for example, in my sub-county, nobody got a first grade in the previous Primary Leaving Education examinations. That is why we are saying that we must focus on how to build from down instead of looking at the higher levels. Remember every year, focus is put on Makerere University and Mbarara University only and not about the other universities, and yet there are 42 universities in this country. That is why I will not support this view because it is not for the good interests of Ugandans. That is my view. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, would you like to make a response to some of the issues?  

5.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, this loan is part of a regional project. There are eight countries that are going to participate and they will carry out collaborative research in the identified areas for the various centres of excellence. 

Therefore, it is not Uganda alone. The total loan is $ 148 million from the World Bank. Uganda is getting $ 24 million and the rest of the money is going to seven other regional countries. 

This is an opportunity for Uganda to carry out applied research in those very important areas. These research findings are going to benefit the region. They are going to benefit the beneficiary communities and they are going to enhance the capacity of our researchers. For instance, in the area of crops, Uganda is an agricultural country and we want improvement in agriculture all the time. 

For the case of pharmacology, one does not have to explain that. We need more studies. We are importing almost all the drugs we use in this country. Therefore, this is an opportunity for us to enhance the capacities of our scientists to do things, which can benefit us in very important areas. 
As one of the colleagues said, the world is moving very fast. We shall not stop at Masters Degrees and be contented with those. We need to go an extra mile to be able to match the fast moving world. 

When we interrogated the Ministry of Education and Sports, they told us that this money was competed for and it was not just by head hunting. The centres of excellence and different universities, which offer Masters Degrees were all invited in the region to compete in the different areas. The ones we see here were the best among those which competed. Evaluation was done by international evaluators. Uganda did not participate in the evaluation and so one cannot say that there was any bias in the selection. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to throw some light so that Members do not get off-track as we debate these very important loans, which are going to help in the advancement of our country. Thank you. 

5.48
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Mr Speaker, this Parliament is supposed to facilitate Government to do business. We do not intend to obstruct it and we probably do not even have the capacity to do so. 

If I heard well, there is consensus from both sides of the House that people do not want this loan here. People are talking of building robots; do you know the unemployment levels in Uganda? I was in Japan a while ago and I found shops operated by robots and dispenser machines selling groceries. This is a totally misplaced loan and I would urge Members of Parliament to reject it with utmost audacity. 

Mr Speaker, I smell a rat and I am actually going to move formally that this loan should be taken to another committee of Parliament to have a second look at it, in the spirit of facilitating the work of the Executive. I am personally persuaded that the Committee of National Economy has not done what it should have done to advise this House –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, what is perturbing us is that we are borrowing a loan for capacity building in research, yet this Parliament has academicians familiar with research. The question is the $ 24 million. Are we going to buy equipment? Is it for training? Is it for capacity building? It is not mentioned.

What makes matters worse, yesterday, the chairperson said that $ 5 million is going to be spent on management and administration of the loan; $ 5 million out of $ 24 million to be used in management of the loan is a waste. 

If it is not very difficult, the committee would look at it again and maybe come back to this House with a better report. We need to be convinced, as Parliament. Yes, definitely we need capacity building and researchers but applied research is different from purely academic research. Therefore, we need to be sure where we are going. 

Those universities that qualified; how were they rated? How did they end up qualifying for this research?
   
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you debating again? 

MR AGABA: I am giving information to my colleague. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, we have precedence of reports, which this House did not believe due diligence was done by the committee and the reports were given to another committee. It has happened before. It happened when the committee reporting on KCCA was removed and assignment was given to another committee of Parliament. (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for being tolerant and hon. Odonga-Otto for giving me way. We must be careful; hon. Odonga-Otto has a point. The current Chairperson of the National Economy Committee was the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and she was fond of borrowing loans. 

Much of the money she borrowed was never used. She came here and told the whole House that when they were looking at the report, their first question was absorption. However, I have looked through the report and there is no absorption. So, I see a conflict of interest. That is why I want to support my brother that the next committee, which we are talking about, probably of ICT, should look at this loan further and give us more information and we are ready to go there and make adjustments accordingly. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I am going to move a motion without notice. There are other more important loans we need, for example, loans for vocational schools and grid extension since people are lamenting about lack of electricity. I, therefore, beg to move with your permission - actually we do not want this loan. We are here representing the people - (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi insinuated that hon. Syda Bbumba has a conflict of interest because she was a Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi once worked in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a consultant. Many of us have worked in other areas and we are now serving in different capacities. If we continue insinuating that when you work from a certain office, you carry conflict of interest automatically and it remains on the record of Parliament, I think it will not be proper. 

That is why I am seeking for your guidance whether it is okay to leave it just like that. Both hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Syda Bbumba once upon a time worked in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, how can we proceed, Mr Speaker? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the whole mark of parliamentary practice and procedure is courtesy to the presiding officer and to the fellow members of Parliament. Each time we debate, we should give each other respect. That is the spirit and that is how we are able to develop and call ourselves honourable members of Parliament. That is why the rules are very strict that when you suggest things outside what you are discussing, you impute improper motive. You assign motives that are not discernible from a particular document. It will not be proper. So, let us keep ourselves within the respectable limits of debate and we will be respecting ourselves.

Honourable members, let me say this as possibly – since guidance has been sought. The processes that loans go through are enormous. Look at Article 159 of the Constitution. By the time it is coming to Parliament, all the other things have been done. The preliminary documents have been signed, what is left for Parliament is to examine it and give approval, if it agrees with that. That is the mandate that is given to Parliament. It will not pass until it is approved by Parliament. That means that all the questions that the Constitution provides – the questions are what they need to examine, they are in Article 159, the constitutional provision and other laws of this land.

By the time it is coming here, we can no longer begin assigning motive and other things because it has gone through a process. The Solicitor-General has given consent, that it can be signed, all those things have gone by the time it is coming here. In fact, the initials have already been put to the documents; whether it is the environmental impact assessment, whether it is within the 2040 Vision, all those tests these loans will have passed them by the time they come into Cabinet and Parliament.

So, when we are examining it, we now examine the relevance of it, the purpose and the benefit and all those other things, but to go beyond that and start interrogating the motive and the like might not be – 

What I am suggesting is, by the time it comes here, there are things we can examine so that by the time we pass it, it is no longer just the interest of those who are proposed the borrowing but also interest blended by the people’s representatives. That is why it is a must that it should get the parliamentary approval before it is implemented. That is where we are. The documents were there, they were submitted to the committee, they were signed, the negotiated terms were submitted to the committee and it examined them and has reported. It has also made recommendations to the House. We should, therefore, discuss it in that line. If we have issues, we should discuss them in a way that does not create other situations.

On the issue of the proposal that it should be sent to another committee, the specific mandate of the Committee of National Economy is to examine this, no other committee has the mandate to do this by our Rules of Procedure, unless you want to create new situations. When it has to do with policy issues and other things but with issue of loans, the mandate is strictly with the Committee of the National Economy, which advises and they have done that over different leadership all these years and this Parliament has not made mistakes.

The mistakes have come from elsewhere where we have facilitated the borrowing and people cannot absorb the loan, which is another matter altogether. So, honourable let us build the spirit of the House. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I wind up, I was giving a precedent because the work of the committee of Parliament is delegated work; it is on behalf of the House. That is why they bring it to the House. I have noticed in this House three times your very Chair saying that, there are some question marks on the way the committee operated and then they merge; they take another committee to join them.

This is because you guided and I thank you for that, that we should discuss the relevance of the loan. This loan is relevant; we are not going to borrow because other people are borrowing. There are money lenders across the street there. When you see others going to borrow, do you also go and borrow because the others have gone there?

We want an environment where this Parliament does its role. I would like to move with your permission, I do not know if it can be at this time, a motion without notice that discussion on this loan be shelved –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a procedural issue. It is true that in this House, we have ever cried for research, that we need research to help this country. Going by what the committee Chairperson has presented, this loan is going to build a capacity related to issues on agriculture, pharmacies and fisheries, among others. 

I would imagine agriculture will involve so many other things, which are affecting our people. We have been saying that we need research and we are here facing capacity building towards research at a level of the university, which I believe will trickle down to our children even at the undergraduate level, even those who are at the ordinary level and advanced level, will in future come and benefit from this. Are we really proceeding well to say that we stop this debate?

I would like to think that if there is a problem with the committee or with the loan or on the $ 5 million, then the committee can go back, because they work on our behalf, sit down and correct it. 

On the issue of KCCA, I was on the Committee of Local Government and Public Service. It is true that there were some problems with how the report came before this Parliament; that is why I think the presiding officer directed that another committee be co-opted so that the work is done well.

I, therefore, do not know if we are really proceeding well and yet, there are many countries involved in this, there is competition at all levels and if we are left behind at that level of universities or higher institutions, I do not know whether this will be good for the country called Uganda. 
I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to rule on the procedural matter that was raised. The reason that you recall a report and give to another committee or a group of people to examine, it is if there is reasonable suspicion that the people who did the job did not do it well.

I have listened to the presentation and the debate; there is no one suggestion that the report of the committee is faulted in any way. The issue that we have is with the loan itself. If you have the problem with the loan, would sending it to another committee produce a different result? It will still be the same loan.

If a law is bad, we would be sending it to another committee and change the law. If we are discussing the loan, let us stick on that. I think the committee has done its work and we do not have any reasonable cause to suspect what it has done. At least it has not come to surface as of now. So, let us discuss the loan and if we can finish it, well and good, if there are issues that we cannot finish, we let them be but not because we are not satisfied with the report of the committee. That would not be proper. 

So, let us see how to proceed. The honourable member for Oyam had concluded. If we are unable to take a decision on this matter, I will ask the minister to make responses and I will adjourn the House. My adjourning time is 6.00 p. m.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Julius Maganda): Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I urge you honourable members that your speeches should bring consensus in the House.

MR MAGANDA: My perception on this loan and from the information that we have at the EAC level, it come out of the protocol, which Uganda signed on the development of centres of excellence, especially at the university level. This came because many universities had applied even within the institutions of Government to see how they can support research and development.

On the occasion, it emerged that Common Markets for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) countries were having the biggest perspective in having research and development as one of the areas that needs to be developed.

That is how the protocol was signed and then allotted to COMESA countries to apply. The loan came through a kind of competitive system where all universities were invited. Good enough, Uganda got three universities and that is how three universities emerged.

There was a proper evaluation by the World Bank desk that looked into the aspects of how the absorption of this money would be done. As Uganda, we really need this loan. We house the Inter University Council of East African (IUCEA), which supervises all universities in the East African region.

The fact remains that if we are supposed to improve the performance –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The East African Community was there even during Amin’s time and the best university in Law was Dar-es-Salaam, Engineering was Nairobi  and Medicine was Mulago. 

Mr Speaker -(Interjections)- Sorry, when I say Mulago, I meant Makerere University which was housing Mulago, a training centre. There was excellence yet there was no IUCEA in Uganda.

Is the minister in order to say that because they have built an office of excellence for East Africa here that we should now borrow? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the IUCEA was established in the 1960s. It is not a new creation by the East African countries. Therefore, reference to it is not saying that it is a new thing that was recently created because it has been there.

However, what the minister is saying is that under that framework, some negotiations have been made to identify centres of excellence. I do not, therefore, see how I would rule the minister out of order. 

Please, wind up.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the wise ruling. It is on the same basis that for us as Uganda, we deserve to be part of the team of the members who are supposed to benefit from this loan because we are hosting the IUCEA. I will still emphasise on that because it would look bad for us to supervise these universities around the region and yet, we are not trying to help the improvement of science and research.

Secondly, I support the loan because it is also trying to catch onto the system of how we are going to improve the education system especially on innovation, technology and science-based subjects in research and development.

We have many programmes now. The loan is also trying to bring in the private sector perspective. We produce scientists at bachelor’s level but they are not entirely tailored on a particular aspect of research where they can help to tap into the private sector.

Therefore, this loan has such kind of facility that we believe while we produce scientists from this universities, when they get out they will even come out and go to Uganda Research Institute (URI). If you go to URI, many students from Makerere and Mbarara universities are there trying to create incubation. There are incubation centres in URI. These centres need facilities that can support those students to do a lot of research and then their products are put to test with the private sector and thereafter, they  get on to the market.

That is why I support the loan. I just want to beg the Members that we support this loan and if there are a few changes that would be required, we can put them on the Floor and see how we help it. Thank you very much.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of the concerns being raised by Members like the need to mobilise resources to put up secondary schools, other facilities are valid and they can be addressed differently. This does not invalidate the need for improving research.

When you look at the report, the areas, which are being covered, is strengthening research in the areas of centre of materials, product development, nanotechnology? It is a branch of technology that deals with dimensions and tolerances of less than 100 nanometers especially in the area of manipulation of individual molecules and atoms.

This is hi-tech science. If we are going to improve and have technological advancements, we definitely need to build capacity in our universities in order for our researchers to do these innovations. That is being supported at Makerere University.

When you look at the other area is centre for crop improvement. When you look at the challenges we are facing with drought and our crops failing, we need to invest in innovations in manipulation of crops that are fast-growing and maturing.

You cannot say that the areas being borrowed for are irrelevant and not needed; we must separate. If we need this money for secondary schools; granted, that can be handled separately. However, it is wrong for Parliament to say we cannot or we should not invest in these high-level technologies to enable our scientists make discoveries. For instance, Mbarara University is being supported to look at pharma-biotechnology and traditional medicine centres.

We have very many plants in Uganda. For instance, we know that most of the drugs we take have been developed from plants. Therefore, if we support our universities to develop technologies and capacity to research on these plants, it is good. I think it will be unfair for Parliament to say this is something irrelevant.

Uganda Martyrs University is being supported in the area of Agroecology and livelihood systems. In my view, given the issues we have been handling as Parliament, these are critical issues, which need to be supported. We need to support our universities to build capacity, do innovations, high-level research in these areas and I beg that Members appreciate.

If there is an issue, of the $5 million being used for management, that can be restructured so that money is spent on critical areas, which will improve capacity so that our universities can advance. Otherwise, I think it will be unfortunate for us to tell the country –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: In the spirit of generating consensus my good friend, the minister, those days we were working together to oppose the establishment. I am happy he is on the other side and he has changed.

If you are saying that, the $5 million is too much for administrative expense, at which point do we restructure? If you could help me address your mind to that for administration and workshops.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I have not read in detail to know what the money is going for. However, sometimes there is a tendency to think that capacity building means workshops. Capacity building comes in many forms. Even buying equipment to facilitate this kind of research, giving additional skills to these researchers is capacity building. Therefore, it depends on what the loan document is saying and where that money is being spent –(Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. I think the spirit of the loan is not bad. The problem is that we are borrowing for research and capacity building. We would like to be particular what are we doing with capacity building. We are mixing applied research and academic research, building capacity of researchers, PhD programmes and many others. 

Are we constructing pharmaceutical companies or pharmaceutical industries to produce medicine? Are we simply training lecturers to get PhDs, which we can do by exchange? What exactly are we doing with this money? 

Further, the breakdown of the loan; strengthening the African centres of excellence in regional priority areas is $ 24 million dollars. Capacity building for the African centres of excellence is $ 3 million, administration, coordination and facilitation is $ 5 million. We are largely talking about $ 8 million as facilitation, capacity building and the $ 24 million is the one, which is going for strengthening. 

If we get enough information that the strengthening means we are putting up industries, strong research institutes, which are going to have products then, let us know this so that we do not spend much time on it. As it is we are not sure, we want the money to come but we do not want it to come and get misused. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, I need to hear from the chairperson on the specifics of those things. Please, wind up.

DR BARYOMUNSI: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, just looking at the report on the component of capacity building, I am looking at areas like capacity development to address key institutional weaknesses such as partnership development with the private sector. Definitely, the purpose of research is to link it with policy and private sector development because it cannot be in a vacuum. 

Secondly, I am looking at competitive scholarships to award top future talents and encourage regional student mobility. (Interjections) I am reading from the report because you are asking about capacity building.

The scholarships for students to undertake Master’s Degree in some of these areas; it is envisioned that the ACE scholarship programme will acquire the prestige of a Rhodes type scholarship programme, identifying and cultivating future leaders for the region.

Part of this capacity building will facilitate our own Ugandans to acquire postgraduate training in these fields, which I think is very relevant. 

MS BBUMBA: Supplementing that, they are going to build capacities of the host communities where they are going to experiment their research findings. Even the host communities will be beneficiaries of this loan. 

Mr Speaker, in research it is the human capacity that we are building. So, these other material things are not very important as the building of the human being carrying out the research. (Interruption)


MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I look at the paper we have, only three universities are mentioned here. I do not see Gulu and Busitema. Is it in order for Government to deliberately neglect the north and the east? (Laughter) Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Part of what energises the Speaker to continue sitting for 2.00 p.m. without stepping outside is the hope that Members follow what is going on. It has been stated that this was a competitive matter and only three universities in Uganda qualified for this loan.

I do not know how many applied but three qualified - is it because of Busitema? You would like to rule on this matter? Let the honourable member for Tororo now rule on this matter. Please, proceed and rule. (Laughter) Honourable members, that is what was in the information that was given to the House. It is not because the Government selected three universities. 

It was through the World Bank competition processes that only three universities qualified. And that is why there was a question about rolling out to the other universities and other institutions. 

We are proceeding properly according to what we have seen. I cannot rule the member out of order. Can we find a way of winding this up? Members, if we are not going to take a decision on this matter, let us not take it but if we are going to -because I did not intend to go this far with this.

6.22
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the loan but I need some issues to be addressed and the Government should take it seriously. 

Listening to the arguments it looks like we are pushed to pass this because it is a regional loan; that should not be the argument to support this loan. I have heard Members talking about it here that because it is a regional project we must support it; the Minister for East African Affairs did state it here.

We have raised the issue of excellence and it should really be that. I would like to give an example of Soroti Flying School; they say that it is a centre for excellence but when you look at it, is it really a centre for excellence because people misuse the money that we pass?

I do not want to see this money being misused and we end up getting institutions that do not meet the standards of excellence we are talking about here. The concern about low absorption of the loans in this country must be addressed. If you read the Auditor-Generals’ report which was released the last financial year, Mr Speaker, if given time I would give you the data and the figures.

It should be something that needs to be addressed; it should be of concern to the Members of Parliament, Government. Mr Speaker, as of 30 June 2016, committed but undisbursed debt stood at Shs 18.1 trillion, which does not augur well for this country. 

We end up paying -according to the Auditor-General - Shs 20.9 billion in respect of undisbursed loans. This is nugatory expenditure; this money would have been used to do something for this country.

Mr Speaker, there are loans that have expired before being disbursed. How do we continue like this? These are the issues that the Government must take seriously and the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy should look into it.

We do not want a repeat of this.  This country is losing a lot of money because of the weaknesses of our institutions and of those who are supposed to implement.

Finally, the issue, which was raised by our colleague here though he put it in a very negative way; that Government is ignoring the north and the east. We need to strengthen those other universities in the north and the east because tomorrow we are not just going to roll it out, it is going to be competitive but because they are very weak, they will not be able to compete they will not get the money.

Can we strengthen the universities in the east and north so that next time, when they compete they are able to win? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.25
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Mr Speaker, I would not have any problem with this loan –(Gen. Tumukunde rises)- Thank you for saving me from the General. Otherwise, I was scared. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would not have any problem with this loan. However, the issue is that if we are looking at excellence in terms of the quality of the PhD holders and post-graduate students, we are not going to realise the benefits of the loan. That is what is actually causing us a lot of concern. My colleague asked, “Are we looking at applied research or academic research?” 

Mr Speaker, how is this loan going to translate into innovation, for example, to support a gentleman in Masaka who is doing tissue culturing? How is this excellence going to translate into the massive and best research by the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) people? It brings a question of only academic excellence. 

Mr Speaker, you know very well that PhD holders have made themselves through studies and research. If you have a PhD holder, for example, who is very excellent in the finger of insects – entomologist – how is excellence in the study in that field going to help us in pest control? What is the innovative tangible product? That is why we are crying.

That said and done, we are not against this loan. You know the other loan of extension also brought a lot of issues until His Excellency the President said without this capacity building component, World Bank is not going to give us the loan and asked this Parliament to reconsider. It does no harm when Parliament asks questions. We are not deferring the loan but deferring the debate so that you bring something that answers our questions because once we pass this loan, we will have no say. The technocrats will do whatever they want. That is why we want to take care. Thank you very much.

6.27
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. (rtd) Tom Butime): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not speaking as the Minister of Local Government but standing in for the Minister of Education and Sports. 

Sir, the Ministry of Education and Sports is very reluctant about taking on loans when it is not ready to take those loans. This is the new spirit today. The ministry is ready for this particular loan and is looking forward to this House passing this loan today. You know that this money is for centres of excellence. The ministry is ready –(Mr Agaba rose_) - Hon. Agaba who has himself been to university cannot say­­ - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But he has to accept.

MAJ. (RTD) BUTIME: I have not allowed the point of information – (Interruption)

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is on two things. The first one is that the money that we are going to borrow will be used for academic research. People will be attaining their masters and some PhDs. I would, therefore, like to know whether the people we are going to support will be retained in this country so that Uganda as a country can also benefit. I am talking about bonding. This is because we are borrowing money to support them to attain higher education status. How shall we benefit? Are we going to bond these people?

Secondly, this is a regional loan and it is going for eight countries – Eastern and Southern Africa. The clarification I am seeking here is, will the money that we are going to borrow benefit Uganda only? If we are bringing other outside countries, sincerely, how shall we use this money that we are going to borrow? How can we benefit Uganda together with other countries? We are talking about Eastern and Southern African countries. I have not understood and that is why I am seeking this clarification. 
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MAJ. (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, any money spent for purposes of research at any university, automatically capacity is built. Really, I do not think we should labour in this particular issue –(Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, concerning the capacity building, which is of high concern to the Members, I would like to inform the minister that that money is for financing the Inter-University Council of East Africa, which is a regional coordinating and management agency. It is not going to the centres of excellence. However, as you can appreciate, there are many countries –(Interjections) Yes. This $5 million is going to the regional coordination centre, which is the IUCEA. If colleagues had read the report, all these are very well detailed out in the report. Therefore, it is not money to go to the centres of excellence for them to chew or hold workshops. It is for that centre, which was selected to do the coordination in the region.

I would further like to inform the minister that the $24 million being borrowed by Uganda is to benefit the Ugandan centres of excellence. The other countries are also borrowing their portions out of the $148 million. The portion for Uganda is only $24 million. That is what I wanted to inform the minister about. Thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) BUTIME: Mr Speaker, before I conclude, research is research. Research is investing in people and in this particular case, it is investing in Ugandans. We all stand to benefit. Finally, I would like to ask the honourable members that this is a matter that is very important. I can assure you that this money will be put to the best use and this country will benefit in terms of research and creating these centres of excellence. Therefore, it should be passed. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.35
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Mr Speaker, we are talking about scientific research. I would like to inform Members that without research, we cannot advance. In African, we lag behind because we do not do research. We are sleeping day and night and yet, in developed countries, people are studying and doing research throughout the night. We want this money so that we can produce products. The President is urging us to invest in research so that we can bring new products and this is an opportunity. Luckily enough, our universities were selected to be among the best to receive this money. How can you let this money go when you want to develop? These phones we are using, someone did research; this light you are seeing, someone did research. Without research, we cannot move. I beg you, honourable members, that we pass this money.

Capacity building; you must know that each research comes with different skills and the person must be trained on how to do that research. Research comes with different equipment, which we need to buy to do that research. How can we let this money go when we are chosen to do this research? I beg you - those of you who are not scientists, please, listen to us who are the scientists who know the importance of research. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not take the submission of the member for Koboko like a joke. She lost her sight doing research. It was a chemical combustion that caused her to be blind. So, she knows what she is talking about. It was a laboratory accident that caused her that incident. 

Therefore, honourable members, on the basis of the submission of the honourable member for Koboko, can we find a way forward on this? Let me get the professor from Makerere.

6.37
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you, for this opportunity.  I am here to support in totality. We are where we are because we have not focused on the most important sector and that is higher education, research and development. 

As a scientist and someone from the academia, I have looked at the report - of course, colleagues have valid points in regard to adjustments. Research is about solving problems. The reason most of our interventions are not making impact is because we intervene without getting the right prescription. If we have the quorum - and colleagues, this is the right opportunity for us to pass this loan. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, this was a competitive bid –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  The procedural matter I would like to raise is that this project has been described as ACE II and we have not heard the report from ACE I. So, wouldn’t it be correct that we first get a report for ACE I, before we proceed with ACE II. Thank you.

MR ODONGO OTTO: Mr Speaker, I do not know if your office could be kind enough and procedurally help if we could get services of a translator because some of us are getting difficulties understanding our honourable colleague.  (Laughter)  I am just seeking your guidance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I know that the honourable member for Aruu, has done negotiations with the British people and he has understood them very well. (Laughter) The honourable member for Bukonjo West speaks a similar kind of language and you have understood this very well. Let us treat that as that and then we proceed.

Now, on the issue of ACE I, ACE II; this is not before us. What is before us is what is being presented and that request is what we are debating. We cannot debate anything else different from what has been presented to us. That is how we proceed normally and we are proceeding very well. 

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising relates to this request for money to finance scientific research. One of the activities that have been indicated in the report for financing is biotechnology research in Mbarara.

As far as I know, at the moment, there is no law in the country to govern biotechnology research. I do not know if we would be proceeding well to borrow to finance an illegality or an activity, which is not governed by law.

Secondly, there is a fund with National Council of Science and Technology, to support scientific innovation and research. Why won’t the Government tap into that fund? There is also the Presidential Innovations Fund. Why can’t all these things be tapped into? Why are we making a request for a loan?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, not all research is based on law. Cancer, for example, do we have a law that we have passed here that enables people to do research on cancer? Is it there? Let us not stretch these arguments too far. You do not need a law to do research. After research, then you need the law to implement what you have found because research is finding out. How do you regulate what you do not know? Please, honourable members. 

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise guidance –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have really guided us very well.  Before I raise my procedural issue, I think our colleagues who raised the issue of the first project – I am sure if the committee was very good to us, they would have shown the success or the failures of the first and how they have been addressed. That is how we would move on. This is reason why he had to raise that the committee has not educated us on the success and the failures of the first one.

Having said that, the procedural issue I am raising is about capacity building. I would like to know in this project – I want a component. Nowadays, many people who are being taken to Electoral Commission say “its equivalent.” Is there capacity building in this project for the people who have their equivalents in this Parliament so that we can deal with that matter also at this particular time? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, proceed.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was trying to say that at this point, the competition or the bid has gone through the relevant processes. In research or especially, reviewing proposals of this magnitude - they have looked at the definition, the construction, development, transfer aspect, application and at the utilisation. I would like to believe that is the reason the three universities were ranked the best. That said and done, Mr Speaker, we can have an interface with the chairperson.

There are a few gaps that I see. I would be interested in knowing how the effects of this project will be monitored and evaluated. Secondly, I will also be interested in the reporting process. Thirdly, I will also be interested in knowing how the actions will be generated and how those actions will be measured. Lastly, Mr Speaker, the report is not quite clear about the impacts, output and outcomes. 

That said, I do not think that is enough justification for us not to pass this very important loan tonight. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have sufficiently covered grounds. Hon. Agaba, our rule allows us to contribute on a matter once. However, you can make your comment and then, I will have hon. Ameede. 

6.47
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your kindness. I would like to make one thing very clear that nobody is opposed to this loan. In all honesty and sincerity, the universities competed for these loans and they got it. Three went through and Makerere, among them, has two projects. Each competed for a project and won. We congratulate them because they are our universities.

The problem with the report is that it does not tell us how much money Makerere won and how much Mbarara University of Science and Technology won in this such that we know what they will use it for. It is not specific. The point is, the total amount of money Uganda is asking for is about $32 million. If we get this clarity from the committee, we will be happy.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, this includes both public and private universities. The research is going to be done but what is the position of Government in replicating the results of the research and running them around for the benefits of others? We need these two points clarified so that we can move on.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Finally, I will have hon. Ameede, the chairperson of the committee and then, we shall conclude this debate.

6.48
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad to contribute to this debate. I am a member of the COSASE. Mr Speaker, in our work, we have not found any Government institution or entity that is working well. Things are not well. The debate on aid versus development in Africa is huge. China, the Asian tiger, has borrowed very little to develop. 

Recently, the IMF President was here and she said much as there is money to borrow, we should borrow wisely. We are doing a lot of things at once. We should sequence our priorities. There may be no problem about this particular loan but the tangibles of what it is going to give us are not very clear. Most of these loans are lost in just stories and theories. 

Madam Speaker, what is the output of this excellence? Can Makerere University come up with outputs of what they intend to achieve from this centre of excellence before we give them money? Otherwise, this money would go into workshops and it will only benefit a few. Thank you.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I wind up, I would like to address the issues raised by hon. Abbas Agaba with regard to allocation of funds. This was done at the time of the competition and when they were being evaluated. That was not our responsibility.

According to the report we have here, it says that each centre of excellence will sign a performance and funding agreement with its Government. Therefore, the private and public universities will sign a performance agreement with the Government of Uganda. This will help us solve the issue of locking up the information from the other members.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to thank you very much for the issues you have raised and the overwhelming support for this loan. I, therefore, request you to support this loan, which is very important for the development of our country. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion? I now put the question that the request by Government to borrow SDR 17.1 million, equivalent to $24 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centres of Excellence Project be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It was important that we had this discussion. It is about our country. The things that concern us, we should understand them better. This House is now adjourned to Tuesday, 21 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 21 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)

