

Thursday, 9 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you all to this sitting. We were not able to sit on Tuesday and yesterday because of some circumstances that were not within our control.

As you may already be aware, on Saturday, 4 February this year, Dr Margaret Mungherera passed on in India. Her body was brought to Uganda and a request that the body be brought to Parliament was made to this House. This request was accepted but as I said earlier, there were circumstances that did not allow the House to sit. 

Therefore, honourable members, I am informing you that there will be a tribute motion in honour of the late Dr Margaret Mungherera next week either on Tuesday or Wednesday. I urge all of you to come and participate in this motion. She was one of those leaders that were not political but in her own sector, she did a tremendous work. She headed most of the institutions in the medical profession. 

Personally, one time I appeared in a committee where she was. I was representing one of the doctors that had been accused of certain things. I went there as a lawyer and I met her. Therefore, I kind of knew her. It is a sad occurrence for this country. I now ask you, honourable members, to rise and observe a moment of silence in her honour. 

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week in one of the sittings, two issues arose from presentations that were made on items that were on the Order Paper that day. The first related to a report on Uganda’s missions abroad. The honourable member for Ndorwa, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, raised the issue that there was no consistency between the executive summary of the report that was presented to the House and the full report. He said that if you compared the executive summary to the full report that the committee tabled before the House, there was a variance. He singled out the issue of properties abroad under Uganda Property Holdings Limited (UPHL). His issue was that the summary that had been presented by the chairperson was at variance with what was contained in the report, therefore, there was need for harmonisation. 

I did direct that these matters needed to be harmonised for us to proceed properly. I engaged the Clerk’s office and we looked through the documents. The recommendations made on Uganda Property Holdings Limited in the executive summary of the report and the main report of the committee were indeed different. The executive summary calls upon Government to improve staffing and operational capabilities of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and transfer custodianship of property currently under the Uganda Property Holdings Limited to the Uganda missions in the respective countries. That is what the chairperson communicated to the House as their recommendation in the executive summary.

However, the report of the committee in its recommendations stated that the committee requested the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, under whose docket the company falls, to provide a comprehensive statement on UPHL. The report further said that Ministry of Finance should determine either a private company or the Government should manage the properties under the UPHL. That was the issue. So, there is variance and there is need for harmonisation.

We will, therefore, ask for the record to be corrected so that when we come to debate this report, these matters are taken into account. The actual recommendation of the committee relates to whether properties abroad should be managed by UPHL or we should get a private company to handle this matter. Policy matters regarding UPHL are under the mandate of the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, audit queries regarding UPHL are handled by the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

Therefore, the recommendations were dealing with too many issues at the same time. As a House, we needed to straighten this matter up. I hope that in the course of the debate, we will have these matters straightened out so that the records are now clear.

The second matter that was raised was in relation to the report on the Standard Gauge Railway. The report was presented to this House by the chairperson of the committee. However, the honourable member for Lwemiyaga raised the issue that there had been a select committee in the Ninth Parliament that handled the same business, and he argued that that matter had not been resolved. He wondered if it would be proper for this House to proceed when there are two reports and whether it was proper for the House to proceed with one report yet the first had not been debated. I asked that you give me time to come back to guide on how we should proceed with this.

Honourable members, there are principles of parliamentary practice captured in our Rules of Procedure. It is understood that the work of a particular parliament must end with that parliament. Of course, the projection is a reality; suppose there is a change of government, would another government be able to take over business that was in another parliament of another government? That is what was under the guidance of this particular instruction that was given to Parliament. 

Therefore, the rule is that no business of a parliament must overlap. Any parliament in its term must be able to comprehensively deal with all its business and finish it. That is the rule and that is what we should stand by. Work introduced in a particular parliament must be handled and finished by that parliament so that there is no question of what to do in the next parliament. We cannot determine business that is coming for the Eleventh Parliament; we should be able to handle our own business and finish it.  

However, in very exceptional circumstances, – which is almost becoming the rule in our operations - where a matter is urgent, continuous and is likely to continue affecting the citizens of this country, that matter will remain outstanding until it is finally determined by a parliament. However, that is the exception. We cannot now make the exception the rule. It will not be proper for us to do our work in a way that we are looking forward to not completing it so that a motion can be moved to save business for the next parliament. It is highly irregular and unprocedural and we should not be observing this.

In this particular case, this was a report of a select committee, not even a committee of Parliament, which was tasked with the responsibility of investigating issues relating to procurements in respect to the Standard Gauge Railway. That committee did its work and laid a report before this House but it was not debated. Therefore, the question is: can we even save the work of a select committee and have another parliament debate such work of a select committee set up by a previous parliament? I think that will be stretching the rule. 

My guidance on this matter would be that the report, which was laid before the Ninth Parliament by the select committee that was chaired by the hon. Ssekitoleko, can be looked at by Members now to inform us in the course of the debate. We cannot bring it up for debate as a report of this Tenth Parliament but Members can rely on it. 

When the debate begins, I will ask the honourable member who was the chairperson of that select committee to give a summary of what they did so that we can be together on what they did and where we are on the issues that they handled. We can do this because he happened to have come back to this Parliament; if he had not been re-elected, we would not even have that option. So, it cannot be cited as a rule that can be adopted for all procedures. 

What I recommend to the rules committee is that this matter has to come out clearly, that the work of a particular parliament must end with that parliament. If there is need, which should be on a case by case basis, the issues are clear and a particular parliament feels liked it can take over such business, then it will be the mandate of that new parliament to take up that particular business. Otherwise, we cannot continue saving business for the next parliament; that would jeopardize the work of a parliament that will have been elected for that purpose. For now, whatever work was saved for this Parliament will be handled as previously decided. That is my guidance on those two issues. 

Let us proceed because we have a lot of work today. I will start with Obongi, Agago, Bugangaizi East and Mityana Municipality. Let us have those issues raised quickly so that we can go to business. 

2.18
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance that is urgent. It is a problem of land grabbing in Obongi Constituency, Moyo District. 

This problem is associated with cattle keepers whose cattle is ferried using trucks from somewhere to Obongi; I mean they come from outside West Nile. These are the cattle of the Balaalo - cattle keepers. These cattle are brought using trucks at night and some trucks belong to the UPDF. 

This problem has created a conflict between crop growers and cattle keepers. When the cattle go to the fields of people and destroy food crops, definitely the owners of the food crops and the gardens complain. When they go to the subcounty courts, another problem arises from there. 

It has openly been said that the state security agencies support the cattle keepers, the Balaalo. In the case of Obongi, we have seen them supported by the UPDF, the police and officers of the Internal Security Organisation, the Gombolola Internal Security Officers (GISOs) and the District Internal Security Officer (DISO) for Moyo District. 

Mr Speaker, this problem requires urgent attention in the sense that the people are asking: if there is a conflict amongst us, the people in this area – regardless of whether they come from somewhere or within here – and state security agencies turn out to support one side against the other, what will happen? Definitely, people have questions about that.

The case of Obongi has also been witnessed in the neighbouring areas of lower Madi-Okollo and upper Madi-Okollo. Arua District is entirely affected including the constituency of Vurra. Arrests have been made, yes; however, when suspects are out there, they can be arrested but the question is: how do we handle the issue of detention versus taking people to court? Some people were arrested in Obongi but it was those who had complained who were arrested. They were taken to Moyo Central Police Station and detained from 19 January up to yesterday, 8 February, without being taken to court. What is happening?

This problem is not only in West Nile. When I came here, I interacted with my colleagues from the Acholi subregion and I got to realise that the same problem is also affecting Aswa and Agago counties. Why is it that the cattle from Western Uganda are being ferried to Northern Uganda? Is this the re-stocking programme for cattle stolen from the north during the war or there is something else? Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Fungaroo for giving way. The issue of animals being taken to Northern Uganda is very serious. In my district, Amuru, for the last two months we have had more than 20 trucks dropping cattle on our land. Whenever we ask where the animals are coming from, they normally respond that there are some people who are behind the bringing of these animals to our land.

Would it be right for the honourable minister to come up with clear information about the Balaalo who are taking animals to various areas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not holding the Floor; he is just giving information.

MR OLANYA: The information I would like to give is that, in Amuru we have a serious problem of the Balaalo who are occupying people’s land without their consent.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for that information. The biggest thing that worries me most is the misuse of the state security. Besides, what we have woken up to in Obongi, which is very painful, is that we have a UPDF detach and the commander is from Western Uganda, he is called Gideon Mwesigye, and he supports the Balaalo. The District Police Commander (DPC), the DISO and the brigade commander all come from the same side and support these people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you just raise the issue substantially without regionalising it. Why don’t you just raise the issue and leave it there?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. My prayer is that the Balaalo and their cattle be taken away from Obongi immediately. My second prayer is that land should not be grabbed from the people. We should not create a class of landless poor people in Northern Uganda - (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I do realise that there are two issues that need to be clarified to the House. I am learning the word “Balaalo” and it has gone onto our Hansard. Can the contributors explain to us what this word means so that whoever is going to read about that word in the future will understand what this Member is talking about?

Secondly, judging from the contributions of other Members and from what I have picked up from the media, it looks like the issue of these Balaalo - although I do not understand the word very well - is becoming a common issue. Therefore, can the Member do us a favour and write a paper and make a proper presentation to the House for us to analyse the issue of these Balaalo and the problems they are causing to this country so that as a country, we can resolve it.

The point of procedure, therefore, is: is it normal for us to discuss such a serious matter just as a matter of national importance when actually it is very serious, from the way the Member is articulating it? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member for Dokolo has a point. What is this word because I have checked in the Constitution, the Third Schedule, where Ugandan indigenous communities are listed as at 1 February 1926 and I do not see that word? So, what are you talking about?

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Member for raising the matter. My procedural point is: do they have cattle movement permits? I am raising this because in the Eighth Parliament -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you raising a procedural point to the Speaker or to the Member speaking?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the procedural point I am raising for your guidance is that in the Eighth Parliament, Members of Parliament from Lango, Buliisa and Teso raised this same matter and Parliament decided to put in place a committee. Unfortunately, the committee report did not see light.

Mr Speaker, would it therefore be procedurally correct, as you earlier made a ruling on saving business from former parliaments, for this report, which does exist and which looked at the whole country and causes of the movements, to be brought on the Floor? I know the problems in his case are not different from what was in Teso and Lango and I am sure that is why Lango was raising the same matter. I wish to seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, on a purely procedural matter, that would not be procedurally correct. It could have been saved and handled by the Ninth Parliament but for the Tenth Parliament to save work of the Eighth Parliament, –(Laughter)– that would be a difficult one for the House.

The thing is that these are current issues. Let us deal with them as current issues. This House is faced now with the situation and these facts are being brought, so let us handle them as a situation that is happening right now. We do not have to go anywhere. Let us deal with it as it is and see how we can comprehensively deal with it.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a Member of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, I cannot believe that I am listening to what I have just listened to, knowing that the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees free movement of persons in Uganda and their property. Where animals are concerned, they must have movement permits for them to move from one district to another, but there is freedom of movement unless there is quarantine in some of the areas.

Mr Speaker, there may be issues to bring to the Floor of Parliament regarding these movements where there is concern. However, is the honourable member in order to fan tribal sentiments in discussing this issue?

Mr Speaker, we all know that there is famine and drought in this country and cattle keepers are moving throughout the whole land looking for water in those parts that have less effects of drought than others. Therefore, is the honourable in order to fan tribal sentiments without giving us specific figures and statistics so that we can appreciate the nature of the problem and discuss it as Ugandans for the betterment of this nation, and the wellbeing and coexistence of our people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think I guided the honourable member for Obongi that he should raise the issue as it is without regionalising it or making it sound like a tribal matter. I have already guided him on that matter and the same guidance is to you, that we need to present these issues nationally so that we can debate them as such rather than going to specific details.

In regard to the free movement of people and probably animals, when we used to train in human rights, and I know you are the chairperson of the Parliament Committee on Human Rights, an illustration was given of a man who had just come out of a human rights workshop and walked throwing his hands all over the place. Later, he hit somebody in the process of enjoying his freedom. That person complained but the person who had been walking throwing his hands all over said, “I have my right to freedom of movement”. However, the other person who had been hit said, “Yes, it is true you have full freedom of movement, but where my nose begins your freedom ends”.

Therefore, do these freedoms extend to coming to my private property or are there some ways of respecting individual holdings, which is also another branch of human rights? We can have that discussion another day. However, I think what is being raised here is that some movement of cattle is being seen in places where the people taking the cattle cannot claim ownership in those places and it is creating problems with the people who hold that land. I think that is the problem that should be handled without regionalizing it or doing anything. That is the actual situation that is obtaining right now.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. The information I am giving my colleague, who I addressed a press conference with last week, is that the movement of cattle is one way and by one ethnic group. You cannot find any cow from Buganda, Teso, Acholi grazing anywhere in Western Uganda. In Lango area, where hon. Cecilia Ogwal comes from, the cows were brought by a ferry properly guarded by the police into Northern Uganda. In my constituency, those keeping 12,000 herds of cattle in Aswa Ranch are armed with AK-47s. 

Can the minister probably tell us whether we need a cattle policy and whether we need a law on how to move animals across the country? In Texas in the USA, they have more animals than all the animals combined in Uganda but you do not hear anything to do with cows crossing into someone’s land. Can we get good infrastructure to facilitate trade among all the ethnic groups in a peaceful environment?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members – (Interjection)- I really find it hard not to give way to my brother here. Let me take this information. Even if I say nothing afterwards, you have heard. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me guide since you have insisted. When a Member rises on a point of urgent public importance, that Member has the information. In fact, a Member rising on a matter of urgent public importance should not entertain information because it is you who came and requested the Speaker to give this information. If that matter can be debated, that is another issue. 

If Members are going to supplement after you have raised your matter, that is also another matter. However, to accept information is irregular. That means you do not have the information; you just came and hoodwinked the Speaker.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for the guidance, Mr Speaker. This problem has led to increased levels of cattle theft. The same trucks used for ferrying these cattle to Northern Uganda also carry other cattle from there when they are leaving.

Cattle belonging to a one Mzee Sebi, stolen from Itula Subcounty in my constituency, were arrested from Luweero and returned to Moyo. The case was recorded at the police. Other heads of cattle again stolen from Itula Subcounty were arrested in Yumbe and brought up to Arua Court and the records are available. If you need details about these issues, we shall give them to you.

My prayer is: let us stop land grabbing. It has created the danger of displacement of people from the parishes of Liwa Dilokata and Waka in Obongi constituency. This problem also extends even to the other constituencies in the neighbourhood. 

We need to save our people from becoming poor and landless. There is one person who is grabbing 25 by 6 kilometres of land in my area. I pray that the army and the police remain national, and I say the word “national” with emphasis. If it is allowed and my chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights sees what they do down there, I do not know whether she will not call it a tribal matter. Those who practice tribalism are not condemned for airing tribal sentiments but those who speak against tribalism are criticised for talking against it. This is the Uganda we have today. 

Mr Speaker, help us. I talked to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs on this issue and he is here. The Moyo Chairperson LC V is aware of this problem. The Woman Member of Parliament for Moyo, who is also the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare, is aware of this problem. The Resident District Commissioner (RDC), the DPC and other Government officials are aware and now Parliament is aware. In the Eighth Parliament and Ninth Parliament, I raised the same issue. If no action is taken, what will the people be left with as an option? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a response from the Government on this matter? 

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, it is true that last week, when we were having lunch, hon. Hassan Fungaroo mentioned to me the issue of this undefined term, “Balaalo” moving around. My advice to him as a minister was that let him give us the facts, and I am glad he has quoted lorries which were ferrying cows. I am sure those lorries have got registration numbers. Let him give us the number of vehicles, animals, the people whose animals were stolen, the affected areas and we will take the necessary action or we will inform him accordingly. 

However, at this stage there is nothing that I can do except that I would like to make it clear that when he talked to me, it does not make me a witness of what happened because I am not a witness to what he is reporting. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, without sounding like I am directing you, would it be more probable for you to find out for yourself since you have the mechanisms for finding out? The allegations have been made and they are on the record; you have a national system and infrastructure, would you want to activate them to check the facts and come back to us so that you can advise us on how to proceed?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, the answer is yes. However, we need any other detailed information from the honourable member to assist us so that we can make a very comprehensive statement to this House. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think in the meantime - I have never been a minister, so I do not know how to do these things. But if I were in your shoes, I would call the RPCs, DPCs and instruct them to go down there and find out what is going on and furnish me with a report. That is what I would do, instead of coming back to the Member who has emotionally raised the matter; I would not do that. I would activate my systems and have an independent assessment of what has been stated and come back and brief the House. However, because I am not you, I am not going to do it. 

MR KANIA: Mr Speaker, I have not disagreed with your direction. In fact, I obliged by it, except to help me -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order against my good friend, Mr Obiga Kania, who went on a sabbatical for ten years and came back and yet the Rules of Procedure have not changed much. 

Is the honourable minister in order - on two separate occasions - to disrespect the guidance given by the Speaker on behalf of the House? He even has cattle in his constituency now; is he in order to run away from reality for purposes of protecting his ministerial job? Is he saying we should kill the animals and throw them at the roadside so that he sees that there are cattle in Pader? Are you in order not to be aware of what is happening in the country yet you drive a car with the flag of the Government of Uganda? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please take the advice; it is given in good faith. Come back and tell us what your findings are. Clearly, the matter is already with you and not with the member for Obongi. The allegations are on the record and so it is up to you, as Government, to come and tell us the other side of this matter. 

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Hassan Fungaroo for having raised this very important matter. Mr Speaker - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, on what matter do you rise? (Laughter)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am rising on a point of procedure. As you realise, Mr Speaker, what hon. Fungaroo and hon. Odonga Otto have raised cuts across ministries. It does not only concern the Ministry of Internal Affairs. A policy on movement of cattle may require an input from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There are also issues regarding Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) officers as well as trade. That is why I stood up; first of all, on a point of procedure and also to caution that something small can result into a very big conflict, which can cause death. 

As Government, we are concerned about anything that can bring conflict. What hon. Fungaroo and others have raised is very pertinent. People have killed one another because of land wrangles, so we are taking it seriously.

Sir, since the matter cuts across ministries, from the Office of the Prime Minister I will take it up. The Ministry of Internal Affairs will take up its part. The ministries in charge of agriculture and trade as well as the UPDF will also have to have input. We must go to the ground to find a solution. Even Ministry of Lands is equally going to be involved. 

Let us take it up as the Office of the Prime Minister and come to this House maybe within one week and tell you what we have done to save people’s lives. We have seen people kill one another because of land conflicts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have staff from the Clerks’ Department of the National Assembly of the Republic of Kenya. They are here for a benchmarking visit and are attending training at the Eastern and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI). Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have, in the public gallery, leaders from Mayuge District. They are represented by hon. Robert Ntende of Bunya South and hon. Julie Mukoda. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, last month a Member of Parliament from Otuke made a statement on the Floor of this Parliament about a similar movement of animals from Karamoja into Otuke and Alebtong districts. Over 10,000 animals were moving towards Alebtong. Over 5,000 people – (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order and to advise the Member who is holding the Floor that the matter he is raising is on our Order Paper. I have been made to know, and I am now talking as a Commissioner of Parliament - (Laughter) - that the Order Paper is now given out a couple of hours before the sitting. So, is it in order for the Member to come to the House before he has looked at the Order Paper?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for where? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: The member for Dokolo South. Is he in order to destroy the name of my district before seeking my opinion on this matter which is also on the Order Paper? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think this matter should now be resolved in Dokolo. (Laughter) That matter is actually on the Order Paper. Let us wait and deal with it. Thank you.

2.49
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the chance granted to me to raise this very pertinent issue. 

Mr Speaker, on Sunday in Mityana Municipality, which is my constituency, a woman called Angel Nansubuga and her husband, Mr Stephen Kakumba, went to Mityana Hospital to have their baby delivered. Indeed she had a normal delivery, unfortunately she started bleeding profusely. Saving her life would, therefore, need a blood transfusion line. The doctors here understand that. All that was required was available, except the willingness of the health worker to work before being paid Shs 5,000 only. 

The health worker asked for the money from the woman’s husband. The condition was that the payment be made before touching the dying mother, who was bleeding. Unfortunately, the husband had no money but tried to plead with the health worker to save his dying wife and that he would pay in the morning of the following day. Due to excessive bleeding, the mother died and the husband was told to take away her dead body immediately without even giving him a death certificate for his beloved wife, I think in a bid to cover up the incident.

Honourable members, you all watched this in the news and this health worker pleaded guilty, accepting that she did not save this woman’s life. This is a shame and I am bringing it up as a national concern because this is happening in very many hospitals. One time, a patient from a place called Banda, also found in Mityana, went to the same Mityana Hospital but died during labour and the medics were accused of neglecting her. 

Last year, a child died in Kyantungo Health Centre in Kalangaalo Subcounty where he had been taken for treatment after a snake bite. The residents accused the medics of Kyantungo of neglecting the child. When we intervened, the medics were transferred and the case is still being investigated up to now.

Mr Speaker, there has been quite a number of such cases in this hospital emanating from what I call the negligence by health workers. However, I would also like to bring to your attention that there are rumours that 50 per cent of these health workers are traditional birth attendants and not qualified -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this House does not proceed on rumours.

MR ZAAKE: Okay, Mr Speaker, but I am very sure that this is happening -(Laughter)- therefore, I will stop calling it a rumour; I now would like to bring it to your attention that it is happening. These are facts and these things are happening everywhere. I am afraid to say that even those that are medically qualified spend 80 per cent of their time away from the hospital, rendering the hospital devoid of medical workers in times of need. 

Even members of management of that hospital are always not in hospital. Officials of the committee, which was created at that time by the leaders of the district – the LC V Chairperson and the RDC of Mityana District – were called but they were nowhere to be seen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, do you have any prayers that you would like to table before the House?

MR ZAAKE: Mr Speaker, what happened in Mityana perhaps is happening elsewhere in Government health facilities. It is based on this background that I pray that honourable members cause this House to launch investigations into the qualification of health workers specifically in Mityana Hospital, and also probe into the circumstances under which the police released this suspect yet she pleaded guilty. I beg to move. However, I would wish to give my colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response from the Government on this?

2.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (MS Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is quiet absurd to hear that a woman died in labour; at least you die but die somewhere else and not in the labour ward. It is very sad and I would like to pass on condolences to the bereaved family.

Mr Speaker, Mityana Hospital is becoming notorious. This is not the first case that has happened there. Many cases of this nature have been reported and I am a victim too. I lost a niece just like that although when the ministry launched an investigation, the workers were reprimanded. 

I am making an undertaking to work with the Ministry of Health to make sure we follow up on this health worker who admitted to being negligent. We must know whether he is not mentally sick because he accepted that he was negligent and just did not work. The good thing is that we have a clue; the name of the health worker is known and the case has just happened. We have to swing in action and make sure we investigate this matter to its conclusion to save the lives of the people of – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this matter. The procedural matter I am raising is in regard to the undertaking the Government Chief Whip has just mentioned.

Given the fact that all hospitals are in this situation, wouldn’t it be right for this undertaking to bring on board all hospitals that are in similar situations? I am saying this because Arua Regional Referral Hospital too needs a comprehensive audit. Monies for buying equipment have gone missing. The last time the Public Accounts Committee was in Arua, they came back with one of the staff who had been in charge of the pharmacy, having found out that drugs supposed to be on the shelves had been hidden among expired drugs. Someone is even whispering that it happens in Soroti Hospital too.

Mr Speaker, our Committee of Health needs to be brought on board and work hand in hand with the office of the Government Chief Whip so that we clean up the mess in all these hospitals. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a committee; can I hear something from the chairperson of the Committee of Health?

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  What happened in Mityana is not only happening there. It is happening all over the country. 

Let me tell you the story of Mityana because I know it. What happened to this lady is that there was no ergometrine – the drug that is supposed to control bleeding - in the hospital. So, the nurses buy drugs and sell them to patients because the drugs are not there. For this particular situation, the nurse wanted the attendant to pay for her own drugs not a Government drug but the attendant could not afford. This is what happened. 

Anyway, to cut the long story short, I was reading through a parliamentary recommendation for the previous years and I found that the Ministry of Health is required to report to Parliament quarterly on issues of maternal mortality but this is not being done. I think that would be a beginning. If every quarter they tell us that 50 women have died in Gulu, two in Mityana, three in Kiboga and these are the reasons, we can start from there because this Mityana issue is not an isolated case.

However, as a committee –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. As a former minister of health in this Government, I would like to state it on record that I thank this Parliament because this Parliament went an extra mile to pass a loan request of US$ 130 million for reproductive health. Therefore, I am really shocked that even the report since then shows that this is still happening in the hospitals.

As for the Mityana Hospital we are talking about, in 2011 people went up in arms and wanted to kill the nurses. I had to go there to find out what was happening. Later, I found out that they were selling drugs. The same issue is still happening. I think the Minister of Health should now wake up and make supervision thorough. They have commissioners and directors but the health monitoring unit is down yet they have the capacity. I do not know what is happening.

Mr Speaker, one time I behaved like a villager. I visited Mityana Hospital and sat on a bed. The doctor came and found me there. I had a chit but the doctor chased me out and said, “What are you doing here?” It was around 7.00 p.m. I told the doctor, “Please, I came from Nsujju and I am suffering from malaria. They informed me that there were no drugs there.” The doctor said that Government does not supply drugs to that hospital. Imagine, he was saying this to a minister – (Laughter) - who was masquerading as villager. Unfortunately, I had bodyguards. They came near me and told the doctor that the person he was saying all that to was the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare. 

The doctor expected reaction, his blood plasma went up and he was sweating seriously. I told him, “If the Government does not supply drugs, why don’t you complain?” I knew that a week before, Government had supplied drugs to that hospital. I requested the doctor to go with me to the store and find out whether there were no drugs. The store was full of drugs. 

This habit is common in all the Government hospitals. I would like to request my colleague at the Ministry of Health to take up monitoring and evaluation because if they do not do it, they will not perform to their best. This is what we used to do in the Ministry of Health with the late honourable Dr Stephen Mallinga, honourable Dr Nduhura and the commissioners and the performance went from 35 per cent to 80 per cent. Right now, when you look at the performance of the Ministry of Health, with all the resources they have, it is almost at 35 per cent. It is a serious concern we are raising. We need to put them on their toes to perform at their best. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the chairperson finish please?

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To cut the long story short, there are problems of supervision as hon. Kakooza has said. They are all over the country. 

However, I propose that maternal health should be handled separately; first, by enforcing the parliamentary recommendation of quarterly reports on maternal deaths to the House. They have to tell us the causes so that we look at the possible solutions as we work together and improve supervision. Secondly, we have scheduled next week as a committee to visit Gombe, Mityana and Mubende. Therefore, we hope to get more information on this issue. 

The third point is the issue of health financing. The problem started with the staff asking for money. Mityana Hospital serves my constituency also; there is no single woman who goes for caesarean services in that hospital without paying at least Shs 200,000. The same happens in Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Masaka, Lyantonde and Kabale. That means this happens all over the country. 

This financing issue should be sorted. Where is health insurance? It could sort out some of these issues. We should request the ministry, before they come to the committee, to come and update the House on the issue of maternal health and national health insurance. 

However, that is not the only problem. I had an experience over the last two weeks. I travelled to India for medical issues and I discovered that between 50 to 150 Ugandans get medical visas every day to travel to India. They spend a minimum of $10,000 to $15,000 per person. You can do the mathematics to see what it costs us. 

The Indian High Commission charges a business visa at Shs 7,000 and the medical visas Shs 290,000. This can be verified. I travelled on Qatar Airways with two patients. A colleague travelled on the same day on Emirates with 11 patients. There is a big problem with our health sector. I do not know whether we should give them a week to inform this House on those issues. 

To make matters worse, we have invested billions of shillings to super-specialise Mulago. The hospital is going to be reopened at the end of this year. However, if you look at the framework paper which we had, there are no funds to run this super-specialised unit. 

The President was very clear in the State of the Nation Address that we should stop the haemorrhage. However, we have failed to invest here. Therefore, Mr Speaker, the problems are much bigger than what we see. I do not know what we are going to do in this kisanja hakuna mchezo. We need a lot of prayers.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, taking into account what has been said about the medical situation in this country, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Health to come and make a statement so that we debate the paper? 

The issue the chairperson of the Committee on Health has raised cuts across the whole country. I wanted to inform the Government Chief Whip that I also lost my niece who went to give birth but bled to death. Therefore, the situation is the same all over the country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are still matters of urgent public importance. I have not yet started on the Order Paper and yet it is past 3 o’clock already. Please, bear with me.

Honourable members, there are two issues here. The first one is the quarterly report that should come from the Ministry of Health on issues of maternal health. The second one is a request for a comprehensive report on what is going on in the health sector. 

However, the chairman of the health committee can also give a preliminary report to this House on what they have found so far, to form a basis of an interaction. You are all speaking very well, but there is nothing documented that the House can look at. Therefore, if you can show us what we can do, those would be the proposals we expect you to make to the House instead of asking for what we can do. 


We would like you to propose the solutions to us as chairperson of the committee who has been in those places. Come with a preliminary report that can kick off a debate in the near future so that we can interact on those issues.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are in the process of finalising the report. The earliest time for us to present our first report of the committee’s tour should be Thursday next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the debate when that matter is brought so that we can handle it more comprehensively.

3.11
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity- (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in my capacity as the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs and also as a Member of Parliament. This Parliament is supposed to provide a free and conducive environment but right now in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, I see a row of policemen in full combat gear. Also at the entrance of both sides of this chamber, there are around eight police persons sitting there. This is very unusual. 

Mr Speaker, before we come into this Parliament, everyone is disarmed right at the quarter guard. Secondly, even if a situation arose that would otherwise require increased security enhancement, it could tactically be done so that we can have a truly free atmosphere that this Parliament deserves. 

We know we have distinguished Members like the Vice-President who have enhanced security. However, once they are in here, they are among safe Members of Parliament. Therefore, the procedural issue I raise is whether this kind of atmosphere - We have students who come to Parliament and there are those of us who have had bad ordeals with the police. Once they are here, we get a lot of issues that can injure our freedom.

This is a distinguished stranger’s gallery and the madowadowa police are not ideally paramilitary police. Here we have a whole directorate and that much I know. Therefore, the procedural issue I would like to raise is whether this kind of atmosphere provides a free environment for Parliament to conduct its business.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He raised a procedural matter; let me have a comment from the commissioner before I guide.

3.15
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the information given by the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs. I would like to inform Members that this week, Parliament has been involved in some unique activity. We have decided to open our doors to the public so that we engage and get them to understand what Parliament is doing. This matter has been all over the media and we are all aware of what is happening. 

I believe that whoever has deployed this massive number of policemen could have been aware of the fact that we have opened our gates and doors to the public. However, I would wish to advise that as a commission, we are going to look into the matter so that whoever comes to this Parliament comes well knowing why they are here.

We are not going to allow policemen in uniform to police us when we are all disarmed before we enter. The parliamentary police are the ones to ensure that we are safe here. Even if you are a minister or whatever, please leave your guns at the gate. That is the normal procedure. Therefore, we are going to look into this matter, Mr Speaker, and we would like to ensure that the stranger’s gallery remains a stranger’s gallery and not a policemen’s gallery. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are also some realities that we need to live with. The day when the President comes to address Parliament, the security arrangement changes completely and we all know that. When the Vice-President is sitting in the House, he is entitled to some amounts of security by virtue of his position. If the First Lady comes to this House, there will be some changes in our security deployment from their unit. Those are things we should recognise because of what we are as a Parliament. We have a Vice-President who seats in Parliament. Even the Speaker has a few of those people. (Laughter) 

Let us not hide under something which is not an issue and make it an issue, because the category of uniform I have seen up there are for the VIP Protection Unit of the Vice-President and the First Lady. Those are the two I saw sitting there. They are for the Vice-President. The gentleman sitting right there is my head of security as Deputy Speaker. 

Therefore, why do we want to create situations even when there is none? In all fairness, we know that the Vice-President has security and we know the kind of uniforms they wear - he is a member of this House - so why should we make it an issue? They have been here each time the Vice-President is here. Have they affected our debate? 

My security keeps changing and even those of the Speaker come. Have they affected debate? These are issues we can ask quietly rather than put them on record. You can ask through a note and I will send the Sergeant-at-Arms to verify. These are matters we can do. Otherwise, you make it a big issue when it is not; it can be explained quietly.

3.19
MS AKELLO FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of very serious importance to this country. This matter is directed to the Ministry of Security and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and any other relevant body that may be deemed fit. 

This matter of national importance is about the problem people and problem animals in Agago District. Mr Speaker, there is an invasion of problem people coming from Karamoja with their animals to Agago District. They have invaded the district in the subcounties of Adilang, Lapono, Omiya-Pacwa and Paimol. 

This invasion is extraordinary because it has caused a lot of insecurity among our people. The people are no longer secure or safely sleeping in their houses for the last two weeks. Ever since they invaded the district, their animals are destroying crops in the gardens. They are also looting food stuffs, especially dry stuff from the houses of people and have also gone as far as injuring our people.

Mr Speaker, I am so saddened to report to this House that this morning, a one Okot Andrew from Bar Lajwa in Kulaka Parish in Adilang Subcounty was speared by one of the Karimojong problem people who were trying to uproot cassava from the garden of one of the residents in that area. This man is currently under medical care. 

Mr Speaker, because of this problem, our people are no longer secure. The security people in the district are aware of this problem. The Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and all the security personnel are aware but nothing has been done. This matter started about two weeks started ago, but there is nothing that has been done and yet our people are losing their animals, food and sleep especially in the parishes of Kulaka and Labwa.

These people came with about nine kraals of animals and they are all camped in Adilang Subcounty. Therefore, these four subcounties that border Karamoja are not at peace. It is an extraordinary case which must be dealt with. 

I know my sister, hon. Akello Sylvia, from Otuke raised this matter about two to three weeks ago and I am sure the matter is going to be debated in this House. However, it is not a matter of debate, Mr Speaker. Action must be taken. The coming of the Karimojong people to our place is neither a sin nor an offence but they are disturbing our people and removing our little food, killing and injuring us. That is what we are talking about. It must be dealt with forthwith.

The second issue is about problem animals. Two weeks ago, a one Akullo Helen from Ajwa in Lapyem Parish, Adilang Subcounty, was killed by a buffalo. As I speak now, another man, George Owili, was badly injured last night and is nursing wounds in Kalongo Hospital. 

Mr Speaker, these problem animals have become too much and unless the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities does something about this matter – It is not just buffaloes but also elephants. I have spoken time and again about elephants in this House and I have reported to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) but there is no action that is being taken. I do not know what this ministry is going to say about these two problem animals. The answer must be urgent as the matter is also urgent. 

As I speak, there is an ongoing security meeting of the communities in the subcounties that I have mentioned. We have reported to the authorities who have not taken any action. People are going to take the law into their hands and I wanted to warn this House in advance. I am constrained because I am not able anymore to stop or control the communities. We are scared about loss of lives and property and that is why there is a meeting. I do not know what they will decide but I think that they are taking serious decisions in regard to that matter. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. While we raise these issues, we should stay within the parameters of the law. If you say that they are going to take the law into their own hands on the record of Parliament and also during a session which is being broadcast to the public, what message are you sending? We could have a way of making this statement without going to those extras which may amount to other things.

Let us raise these issues because they are very important and they affect the community. However, let us stay within what guides a national parliament. Let us use language that can communicate the problem properly without creating another set of problems. I beg of you, honourable members.  

On the matter of cattle, we have an item on the Order Paper – item No. 4 (I) – on the Karimojong herdsmen in Otuke, and now we have Agago. We could wait for that item to raise these issues affecting Agago and other districts. There is a statement on that.

On the issue of people who are moving around with animals, we have already taken a decision on that and so we should not go back on it. We have been guided that we allow the Minister of Internal Affairs to interface with the other people and then come back here to tell us what is going on with the movement of cattle. Those issues have been resolved and we should not go back to them. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue that I am raising is in relation to the animals. We have been bringing reports here and even in the Ninth Parliament I raised this matter of elephants killing my people. We reported to UWA and Parliament but nothing happened.

Mr Speaker, this is a very serious issue and this House has to come up with some remedy to help our people. These animals eat our crops; Elephants one time invaded the entire subcounty in one of the –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on procedure.

MS KARUNGI: Yes. Mr Speaker, the procedural issue is: shall we keep coming here and talking forever? Something needs to be done immediately.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I agree. Honourable ministers, there is a matter here. Hon. Moses Kizige is in charge of the Karamoja sector, we shall come to you when you make your statement. You do not have to speak now on this because we will be spending more time on this. 

Let us now have the final matter from the member for Bugangaizi East County and then we move to the Order Paper. Honourable members, today we have not done well. Thursday is private Members’ time but we also have other business on the Order Paper.

3.29
MR ONESMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The matter of national importance I am raising is related to the Ministry of Health. The Ministry of Health has a new proposal to have children as young as 10 years access family planning services as one of the means to reduce early pregnancies among adolescents.

This news story run in today’s Daily Monitor as a headline and is authored by Patience Ahimbisibwe. It explains how this new proposal by the Ministry of Health is going to be implemented in schools and will affect pupils as young as 10 years old. This policy is a product of the Ministry of Health, development partners, civil society and implementing partners. 

According to the Ministry of Education and Sports’ standards, a child is expected to enrol for primary one at about six years of age. This means that this child at 10 years of age, in primary five, will start family planning. In Uganda, one is expected to complete university education at about 22 to 23 years old. This means that these young girls are going to have 12 years on family planning even before getting married. 

I find this proposal very perturbing. It is very clear that some unscrupulous people with support from powerful multilateral organisations have mooted an ill agenda of introducing and promoting comprehensive sexual education in schools and institutions.

Mr Speaker, I find the health ministry coming up with unhealthy proposals for Ugandans. It is my prayer that this House –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you read this from a newspaper and yet our rules stop us from anticipating and engaging in things - don’t you think it would have been proper if you first sought whether what you read in the papers is true? Right now you are raising and debating it as if it is the truth. Can you first seek confirmation from the ministry on whether that is where they want to go and then you can deal with the matter?

MR TWINAMASIKO: Mr Speaker, I did not bring out all the details in the news story but the author quotes officials from the Ministry of Health. I think that it is actually the ministry to confirm to us whether this story is true or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what I am saying, because you are now proceeding to debate the merits and demerits without it being put properly before us.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Mr Speaker, I take your guidance. However, this is a news story that has circulated in the entire world –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you help us with this situation?

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you. This is some information to my colleague who has just raised an important matter on the Floor of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my colleague that just as he has said, whatever is in the newspaper is not the gospel truth. As far as I know, my ministry does not have, has not and is not planning to have any policy or guidelines concerning reproductive health for girls as young as 10 years. That is horrible.

For that matter, I would like to request you, Mr Speaker, for time to come up with a comprehensive report as a ministry since it has come up on the Floor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That will be a comprehensive response so that the public can know. 

DR MORIKU: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not good to let the House start anticipating and engaging in this debate before we have established what the truth is. Can we now go to the Order Paper.     

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read for the first time. Mr Speaker, I have a certificate of financial implications attached herewith and I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to handle within the rules and to guide the House on how to proceed. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ILLEGAL SETTLEMENT BY KARIMOJONG HERDSMEN IN OTUKE DISTRICT

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Moses Kizige): Mr Speaker, on the 10th of January 2017, hon. Sylvia Akello, Member of Parliament for Otuke District made a statement in Parliament on the illegal settlement of the Karimojong in Otuke District. 

The Speaker accordingly directed that the matter be referred to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs to make a response on the 18th of January. 

Owing to the scheduled meeting of leaders on the subject matter on the 17th January in Otuke, we requested you, Mr Speaker, to defer my response until the 31st of January to enable us make consultations with the stakeholders. 

Accordingly, Mr Speaker, I now present the following response. 

Mr Speaker, in December, cattle keepers with well over 10,000 livestock moved mostly from Kotido District and entered mainly Ogwete in Otuke District as some others moved into Ogen, Kyokobel and Moronoto parishes in Alebtong District. 

They have not only moved to these districts, but they have also moved to all the other districts surrounding Karamoja. They have moved into Lamwo, Agago, Amuria and Katakwi. They are not the only people moving –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to raise a small procedural matter – I will be guided by you if I am wrong. I know that the person reading the response is the Minister of State for Karamoja. However, this matter was raised as a security matter, a matter belonging to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and as such, it requires a response from the respective minister. There are other issues that may not necessarily relate to Karamoja that we may want to hear clarified. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sure the minister in charge of security will come; this particular response is on illegal settlement of the Karimojong herdsmen in Otuke District. Now, he is saying there are other surrounding districts affected by this settlement we are talking about. The one on settlement might come through the minister responsible for security, but we have this one regarding Karimojong settlement. 

MR KIZIGE: I was saying that they are not the only people moving; the Toposa from South Sudan have moved south, the Turkana from Kenya have moved into Uganda, and the Pokot have also moved into Uganda. The movement has resulted into displacement of people and displacement of flocks, aggravating the already existing famine and has asserted pressure on the water resources and health infrastructure, public health and pre-intended supplies in the areas. Local communities are living in fear and trauma of the presence of the herdsmen. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to express my sympathy and concern for the affected people and to reassure them that Government is addressing the matter to have a systematic and orderly movement of the herdsmen. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, Karamoja sub region is a semi-arid expanse of the Savanna. In many areas, rains do not exceed 800 millimetres a year, sometimes hovering around 500 millimetres. These rains usually fail between June and October with desert wind and hot wind/hot air throughout the season. This year, however, the whole country is faced with prolonged drought, but the impact is more severe in the Karamoja sub region. 

Mr Speaker, the Karimojong depend on pastoralism for their daily food; cattle are the determinants of seemingly everything in their pastoral lives. The current drought which started in November, experienced annually is what drove the Karimojong herdsmen to move in search of food, pasture and water for the animals in the neighbouring districts. 

Mr Speaker, objective, XXIII of the National Objectives and Directive Policies of State Policy under the Constitution enjoins the state to institute effective machinery for dealing with any hazard or disaster arising out of natural calamities or any situations resulting in general displacement of people and serious disruption of their normal life. 

Following the statement, we held a meeting at the Office of the Prime Minister and we agreed to send a team to assess the situation on the ground. The team was led by myself, State Minister for Karamoja Affairs. In order to get information, I immediately got in touch with political, technical and cultural leaders in Kotido District, Otuke, Abim, Alebtong and the greater Lango sub region. 

We also got in touch with the divisional police commander – Fifth Division, and this is the division that takes all the districts affected by this movement, including Agago; the regional police commander of Lango, the commandant of the anti-stock theft unit, and others. 

In addition, we received reports together with the Fifth Division Commander from the Resident District Commissioners of Otuke, Abim and Alebtong; the District Internal Security Officers for the concerned districts, the regional internal security officer for Lango, the Division Intelligence Officer; and we also received reports from independent members of the society whom we contacted covertly. 

We also received a situational report from the Chairman LCV, Otuke District. We further had the privilege to attend a meeting between the leaders of the Lango Cultural Foundation and the elders and kraal leaders of Karamoja. The meeting was attended by political leaders including some Members of Parliament from Kotido and other Members from Otuke, Alebtong, the Divisional Commander of UPDF, Regional Police Commander for Lango, Regional Internal Security Officer, Lango, district police commanders from all the affected districts and district internal security officers from those districts. 

Mr Speaker, on 20th January, we had a follow up meeting with some Members of Parliament from the Lango Parliamentary Group in the Prime Minister’s Office. 

Cognisant of the adverse climatic attrition and the unique context under which the Karimojong live, Government complemented by non-government actors has over the years afforded affirmative interventions to improve on the livelihood of the Karimojong. These include disarmament, construction of valley dams, valley tanks in some parishes, distribution of oxen and ox ploughs and heifers and provision of improved and adaptive planting materials, improving livestock feeds and technologies for improved production. Government has also supported the school programmes, installation of irrigation systems for progressive farmers, infrastructure development, consolidation of peace and security initiative and so many others. 

As a matter of fact, Mr Speaker, the cross border movements have been gradually scaled down. It is worth noting that in the last five years, there have hardly been any movements into Lango. However, the exceptional weather conditions we are experiencing this year are the primary cause of the movement. 

Mr Speaker, here below is a summary of the findings: It is true that the herdsmen together with their animals moved south from mostly Kotido District in search of water and pasture for their animals and are mainly living in Okwete, in Otuke District and then in Agin, Kyokobel and Arololo Parish in Alebtong District. They are now moving further south as the situation gets worse. They are also in Ajobi, Amuria District – like I have said; they are in Agago, Kitgum and Lamwo districts.

There was no consultation among the leaders before the movement of the herdsmen and the resolutions agreed on in the consultations that followed have not been fully adhered to. In the past – before the last five years where there have not been serious movements, they would know the situation is coming and there would be consultations between the leaders. This time it was not done because five years was a long time and people forgot the normal practice.

The security reports received do not provide evidence that the herdsmen are armed with guns – because hon. Akello said that these herdsmen are armed with guns. There was no evidence whatsoever that the Karimojong are armed with guns.

There are some allegations of rape and our office has directed security to investigate further because they say that there are rape cases but the victims are not reporting the cases because culture does not permit it. So there are no reports but there are allegations. So we are just investigating this further to confirm whether it is happening or not.

The Karimojong have kraal leaders and these have, to a very large extent, got in touch with the local leaders where they are to set up channels for resolving conflicts. There is evidence, for instance, that in some cases where animals have destroyed crops, the parties concerned have been brought together and compensation made as agreed upon.

The movement by the herdsmen has put some reasonable pressure on the existing social services like health units, sources of drinking water, food supplies and veterinary services.

The situation has been blown out of proportion to a very big extent by some political leaders and FM radio stations.

Earlier on agreed positions like confining the herdsmen to Ogwete in Otuke district have been difficult to enforce because much as there is still enough water in Ogwete, the grass has been burnt. So you have water but there is no grass and so the Karimojong end up moving farther.

The fears by the people are generated more because of the history and the plunder by the Karimojong when they had the guns – they no longer have the guns.

The resolutions arrived at in mediation meetings include the following:

That the Karimojong herdsmen should be withdrawn in a systematic and orderly manner. And we are trying to see how this can be done.
That government reinforces the security to protect life and property of the affected people. And the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force have stepped up their patrols in the areas to ensure that security is provided to the affected people.
While the meeting in Otuke resolved that the Karimojong herdsmen be confined in Ogwete, the meeting with the Lango Parliamentary Group resolved to have the herdsmen moved back in a systematic and orderly manner. And we are trying to see how we can have this enforced.
The Ministry for Karamoja Affairs and that of Northern Uganda will in future take the lead in these matters and should organise cross-border meetings each year, starting in October, in anticipation of similar situations. 
There should be regular cross-border meetings between the government, civic leaders, political leaders and representatives of the elders from both communities to foster peace and harmony. 
The debate on this matter on FM radio stations has since been regulated so that we remove inciting tribal and sectarian sentiments. The Uganda Communications Commission has been very helpful in this matter.
The Karimojong pastoralists should always seek permission and get consent from the host districts as the case was in the past.
Government should provide back-up supplies, such as food, more drugs in health centres, availing fuel for grading security roads to enable easy movement by security agencies in areas. This was requested for by the chairman of Otuke. And as the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, we are trying to see how this can be enforced.
A census of all animals in each herd should be done. We are in the process of starting with this. And the same will be repeated at the time the herdsmen are going back to Karamoja. This is because the biggest fear is that these people when going back, take more animals than they came with. So we shall do a census of the herds in order to establish the exact number.
Government appreciates the concerns of the people of Lango and other neighbouring districts caused by the movement of the herdsmen. We know that Government has the responsibility to ensure that the property and lives of people are protected. And we reiterate that all efforts are being made to address the matters and restore harmony in the districts as soon as possible as we continue praying for early rains.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What have the prayers yielded so far? Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have the Rt Hon. Samuel Ikon, chairman the Inter-Parliamentary Relations Committee of Nigeria House of Representatives and Rt Hon. Larry Odey, former speaker and acting governor of Cross River State, Nigeria. They are here to observe our proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are very welcome. Thank you.

Honourable members, the statement made by the minister attracts limited debate and the two other statements. So, going by the number of members who have already expressed interest in speaking on this matter, including those who have spoken on the subject, we will limit the time. Can we agree on – three minutes will not allow us to accommodate everybody. Can we agree on two minutes? Okay, three minutes.

3.52
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, District Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My spirit became very low when I heard the response from the minister. I categorically spelt out the issues of over-population that the Karimojong has increased in Otuke without any response with the drugs. You know very well that we had the issue of Hepatitis B and Tetanus; these people were there in big numbers and they are the ones using up the immunisation facilities while government has not responded.

Secondly, I said that the animals they came with were not vaccinated and sprayed. Therefore, they were bringing very many diseases to Otuke animals. The minister did not even show that as a serious problem probably – Mr Speaker, the Karimojong herdsmen with their animals are uprooting all the cassava and so famine is imminent. The minister did not even try to think of addressing that.

Mr Speaker, we categorically mentioned that Ogwete is the sub-county created in November last year because of the challenges that they had. But now if you say that you are confining the Karimojong to a newly created sub-county, are we really sure that this sub-county is in Uganda and we want it to reach the middle income status by the year 2020? This is the question that made my spirit to become low and I could not imagine that I am sitting on this side of the House. If my very own minister cannot listen to the plea of the people of Otuke, it is disastrous. My prayer is that the honourable minister handles the issue of Otuke with care. Otherwise, you are bringing tribal war to this country; the Karimojong have disturbed the people of Otuke for years. We have told you issues; today children are going to school – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let us confine ourselves to the issues that are binding.

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Our girls cannot attend school because they fear the Karimojong who walk naked may rape them and this is traumatising. Mr Speaker, the worst is that we are all aware that health is supreme; the issue of open education and free environment is supreme. The Karimojong defecate everywhere and thus dysentery among other related diseases is likely to erupt. Therefore, the Government and Minister must come in, if not I would like to echo the statement made by hon. Franca; when the locals begin to hold matters in their hands, we shall not be responsible. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.55
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister for Karamoja Affairs for the information that you have given to us. Honourable minister, you are aware that on the 20th January, we held a meeting together with the Cabinet. We agreed on principles, but before I mention the principles we agreed on, for sure it looks like disarmament is just – as Members of Parliament we are there just for show. In most cases not only this issue, why is it that whenever we sit and resolve problems as leaders, nothing is implemented?  

Our dissatisfaction with the response you gave in that meeting is exactly what you will implement because from the meeting you never gave a timeframe of how you are going to handle the issues of the Karimojong in Lango sub region. However, you are now here with such reports.

Mr Speaker, when a Member of Parliament rises up and speaks like my sister has done that the Wanainchi will take the law into their hands, it is not because we are not conscious of what it may breed, but simply because Government has never been committed to whatever they say and we are the sacrifice as Members of Parliament – we are answerable to our people.

When our people are suffering and the ministry is not taking precaution, what else do you expect us to say, Mr Speaker? We shall always instigate them. If Government is aware that there is always a dry spell in Karamoja, why don’t they plan for dams in Lango sub region to rescue the Karimojong? They plan very well for dams in Karamoja and then push them to places where they put no reservoirs. They know very well that when these people move to Lango sub region, there must be clear guidance of what is supposed to be done. 

It is not a matter of sympathizing with one sub region, and forgetting about those being affected by this movement. The reason as to why the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan benefits areas as far as Bunyoro, is because this situation spills over to neighbouring areas. Government knows very well that whenever there is a problem in Karamoja, there is a spill over in Lango and Teso sub regions yet whenever they plan for affirmative action in Karamoja, they do not consider Lango and Teso – (Member timed out.)

3.58
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for Karamoja for his response. Mr Speaker, we need to take the issue of the Karimojong herdsmen seriously. I was in the Sixth, Eighth and now Tenth Parliament, but we are still talking about the same story over and again of the Karimojong herdsmen looking for pastures in different districts like Abim. 

I think we need to take this issue seriously. During campaigns, His Excellency the President explained how he had seen a few people in Kotido which would increase our chances of going to heaven; these few people are scattered all over the place in Abim, Otuke, Amuria, Kitgum, Agago and Pader districts.

Therefore, I would like the Government to look for money to put permanent water sources in Kotido. If any money will be allocated for water, we should all concede that Kotido should be given the lion’s share. If they are not settled, Abim, Alebtong, Otuke, Amuria, Pader and Kitgum will all be disorganised. In Abim District, we made a humble plea and it was a council resolution that there is no entering Abim without permission. 

However, with that council resolution our brothers are still there because they do not have water sources. Therefore, Government including the Karimojong from Kotido voted us into power overwhelmingly; we need to take this issue seriously otherwise singing about Kotido year in and out - one of these days, we may need a special national prayer for Kotido and the rest of Karamoja. We talk about the same thing year in and out and even get emotional. 

During the Eighth Parliament, I was about to be lynched in my own constituency for moving with the Woman Member of Parliament for Kotido. When I see the Woman MP for Otuke getting emotional, I am not surprised because people have suffered too much and yet they are Ugandans who need to be settled by providing them water sources; only that and this issue will be sorted.

4.02
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for coming up with this response. However, I would like to state that the minister must begin to look into the issue of Karamoja as a big issue, which does not only affect one district but also many others. When the people of Otuke are affected in Oyam District, we always get these people running to us and they are our people and we cannot run away from them.

Mr Speaker, from the response of the minister, you realise that it is only one group which is catered for fully and this issue annoys us very much. Look at the issue of food; I would like the minister to make efforts of giving the people of Otuke food because the Karimojong communities are coming without food and, therefore, they depend on the food of the people of Otuke, yet the Government is not giving anything to our people. 

Mr Speaker, this brings a big challenge to especially the women; you find the Karimojong going to harvest food from the gardens of the people without permission. They even enter into people’s houses and drink all the water from their pots. This makes the women afraid to go to their gardens because they are always raped. 

Secondly, even if you bring your harvest home, they follow you home and eat everything. Therefore, what plans does the Government have for this –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO: Thank you very much, hon. Santa for giving way. Mr Speaker, the problem with Karimojong is the mindset because they believe that anything that sprouts from the ground is free; whether it is cassava, peas or citrus gardens - as long as it sprouts from the ground, it is free and therefore, destruction of such a thing has got no consequence. I think these people need to try, as much as possible, to create awareness and induct the Karimojong for purposes of co-existence with their neighbours. Otherwise, that is the disaster and it is very appalling. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank my honourable colleague. Actually you have mentioned it. These people, first of all, must be sensitised on how to live with their neighbours. Even when they come and find you eating, they will, straight away, join the eating table without even washing their hands, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) This causes a very high risk –(Member timed out.) 

4.05
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank God for the minister who has just presented the paper. Honourable minister, thank you for admitting that the Karimojong who were moving to these neighbouring areas need the consent of the land holders. I appreciate that you recognise that. 

I also appreciate that you have said that the Karimojong should move out systematically. I think there should be a timeline to that since systematically could mean two years. Please come out clearly on that because I do not think the people can shoulder that burden for two years. 

You talked about security roads. I know this was focused on Otuke District. However, in Agago District, we have a security road that goes to Kidepo Game Park. Please, at an appropriate time, put that road into consideration because I think that will be a good step forward. 

Thank you for your presentation on the food and drug bit. 

You talked about the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) stepping out. I made a tour of Agago District over the weekend. On the 4th, I was touring the affected areas but I did not see a single UPDF officer in the areas in Agago. Maybe they were in Otuke District. If you are deploying them in Otuke, please extend the same courtesy to Agago District. 

You talked of Anti-Stock Unit Groups stepping up their efforts. I wanted to raise a point of order on that. The commander who was helping to safeguard people’s property against trespass from these herdsmen was actually transferred and the rumour in Agago is that he was arrested. I do not know if it is true but that contradicts the information that I got on the ground. 

As hon. Franca put it, I think the fears and concern is that yesterday there was already a fight. I have the same information that she has and I can confirm that those allegations are true. Please, let us be proactive so that we are not caught unaware.

The issue of Karimojong migrating to neighbouring areas has always been there from the time I was a child in Ajilang. Where are the dams up to today? We heard of valley dams when we were still studying. We need these dams in place. 

I do not want to talk about the right of movement to different areas because I know Ugandans have that right. We have even accommodated refugees in Agago. The problem is not even so much about neighbouring districts of the Ateso, Langi and Acholi against the Karimojong. Even in Agago, if you take your animals to somebody’s land, even when you are an Acholi, you will be accused in the same way. Therefore, I do not want people to stereotype this matter - (Member timed out.) 

4.09
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I am disturbed listening to honourable colleagues, who constitute this Parliament, discussing, with accusing fingers, the people of Karamoja. It was in the same Parliament that Members of Parliament rose on a point of national importance on the question of drought in this country. This would be the time for us to ask the Executive how far they have gone in addressing the problem of drought in Uganda. 

Karimojong are part of Ugandans and we, the people of Uganda, must know that the people of Karamoja cannot watch death in the day. They must go where they can find water. They must go where they can share food with the people. (Laughter) I represent the people of Kapelebyong County. There are thousands of Karimojong from Otuke in my constituency -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Karimojong from Otuke? 

MR OCHEN: They are Karimojong from Kotido. Mr Speaker, I received thousands of Karimojong from Kotido and Napak District, when I was the LC V chairperson. I defied all rules and admitted the Karimojong for peaceful co-existence in my district. From the time I was in the chair, 2005 up to 2011, I lived with over 30,000 Karimojong at the border. We drilled boreholes and built schools, even across Karamoja. 

Mr Speaker, the very Members of Parliament here who are supposed to debate and raise issues nationally are discussing like they have forgotten the role of a national Parliament. The Prime Minister is represented here. Our primary responsibility is to ask the Prime Minister how far he has gone in putting up a comprehensive plan to address the issues of drought in this country. Let the Government come forward - (Interruption)

MR MAKMOT OTTO: Mr Speaker, I appreciate some of the statements that my brother shared but he went ahead to generalise that the honourable members of Parliament speaking here and who are supposed to raise points are simply condemning the situation. I think it would have been fair to limit it. Personally, I am mindful of stereotypes. The impression he is giving is that we are all trying to condemn and stereotype the Karimojong. Is it in order for this honourable member to make a far reaching statement without qualifying it?  Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the spirit of this House is to find solutions collectively. If you speak in a manner that isolates other members, you limit the support coming from that side. 

When we speak, let us try to bring everybody together. Understand the issue and then contribute in finding solutions that are comprehensive because when it affects Otuke, Otuke is represented in this House. When she goes back, there are people who come and they are affected. When you are talking about the people who have caused these issues, they have problems as to why they are there. They are not just strolling around; they have been pushed by disasters that have put them there.

That means the tone of our discussion should be in a way that brings us together towards a solution rather than making us feel guilty or victorious about certain things. Let us find a solution. That is what this House is for. Please use that spirit. 

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise guidance – (Interruption) 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to raise a matter of procedure. I have been very attentive in this House, listening to the debate and also participating in the debate. However, when hon. Ochen rose up to make his submission, I got worried because the tone, the face and the energy with which he is submitting is quite scary, to the extent that I almost ran out of this House. (Laughter) I got intimidated but I was only relying on you, Mr Speaker, because I know you can provide protection for your Members. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, are we proceeding rightly in that hon. Ochen can make submissions that scare honourable members of Parliament? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kioga, the honourable member for Kapelebyong has just appreciated the Speaker’s guidance and counselling as a result of how he has been communicating. After I intervened, he said, “I appreciate what you have said to me and I will follow.” Let us see whether he is going to follow. (Laughter) 

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, the responsibility of this Parliament is to guide the governance of this country. The responsibility of this Parliament is to represent the interests of the citizens of this country from the North to the South, East to the West.

If you follow the history of Karamoja, thousands of people have died because there was no due attention accorded to them due to the climatic factors, which affected that region for so long. When I stand on the floor of Parliament, I would be the most hurt because I have lost my people at the hands of the Karimojong. However, I have learnt to say that the problem must be sorted at the source. Karamoja’s problems, which have lasted for so long, should not be left to the people of Karamoja alone. I call upon my colleagues who come from the Acholi, Lango, Kapchorwa and Teso sub-regions to come and put our hands together –(Interruption)  

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am sorry for putting my colleague on order but, Mr Speaker, you realise that the honourable member for Abim said that they discussed this in the Sixth Parliament, in the Eighth Parliament and even in the Ninth Parliament we discussed about the dams. Sincerely speaking, some of these dams are just as a result of silting that needed to be collected by the Government.

As Lango sub-region, we are very affected. We cannot pay school fees and our people cannot marry simply because most of our cattle were raided by the Karimojong. Is he in order to say that the honourable members of Parliament have not been discussing and talking or even making proposals to Government to work? Is he saying that the Members of Parliament were not doing anything and he is the one that is informing Government to do the right thing? Is he in order? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have been the first, even without being moved, to put the Member to order if he had suggested anything like that but he did not. What he was saying is that there have been no results and the situation continues to affect these people adversely and that is why they keep moving and unsettling other people. He is actually saying that we are the ones to generate the solution and then help out. We are the ones to advise the Executive and I was hoping that the honourable member for Kapelebyong would have taken advice and now spoken, even with a smile, even if the matter is very serious. (Laughter)  

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I must congratulate you. Let me come to the issue. When the Vice President, by then, Dr Specioza Kazibwe was assigned the contract to put dams in Karamoja, we all received a report that there was misappropriation of resources to that effect. When that report was released, how much more –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is that the weather conditions have been very severe these days. Even if there were valley dams, would they have survived? You see, the issues are more outreaching than the infrastructure existing right now. I think we need to suggest more comprehensive solutions and I am about to come to the Front Bench so that we can see what interventions are in place that will stop this – We are saying the same thing except different people are saying it. I would like to hear from a person who comes from a different region all together, that is from Kamwenge. Let us hear this intervention.

4.21
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a few issues to raise in a way of looking for a solution to the problem that is at hand. I would like to inform the honourable members present that the issue that is now in Karamoja and neighbouring districts is also affecting other regions. 

Those people we call pastoralists are not only the Karimojong. It has been in Buliisa between the farmers and those with cattle. It has been on NTV that in Isingiro, Kasese and other areas, it is a similar issue. The issue is countrywide. My simple request is that we should know that there is a way we are supposed to handle issues of national importance; it should not be a blame game.

Someone is telling the august House that people are failing to marry and go to school because their animals were taken by the Karimojong but the Government she is representing and talking to has spent a lot of money in re-stocking. In other words, they are not appreciating what the Government is doing to make sure that we have harmony in this country.

I am, therefore, requesting Members that we need to look for a way forward on how we can harmonise the people who have shifted from their homeland to neighbouring districts to take refuge. This country is on record in the whole world that we have been able to host refugees who are not Ugandans and they settle very well.

Some time back, I presented the issue from Kamwenge where we are hosting over 60,000 people from Congo and other countries as refugees. We are living with them harmoniously. Can we provide some resources for emergency so that we can provide food and even boreholes - because the weather is now changing and rains have started coming - so that we can live in harmony? That is my input. 

We should not accuse each other like this because we are all Ugandans and the Constitution is very clear that each and every Ugandan is free to move from one area to another. I thank you. 

4.24
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and my colleagues for the issues they have raised as far as this problem is concerned.

As we talk about the problem of the Karimojong and their neighbours, I see that there are two different issues that should not be mixed up; the issue of looking for survival for the animals and maybe for the people themselves and the issue of criminality.

Mr Speaker, what would killing, injuring, raping women have to do with the problem of drought? As Ugandans and human beings, I believe many of us would want to co-exist with our neighbours who are faced with difficulties. However, if there are aspects of criminality, I think it has to be dealt with differently.

Hon. Okello talked about the need for sensitisation; that most of the Karimojong think that each and everything that sprouts from the ground is theirs. I am also aware, from records, that many of the Karimojong warriors used to think that they cannot live without guns but now we all know that they have been disarmed.

Can the Minister for Karamoja Affairs and Government come up with serious steps of dealing with the criminality aspects of this problem? We need to separate the issues. If women are raped and you say, you know, there are difficulties in their areas, they cannot live, there is no water, they need dams then we are mixing two different issues.

We need some of the Karimojong who are causing problems and committing crimes to be dealt with seriously as per the law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.27
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County South, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very informed and I read the Bible very well. God lived with Lucifer in heaven but Lucifer kept on disturbing God all the time and God got annoyed and sent him down. He said, “I cannot live with you in the same place.” This is what God did because He could not live with Lucifer in the same place.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform you about the history of this country. We used to live very well with our brothers; they are cousins, by the way. However, one time they got annoyed with us and decided to come and get rid of everything from their brothers and uncles, including killing their own uncles. They are aware of these things. 

As they were moving, they raped and looted and from that time, they have never apologised. I want the leaders from Karamoja today to stand and apologise that, “What happened that time was bad; we apologise and we shall never do it again.”

Mr Speaker, my brothers, the Karimojong moved over 10,000 animals - I went to Otuke and I thought I was not living in a country called Uganda. How can our brothers in Karamoja come without food? They are suffering. How can they have no water in Karamoja when our Government has lived in this country for 30 years and up to this time, Karamoja has no water?

We agreed with elders that we are going to support our brothers by moving a motion in this Parliament that in the next budget, as hon. Apolo Milton Obote did when he was planning to pump water from Lake Abyssinia – hon. Ochen knows about this - right into Karamoja. If they cannot have water in the dams, they could have pumped water and our country can do it. That is what we moved in Lango that should be done for them.

However, what we also requested is that since our brothers came without our invitation and without telling us that they were coming, we requested them to first move back in peace so that next time they write a letter requesting us, their uncles, to come and they get visas for coming and we set the rules. When they go back, we will now set the rules –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MR SAMSOM LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth County East, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate what colleagues from Lango and Acholi have raised about their concern of the Karimojong crossing into their area.

First, I would like to inform the House that we have pressure from our neighbours. As I am talking now, we have the Toposa from South Sudan with over 40,000 heads of cattle in Kaabong District. We have over 10,000 Turkana from Kenya with 80,000 heads of cattle. It is because of drought.

As one colleague said, when we had guns, we had a lot of conflict with our neighbours and you know what a gun does. However, we are happy that the NRM Government and Parliament resolved to disarm the Karimojong and we came to peace.

However, all that time, we have not had movements like this year to go to Lango and Acholi. I think they can witness that it is because of the present drought that is eating the whole of Africa. This does not only happen to us. There is hunger in Acholi; people are dying of hunger. Acholi have never died of hunger. There is hunger in Teso and it is because of the drought. This is a peculiar year.

I buy the idea that hon. Ogong said –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable, for giving me way to give you this information. The information you are giving to the House that for the last five years there has not been movement of the Karimojong people to Acholi is not true. Every year, we register a number of them. Unfortunately, they come and when they are going back, they go with our cows as well.

We have been in meetings and hon. Margaret will bear me witness that we had a very serious security meeting last year over the same where our people were accusing some of the Karimojong who had come and stolen our animals. Every time there is drought, it does not only affect Karamoja but us as well. Therefore, as they come to give us pressure, we already have pressure of drought and hunger as well.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: I think the information you are giving - I would like to appreciate hon. Lowila who said we should separate criminality. If there are those who – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please one minute to him on the criminality issue.

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was saying that those who commit offences - criminality cannot be equated to movement of people looking for pasture and water. We have the police and the army. There is nobody who can protect somebody who has committed a crime. 

In conclusion, can we resolve, as Parliament, that Government looks for money to avail us water so that we remain up there and only move to visit our people? However, one day you may also get drought and move to the east. I do not know what you will do. Let Government get money to construct dams and you will not see us moving with our cows. Thank you.

4.35
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Karamoja for the response to the report that was presented on the floor of Parliament by the Woman MP, Otuke.

I would like to thank all my neighbours for hosting my people although you are doing it with heavy hearts and a lot of bitterness. I know it is because of the past incidences that the Karimojong have always crossed to their neighbours. It is very unfortunate and this is what has caused trauma to the neighbours. 

Currently, because of the disarmament programme, the Karimojong people - the Jie are harmless and peaceful. I would like to thank the Government for that effort because if they had illegal guns, it would be so threatening and scary.

I would like to comment on some of the issues that were raised in the report of the Woman MP of Otuke. Rape is not taking place. The Jie who are there are not armed with bows and arrows, as it was mentioned. When I went to Otuke last month for a meeting, which was organised by the cultural foundation, I went to the Police to find out whether there were any reports of rape or killings and I found out that there were none. I even went further with the RDC of Alebtong to visit the kraals. We found people living happily and drinking with the people of Alebtong and Otuke. 

One thing the people of Otuke told me is that the Karimojong have come with a lot of benefits because while they are there, they are buying their beer and foodstuff. What I know is that the stock of food in Otuke, Alebtong and the neighbouring areas is getting depleted because of the high numbers of our people.

My prayer is that Government, with the support of this House, constructs a mega dam for the people of Kotido because it is only the people of Kotido, the Jie, who are mobile –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS ALEPER: There is a dam in Napak, Kaabong and in Moroto. It is only Kotido that does not have a dam. If these people can be assisted, I think they will have no reasons to move to the neighbours. 

Whereas we appreciate that we have to co-exist, even if there is water and there is no grass, there will be need to move to the neighbours but I think this will be done with a lot of consultation. 

However, for issues of criminality, we should not give our Police a vote of no confidence because the security is doing all that is possible to address the isolated cases of uprooting cassava, of injury and I think that has been handled.

I urge the neighbours to continue dialoguing so that we cause harmony between the people of Kotido, Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. Thank you. 

4.39
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are dams in Karamoja. When I was a chairperson of a committee of Parliament, we formally presented a report specifically appreciating the role and the influence of the First Lady, Janet Museveni, in the Karamoja area. They built massive dams and as a committee of Parliament, we toured the area. We were even told that crocodiles had migrated into the dam. What disturbs us is that if you are looking for water, why don’t you go towards the dam? Why do you come to our area? This is a question, which has to be answered.

Minutes ago, we were complaining about the balaalo herdsmen. They do not engage in theft, rape and they do not steal people’s things. They just look for pasture, eat and the animals go. 

When you go to our constituencies - I saw in Acholi-Bur cases of rape and theft. The challenge with that is that you cannot say that they should report to a normal police station. They rape from here and by morning they are in Nakasongola. Some are armed, moving with huge amounts of cattle.

President Museveni tried, in the last Parliament. They put a special fund for all the MPs from Karamoja region. They were given additional fuel and Government vehicles with UC number plates to go and mobilise their people to change their mind-sets. The solution is in community mobilisation and I beg, through the Speaker’s Office, that these resources should be brought back on board. We should organise a special fund whether through the Office of the Speaker; additional fuel and mileage, for the MPs from Karamoja to go and tell their people that this behaviour is bad. 

That behaviour is being encouraged; a stolen cow was even found in a kraal of a minister in this Government. When they were looking for the cows in the morning, they found a marked cow in the kraal of a Cabinet minister. (Laughter) How do you expect an ordinary man down there not to steal a cow? 

Mr Speaker, I pray that we provide special funds for the MPs to go and talk to their people. Ask yourself, we had war in Acholi for 23 years but you do not find any single Acholi begging on the streets of Karamoja. Why is it that 80 per cent of the beggars are Karimojong? 

The First Lady organised a place to settle them. They ran and came back because if you go to that village, there are those saying that someone walked on foot in Kampala, he has begged, now he has a house and a car. These are stories they tell children when they are still being breastfed.

Therefore, the solution is in community mobilisation. In case I am wrong, ask yourself, why are the balaalo not doing the same thing that the Karimojong invaders are doing? (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that on the streets of Kampala, we are seeing young kids from Karamoja and if we talk about changing mind-sets, I think this is where to begin.

If you move around the streets, you will see child beggars and it is so saddening. There is a full ministry for Karamoja and at one time, this ministry was headed by the First Lady. I think there is a lot to be done for Karamoja to benefit. Thank you very much. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I have one important point. The same Committee of Government Assurance that I chaired wanted to find out why there are street children in Kampala from Karamoja. We were taken to Nsambya with my honourable colleagues and we found a big camp where all these beggars stay. They are over 500 to 600 Karimojong beggars in that camp - (Member timed out.)

4.44
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start by thanking the honourable minister for giving us this statement. At least he gave us a basis from where we can begin a serious discussion. The only unfortunate part about the statement is that it is lacking in solutions. It is clear we have a drought across the country. If it is terrible in Karamoja, it is not good in Otuke and neither is it good in Alebtong. The areas bordering Karamoja are equally feeling the pressure of drought. 

When you have an influx into an area, which is just slightly better than Karamoja and people are losing their food reserves, you are pushing the crisis further. Next you are going to get the people of Otuke migrating to Alebtong and continuing because there will be no food to sustain the very population in that area. 

I fault the Government on this issue because you have to look for the solution from the host communities. If the Karimojong are coming and uprooting cassava, how are the people of Otuke going to survive when the Karimojong go? 

Of recent, we had a problem with produce and there was tension developing between local and Asian traders because of the drought. The production was not up to normal levels and there is not enough storage to sustain the population. If, as Government, you are not offering solutions or comfort to the people of Lango, Teso and Acholi, you are only fuelling the level of tension, which currently exists. 

Many of the solutions being talked about here are medium to long-term. The minister’s statement needed to have some immediate solutions to offer and calm the situation.

I was recently in Otuke and clearly saw people with spears and bows moving around freely. The problem, which also developed is about water sources. In some communities, maybe moving around naked is not a problem. How are the women going to fetch water with thousands of herdsmen freely moving about naked? You may doubt the rape but it is safer to stay at home than - (Member timed out.)

4.48
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the middle of the debate, you requested this House to suggest proposals to end the big problem we are talking about. I have observed that the problem of Karamoja region is not only about water strain or hunger but it is bigger than that. 

I hereby propose that Government takes affirmative action to make Karamoja move along with other regions. That affirmative action should cut across all ministries so that each ministry gets an activity that suits the improvement of the Karimojong condition the same way it is done regarding the environmental sector, HIV and climate change. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has to budget for it, the Ministry in charge of Works has to budget for it and the same should apply to the Ministry of Health so that those small budgets can in a holistic approach solve the problem of Karamoja. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have used my discretion until it is no longer working. The rules are very clear. If you look at rule 44(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a minister’s statement shall attract a debate but that debate shall be limited to one hour. We have gone beyond one hour because the matter is important. I am completely out of any more discretion left on this matter. We need to close this but find a way we are going to take it forward. This is because we will not end it by this debate. Down there, we don’t know what has happened in the last one hour when we were debating here. 

Therefore, can I hear from the ministers? What is on the ground and what is happening tomorrow and in the next three days in order to deal with the situation in the short-term and we see how to move forward with the rest?

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KARAMOJA (Mr Moses Kizige): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Members for their contributions. I also want to thank the Members from Lango and the neighbouring districts for their understanding. As Government, we are trying to address the push factors. 

You have already heard that we have water in Kaabong, Moroto and Napak and the people there are not moving anymore. We have a dam in Kotido, which has failed to retain water. Very soon, we are going with engineers from the Ministry in charge of Water to see what the problem is and if it can be addressed. We also have another very huge dam in Abim District, which has also failed to retain water. We hope if these are corrected, we shall have some water there. We are trying to find some food, as Office of the Prime Minister, to take to the people of Karamoja who are in Otuke and the neighbouring districts. We shall also give food to the host communities.

Mr Speaker, we have designed a new development initiative for northern Uganda as a replacement for the Karamoja Livelihood Improvement Programme. It is funded by the European Union to a tune of €150 million. It is not only going to work in Karamoja but also in the neighbouring districts in Acholi, Lango, parts of Teso and West Nile. This is part of the long-term programme. 

However, we appreciate that we did some good work and that is why the movements have been limited in the last five years. We are now going to work towards big dams such that we can have water in the sub-region. I would also like to assure this House that all the security issues are being addressed as they are received.

4.52
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs. I would like to add to what the minister has said to inform the House that we have taken two angles. One, we have taken immediate steps to handle the problems in Karamoja by de-silting the dams. 

He has mentioned that the dams could not hold water previously but we have found technology, using our engineers in the ministries in charge of Agriculture and Water, to help to get these dams to retain the water. Otherwise, originally, the water was draining into the ground and it was causing a problem. You construct a valley dam but the water was not holding. We have gone over this and we are now working very fast to make sure that we de-silt and then technically work on the problem of drainage.

Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the effort by this Parliament because you requested Government to come up with a comprehensive sustainable action plan to handle issues of climate change and food insecurity, food for animals like pasture and other feeds in this country. We are working on it.

Mr Speaker, I have written to you, that it was handled by several ministries and chaired by the Prime Minister. We are going to discuss this in Cabinet and afterwards, we are going to present to Parliament a comprehensive action plan for this. Cabinet is sitting to discuss this plan next Wednesday. (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO:  Thank you very much, honourable minister.  Given the fact that Karamoja and its neighbouring communities did not start today, their lifestyle of nomadic cattle keeping and cultivation and also given the fact that in Karamoja there are conflicts between communities, Dodoth Vs Jei, Tepthe among others, why is the balance of power and internal mechanisms of control of raiding, grazing into the neighbourhood – why have the neighbouring communities of Karamoja lost the balance of power up to the extent that up to day, the Karimojong can go anywhere which did not happen in the past?

Therefore, what mechanism has Government put in place to restore the balance of power so that even if we are here in office, there are checks and balances internally between the communities?

MR JULIUS OCHEN: I would like to also implore the honourable minister to give us a clear position on how the Government of the Republic of Uganda is collaborating with the Government of Kenya and South Sudan over this influx, which has been raised by the Member of Parliament for Kaabong.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I was coming to that. In fact, I wanted to inform Members that the problem of movement of these pastoralists is not restricted to the Karimojong. The Kenyans have moved. Recently, I hosted the Minister of Agriculture from Kenya and they said they had the same problem of drought and climate change. 

Mr Speaker, all those people in the north-western Kenya have moved down south, west and east. Those who have moved to west have already crossed to Uganda. In fact, we have a very big number of Kenyans on our side. I would like to also inform Members that not all Karimojong have moved from their locations. If that was the case, certainly, it would be a worst situation. I will bring the map here to show you because I have been on the ground and my teams have been there. There are areas where we have enough food for people in some parts of Karamoja.

In terms of relief, we are going to handle only those communities that are in crisis stage - (Interruption)
 
MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you are trying to provide solutions and we appreciate. However, I have not heard a clear guideline on how you are going to handle specifically the cases of Agago District because I raised this matter of the influx of these people.  My people would like to hear the immediate solution from the time we are getting out of this sitting. They would like to hear how the two ministries responsible are going to handle their pathetic situation. As I told you earlier, they are in a meeting waiting to hear what is coming from Parliament so that they can know whether they will go back to sleep in their houses. I have also informed you that some two communities have now been encamped. They are no longer sleeping in their huts. Therefore, I would like to hear an immediate solution for the people of Agago.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, I intentionally avoided the issue of criminality in the whole thing. I did not talk about it because it concerns another ministry, which is not here - the Minister of Internal Affairs is not here. However, the Prime Minister is here and he can handle that problem in its own right. But as far as relief is concerned and especially the communities that have been affected by the influx of other –(Interruption)

MR FRANCA AKELLO: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the minister finish. If there are gaps, then you ask. That is how we proceed because if you are intervening in the middle, we will never complete. Let him finish and if there are gaps, then you can fill in. You delay people with information, clarification; you disrupt the process.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Next week, when we produce the comprehensive action plan on the issue of relief – Government has already apportioned funds for handling issues of relief and even supporting the communities that have hosted other communities. Therefore, I would like to request the honourable member to bear with us. The problem is drought and it is not only happening in Uganda. It is happening in other countries especially in the horn of Africa. Ethiopia is suffering, Kenya is suffering, we are suffering but certainly, we have to find solutions.

Mr Speaker, I just wanted to add those few points. Our machines are already in Karamoja and other areas to de-silt the dams and also our engineers are working on the issue of getting the dams to be strong enough to hold the water that will come in the next rains. The rains are coming in March. We have sporadic rains today. Some areas are getting rains but these are unexpected rains apart from Lake Victoria Basin and south-western Uganda. For other areas that are getting rain, that rain can only help us to prepare our gardens for planting. Otherwise, planting will be in March. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I expected to hear the following solutions related to what is happening in Agago District:
I expected to hear about how the ministry would compensate especially the acreage of cassava plantation that was uprooted as I heard in the statement of the minister. I expected to hear, as they did in Otuke, the solutions they provided for Agago District.

Secondly, the Ministries of Works and Transport and Karamoja Affairs would work hand in hand to provide security roads. There are some key security roads that would really guide the movement of these people as they come to the district. 

Lastly, as you are planning to de-silt these dams, you should also remember that the neighbouring districts of Agago, Otuke and the rest that also had the dams should be planned for. Our people also lack water. If you plan only for the others, if these ones dry, we will also have a problem - (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you take charge of these people seeking clarification? (Laughter) You have to accept who to give you information.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. There is a stranger in the House. I have asked all the five colleagues around me and they do not know the stranger. I have also asked the Sergeants-at-Arms staff and they do not know who the stranger is. This is in relation to the gentleman seated to the immediate right of hon. Muyingo. We seek your indulgence, Mr Speaker, where over ten MPs and the Sergeants-at-Arms do not know him.

Are we in order to proceed with the stranger in the House? (Laughter)

MR GUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is it really in order -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, assist the Speaker in dealing with the matter. 

MR GUME: Mr Speaker, I would like to assist the member who raised the point of order that I am Fredrick Gume Ngobi. I represent the people of Bulamogi North-West Constituency and I have been here more times than him in the recent past.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, can I put that to rest? (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I would like to get your protection by requesting the honourable members on the other side to have courtesy and listen to my introduction. I am the Minister of State for Co-operatives in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives. I would like to thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was about to ask whether it is in order for honourable members not to know their colleagues. (Laughter) Can we proceed?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that there are immediate steps that need to be taken. First of all, we need immediate treatments and vaccinations of animals in those neighbouring districts. 

Secondly, we need repairs of the dams and boreholes that were spoilt by the animals and the people. 

Thirdly, you need to provide more drugs immediately because they are there. I believe rain is soon coming and that is going to affect our people and also the visiting community. Therefore, we need to provide preventive and treatment medicine for those people. 

Lastly, we, especially the cultural leaders, religious leaders, Members of Parliament from Lango and other regions, need to take our brothers peacefully back to their areas. That is the immediate point that should be done so that we do not conflict with our brothers. Next time when they would like to come, they should inform us. This is very clear. Even in your home, somebody cannot just come in. You give in written information so that the ground rules are put in place for our brothers to come.

Mr Speaker, we need an immediate action. These people have been in our areas for two months and we kept talking to the ministers. They keep saying they are going to do something. Now, they are telling us they are still going for a Cabinet meeting tomorrow. This matter has been with us here for two months. 

I would like to appeal to the minister that they must take action as immediate as midnight tonight -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. There are things, which are short term and long term. I wanted to hear from the chairperson of this sector if there is something that is likely to help this House immediately or in the nearby future on how we are going to proceed with this matter. If not, it might be a matter the committee has to interest itself in to see that there is consultation everywhere in terms of finding a more comprehensive solution while we also deal with the short term issues. There should be a longer projection on how we move with these issues.

5.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Robert Migadde): Mr Speaker, as for the conflict, that is not too much of the committee’s concern. However, we have interacted with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries especially on the element of food security. We have demanded for availability of quick maturing crops. Unfortunately, we have got some reports from some officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that some of the seeds we are demanding are not available. 

Therefore, it is still a challenge but we have done our part. Even when we interacted with the Budget Committee, we demanded that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, as a component of the Budget Framework Paper, should provide quick maturing crops in response to food security. That has been our prayer and it is not us to answer the prayer; it is the ministry. Therefore, our prayer is the same as that of the Members of Parliament from the area. We do not have much beyond that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you look at your Order Paper in business to follow, the first item is “Statement by the Ministers” and under that in paragraph 2, we are expecting a joint statement on an action plan to mitigate the food security and disaster situation in the country. This statement has been pending for fairly a long time. I am sure by now Government is ready with the joint statement. It could be one of the ways to bring this issue forward and we see how to proceed with it.

MR SSEMPIJA: Mr Speaker, that is very right. The food security inter-ministerial committee is headed by the Prime Minister but the statement has been assigned to me and I am going to present it to Cabinet next Wednesday and then bring it here.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say that Parliament has really executed its role. During the consultations Government decided to take a very cautious and serious measure. We took measures, which affected all sectors to mobilise money for the action plan to mitigate and even stop the reoccurrence of these food insecurity and lack of pasture for animals. Within the means of Government, we shall present a plan that will satisfy the Members here. Therefore, we are coming.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a structural problem with that because I do not know why it was not debated yesterday. But next Wednesday, you are sitting in Cabinet to look at that statement, but Thursday is a public holiday. Therefore, technically we cannot discuss it next week if you are first taking it to Cabinet.

This statement has been there for a long time honourable minister. Why don’t you help this House? These issues are burning. Members do to know what to do when they go back. It has been here. Why are you waiting to go to Cabinet on a day when you know the next day will be a public holiday and the House will not sit?

MR SSEMPIJA: Mr Speaker, I wrote to you after consulting with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and he instructed me to write to you to confirm that we are debating this item. We may not sit on Wednesday, he is mindful of the events that are taking place but I will take back- and of course, the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister is here.

 THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is how we are going to proceed. We will have this statement on the Order Paper on Tuesday afternoon. You will come and explain to us whatever it is. However, on Tuesday this matter is coming back on the Order Paper. Therefore, do whatever is necessary, today, over the weekend, Monday and on Tuesday come and tell us. If you are not ready with it, tell us so but this statement has been long overdue, honourable minister.

MR SSEMPIJA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. However, I would like to inform the Members that the issues that surround the plan call for a lot of funding from Government so we had to do enough-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not going to ask you to lay the money on the Table. We are asking you to tell us what you have put in place to deal with the situation. That will be on Tuesday. Please, help us and do it on Tuesday afternoon. Whatever the situation, come and give us a preliminary report. If the full report is ready, give it to us on Tuesday afternoon. A lot of these issues are inbuilt in that statement being a joint statement with all the sectors. It would help this House to conclude this matter.

MR MUWANGA: Mr Speaker, the minister touched on a very critical issue and very casually concerning the planting season in the country. With the small rains that we have received in the last couple of weeks, I have passed through the countryside and I found very many farmers planting the only stock they have. Now, for the minister to come here and say it is not the right time to plant casually is disastrous across the country. Can we know on two aspects what will be the right time for this country’s farmers to plant?

Secondly, can we know exactly whether you are still very alert with the weather forecast for this country? What we are seeing is that your metrological centre is not fairly accurate. They tell us that this time, it will not rain but it rains -(Interjections)- No, when you are fairly scientific, that is a crude answer of “times change.”  It changes for those who are unprepared.

Mr Speaker, humble peasants and poor people across the country are planting. I have seen them in my constituency. Over the weekend, they were busy in their gardens and the minister is just casually saying it is not time for planting and, therefore, may I beg for your indulgence to clarify? 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In his speech, the honourable minister pointed out that we shall be having rains next month in March. Hoping that what he says is right, may I request that instead of waiting until March, then they start distributing the seeds, coffee so that when it starts raining, we plant immediately? However, this idea of having to wait for March to come, then they start distributing somewhere in April -(Interjection)- even in May and at times we find ourselves getting these items when the rains have stopped. Therefore, may I request that he says something about that so that we start planning now? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEMPIJA: Mr Speaker, the guidance that I have given to this Parliament has been thoroughly investigated by the metrological department. In fact, last week, this information was not available; they were waiting for confirmation from Addis Ababa and they asked me to wait for the general analysis that has been collected by - These rains have been called sporadic and are not what they were expecting. Therefore, the Department of Metrology and the African Department had to synchronise the information that they have, and they have given us that March will be the planting season when we have the beginning of the first season of 2017.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: March has four weeks. By guidance, is it beginning of March?

MR SSEMPIJA: The areas around Lake Victoria basin will experience sporadic rains, which will continue up to March. Therefore, those areas around Lake Victoria can even begin to plant. That is the guidance that we have given, which is official from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Those who are not around the Lake Victoria basin, if you get these rains, please, advise our farmers to use rains to prepare the ground and wait for March.
The seeds – 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, honourable minister. I would like a clarification because I come from Buvuma Islands and I am surrounded by Lake Victoria.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He said people surrounding Lake Victoria and not those surrounded by Lake Victoria. (Laughter)

MR MIGADDE: I am surrounding but also surrounded. I inquired from my colleague from Namayingo whether they are actually having sporadic rains and it is not the case. So, honourable minister, I think you need to revisit some of the statements. 

Mr Speaker, my main issue is that as we talk about food security, the Committee on Agriculture was in Kagadi and Mubende and the Members saw several trucks loading maize and rice headed to Rwanda, DR Congo and Kenya.

When we talk about food security, we talk about the quick maturing plants or crops – but what are we doing to control the food exiting the country much as we are interested in foreign exchange and balancing the payment of trade? I think that we must first feed our people. 

We cannot look at feeding the region because there is no other country doing this. Much as we are a free market economy, we should try as much as possible to control the food going out of the country. The food we are talking about is going to grow in three to four months but what are people going to eat in March, April and May? 

There must be a deliberate measure to control the food going out of the country in the short term. But I know that this is not being done. So, if the agriculture ministry can work hand in hand with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives something can really be done.

We are crying about food shortages and yet, releasing food and talking about quick maturing crops is like we are not serious. There must be something to address the short term problem.  

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, this Parliament is pushing for quick maturing seeds, my appeal is that the minister - I do not know if this is the right minister but the Speaker can direct me – would comprehensively present a report to this Parliament to show the level at which Government is prepared on the issue of climate change because we may call for these seeds and a month or two later they fail and we return to Parliament “crying”. 

While we are doing this, we need to be guided as a country on what is the level of investment in terms of resources that Government is putting into climate change. How is it cross-cutting the ministries that are affected? How is Government packaging it in the local governments?

Mr Speaker, I have reliably learnt that –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose to seek clarification but you are now debating.

MR SSEMPIJJA: I can see the enthusiasm and we are already going into debating the action plan that has not been laid here.

Let me briefly say that the planting materials are ready, and at an appropriate time, we are going to – (Interjection)- We shall discuss the issue of exports during the debate on the plan. As far as I am concerned, Government has not taken any decision to stop people from selling their maize because it is not even our maize. 

MR ANYWARACH: I thank the minister for giving me this opportunity to seek clarification.

Mr Speaker, our neighbours in Kenya banned the exportation of maize seeds from Kenya but they continue to import from Mexico in preparation - do not forget about the spirit of integration. So, if the Kenyans are doing that because they have assessed the level of the danger in their country and yet we neighbour them here – I grow my maize in Bweyale but one year ago, I sold a kilogramme at Shs 600. A kilogramme of maize is now Shs 1,200. A kilogramme of beans that we used to sell at Shs 1,200 is now Shs 2,000. 

Mr Speaker, you also pay fees and you know that schools have sky rocketed their fees. For example, Uganda Martyrs Namugongo is now Shs 2.5 million. I do not know what hon. Muyingo is charging for his Seeta School –(Interjections)– When one makes a statement that we cannot stop farmers from selling their maize outside the country, then this will come back to bite us. 

The point that I am making is that we produce, earn money for a greater good, which is life. The same Government felt it that Produce Marketing Board was worth nothing to do with. Lint Marketing Board was “killed”. Coffee Marketing Board is gone – from this, one can see a planned and unplanned country when systems are operating.

The minister is talking about seeds but the Speaker asked you a simple question, “When are the rains coming?” And you replied that they would return in March. Is it at the beginning or end of March because March has four weeks?

You are going to give us seeds and I would like to ask a question -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you now debating? You rose to seek clarification.

MR ANYWARACH: No. This subject touches my heart. The seeds are distributed by NAADS, which is comprised of military officers who follow orders for supply whether there is rain or whether the season is bad or good. The extension services we talk of in the district must even be at the source. Who are those who take the seeds for us? They will tell you to go and collect the seeds from a company in a particular place.

I think we need to plan otherwise, give it one year and you will see the food crisis here. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to wind up now. We shall handle one more statement.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, seed distribution will be done in the most careful way. We do not intend to skip your areas in anyway. The programme will soon come out.

The other issue now is on food distribution. I want to inform you, honourable members, that we have maize and beans in the gardens, which have not even been harvested in 46 districts. So, the issue of lack of food is not there but the problem could be food distribution, but Government is also planning to stock food for its people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We will have further discussions on Tuesday and we hope that the minister will come with the statement so that we can have more comprehensive dialogue on the subject.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON FISHERIES MANAGEMENT

5.35
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the status of fisheries management in Uganda.

The fisheries sub-sector in Uganda contributes significantly to the national goals of poverty reduction. It also contributes to economic growth and National Economic Development. 

The Current annual production from capture fisheries is about 461,000 tonnes and from aquaculture 111,000 tonnes. If well managed, fisheries can help Uganda attain middle income status by 2020.

While exports to international markets rose from 4,751 tonnes worth $5.308 million in 1991 and peaked at 36,616 valued at $143.618 million in 2005, the current export levels are at 17,597 tonnes valued at $134.791 million in 2015.

The subsector has overtime experienced decline in fish catches; driven by the increasing population and the corresponding demand for fish in the region and international markets. The use of indiscriminate methods have led to  overfishing. 

There is still trade in Illegal Unregulated and Unrecorded (IUU) immature fish, which is estimated to cause an economic loss of up to $ 429.6 million annually. 

The fisheries sector continues to suffer with weak governance in terms of legal and institutional frameworks that are important in leading the sector to sustainability. Fish conservation measures and co-management arrangements remain weak yet they are key in resource sustainability.

Aquaculture has remained at small scale with farmers having small ponds of less than 600 cubic. It is estimated that there are 15,000 farmers owning 27,000 ponds and 3,000 fish cages. 

Aquaculture is, however, still faced with the following challenges: There is still inadequate supply of quality fish seed and feeds and where available they are very expensive –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I have checked my iPad and I cannot see the statement that is being presented by the minister. May I know whether this statement was uploaded?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me find out, did we get copies of that, was it uploaded? Clerk, what do we have? The Clerk says it was uploaded. -  You are not seeing it but that does not mean it was not uploaded. The Clerk is saying it was uploaded. Honourable members, we have had this debate for a while now, can we receive the statement now and then see what to do with it. It has been coming up; in fact, we had to extract it from “Business to follow” and have it come today. So, let us receive it, honourable members. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: I knew we would face this problem but we also have hard copies – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where are the hard copies? Okay, let us have the hard copies and then you proceed.  

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Generally, the declining stocks has led to a drop in fishers’ incomes, conflicts in fishing communities on Lakes Albert, Victoria and Kyoga  and closure of 13 fish processing establishments. This calls for critical and urgent intervention to avert the problem. 

Plans for Enforcement and Fisheries Management

On-going Interventions

The ongoing interventions will include the following: Reforming of the fisheries co-management with involvement of actors in the industry, and this will include processors, fishers – page 3; page 2 is background; page 3 is interventions. 

Strengthening the Directorate of Fisheries Resources with the Agriculture Police and other security agencies to protect the lake resources and livelihoods. 

Procurement and Issuance of Fishing Vessel Identification Number Plates to limit entry into fishing. Let me inform you that we have so far issued 9,535 fishing vessel identification number plates. 

Recruited and deployed 10 Fisheries Inspectors at main exit/entry border posts to work with URA to curb illegalities and registration of all boats, fishers and input dealers along the fishery value chain on all water bodies in Uganda.  

Identification of fish breeding areas for gazetting and protection. 

Reviewing of the National Fisheries Policy and Amendment of the Fish Act Cap 197

The ministry has also undertaken deliberate effort to support aquaculture through supply of quality fish seed and quality feeds to 903 farmers in 54 districts under OWC and other MAAIF recurrent budget. The seed included 6,134,730 tilapia fingerlings; 3,364,000 catfish fingerlings; 301,972 of mirror carp and; 209,704 kg of fish feed. 

MAAIF has also supported fingerling supply amounting to 1,180,375 fingerlings to 22 districts targeting 98 farmers.

Training of over 500 farmers and extension staff in management skills and in undertaking aquaculture as business.

MAAIF is rehabilitating three public hatcheries at Kajjansi, Gulu and Bushenyi and 65 private hatcheries have been established by private sector to address the issue of inadequate fish seed.

Five private commercial fish feed producers have established factories in the country (UgaChick, Ferdsult, IG Invest, Sabra and Sons, and Jordar services). We have also developed guidelines on cage culture to help in guiding this increasing investment area.

Planned Action

a)	The ministry plans to undertake a new enforcement arrangement in form of a Joint Fisheries Protection Unit composed of technical officers from the Directorate of Fisheries Resources, Police, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Uganda Revenue Authority, UNBS, Uganda Fish Processors and Exporters Association (UFPEA) and other civil society organisations. This enforcement framework will be under the overall policy guidance from a Policy Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by my office.

The major objective of the joint enforcement strategy is to prevent, deter and enforce jointly national fisheries concerns on land and water, targeting curbing trade in immature fish; control importation and usage of illegal fishing gears; control of Illegal Unregulated and Unreported fishing (IUU) and illegal fishing activities.

The security agencies will support enforcement operations and also provide technical support in procurement, installation and operation of high technology lake monitoring and surveillance systems.

Other measures include: institution and implementation of closed fishing seasons/holidays in liaison with neighbouring countries for shared water bodies, and developing and implementing an appropriate mobile licensing system for hard-to-reach areas. 

In order to enhance stocks in natural water bodies restocking is to be undertaken on at least 20 minor lakes and five community dams.

MAAIF will also identify suitable sites for aqua parks development and encourage and also promote formation and establishment of aquaculture parks and cooperatives while working on the necessary policies to provide the enabling environment.

Invasion and Control of the New Weed (Kariba Weed)

This weed was reported here by the Member of Parliament from Kioga and it is on our water bodies.

Our water bodies especially Lakes Kyoga and Albert got invaded by a new breed of weed (Kariba weed) in 2013. The weed has over the past years increased in spread and magnitude hence threatening the fisheries sub-sector. While the Arab Republic of Egypt has been supporting the weed control process since 1999, the support has since dwindled and interventions in the control of the water hyacinth put to halt.

It is important to note that the past intervention was on controlling water hyacinth and the new breed of weed requires different control methods, approaches and interventions that are currently not being comprehensively addressed. 

As the support from the Arab Republic of Egypt ends, equipment (exactors, weed harvesters, barges, boats, bulldozer, elevator, trucks) remain for use in the weed control programme. Although they have not been handed over to us yet by the contractor that was using these machines but they will eventually be handed over to us. 

In line with the above, community awareness materials have been developed and disseminated to the Lake Kyoga area and manual removal equipment including wheel barrows, lifejackets, pangas distributed to the affected areas. Using the equipment under the Uganda-Egypt Aquatic Weed Control Project (UEAWCP), mechanical control was undertaken in Nakasongola but the equipment is not effective on this weed as it can only harvest it when in combination with other vegetation.

The Arab Republic of Egypt has indicated availability of $ 230,000 for a pilot study on the new breed of weed and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs have since cleared the intervention to start in March 2017.

MAAIF requires Shs4 billion to cover costs of equipment modification to suit the new weed or purchase of new ones, control technology development and implementation, community capacity building, among others, in managing this weed.

Action Plan

Regulation of the fisheries laws, which includes operationalising and strengthening the Joint Fisheries Protection Unit; and the time schedule is January-June 2017and the budget is Shs 10.8 billion.

Developing an appropriate Fishing Vessel Monitoring System and linked to  Radar up to December 2017	

Controlling fishing effort by limiting entry through registration, licensing and issuance of Fishing Vessel Identification Plates (FVIPs); and time frame is July 2016 to June 2018.	

Implementation of closed fishing seasons/holidays- 	June 2017.	

Reviewing the existing Fisheries Act to provide for creation of a Fisheries Regulatory Body -July 2016 to June 2017.	

Conserving critical fish habitats through identification mapping, gazetting and protection of 51 fish breeding areas; for Nile Perch/Nile tilapia (25 on Lake Victoria, 10 on Lake Albert, 10 on Lake Kyoga and three on Lake Edward and three on Lake George. Breeding areas will be protected and this will take place up to June 2018. 

Enhancing stock in natural water bodies through restocking of at least 20 minor lakes around the Albertine, Victoria and Kyoga regions and other five community dams will take place up to 2019. When you consider the total surface area of one million of these small water bodies is Shs 1.983 million at seven fish per square meter or cubic metre; it will take up to 2019.

The control of water hyacinth and the Kariba weed through manual, biological and mechanical methods will take us up to 2018 and it will take Shs 4 billion.

Aquaculture management and development; this includes identifying suitable sites for aquaculture parks, carrying out feasibility studies and acquisition of land for aquaculture parks. Support for commercial aquaculture in fish ponds through stocking will take us about one and a half years and it will cost about Shs 15.6 billion.

Mr Speaker, that is the brief report on fisheries management and that is what is ongoing in the fisheries sub-sector, currently. Once we do this we are likely to earn up to $600 million for this country from the fisheries subsector. Thank you very much, for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. This captures all the other issues except the one that was raised recently on the conflicts that happened about two weeks ago, which came last week. I had instructed that they should all come together but it is certainly not in this statement. We expect a brief on this matter probably on another day. However, honourable members, this is a statement from the minister and as I informed you, it attracts debate.

5.57
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and the minister for his commitment, spirit and of course the tone with which he has presented this statement; it is quite encouraging. 

Mr Speaker, like you have rightly stated, last week I raised a matter concerning the insecurity for fishermen. In spite of the fact that the security aspect is not comprehensively covered here, the rest of the matters that we probably raised earlier on have been covered and this confirms what we had raised and it partly meets my expectation. 

However, I still expect that the security issue will be addressed because when you look on page 3 of this statement, it talks about the introduction of Agricultural Police and other security agencies to protect the lake resources and livelihood. This was the subject of my matter because 2.1(a)(vi) “Identification of fish breeding areas for gazetting and protection…” while the ministry is still thinking of identifying, the fishermen have gone ahead and have identified these areas already and gazetted them as their personal fishing grounds. 

This is the reason for anchoring of the shard that breeds insecurity because under the shards, which are a mass of floating aquatic plants or mud, there are some small plants on which fish feed. Furthermore, the problem of getting decomposing human bodies and putting them under these shards is for purposes of attracting living organisms that fish feed on. These living organisms that feeds on decomposing bodies are called zooplankton but fish scramble to feed on them. 

We also have phytoplankton which are small animals on which fish feed and eventually, Mr Speaker, the shards are supposed to be some areas which are breeding grounds for fish. However, people have mastered it and they know fish scramble there, they protect the area as their fishing ground. In the end, we have so many people being killed and their decomposing bodies pushed there for fishing purposes. 

These are some of the practices which are unbecoming and when you talk about unregulated, unreported and illegal fishing activities, I agree with you. It is a practice that has caused a lot of insecurity for our people and I am glad that in this statement, you are considering some solutions to solve the above issues.

I appreciate the security institutions that you have included in the report, like the army. The army is indeed a loyal unit of security that we know but at one time the army, I think in an effort also to enforce the Fisheries Act, went into the water and on one of the landing sites in my area called Odyedo, they killed two people in just a day. I raised the matter here and I am grateful that the Government Chief Whip wrote to the Minister of Defence although to date, we have not got any response.

Therefore, honourable minister, as you bring these people, I hope you are looking at bringing people with technical requirements. In fact, they should be technically competent to do the work so that they are technically placed to curb illegal fishing. Otherwise, we shall have them there and they might do more harm than good. 

The aspect of technical competence is something you should not overlook but better still they should work together with technical people because we have got technical people in the area. The only problem we have had with these people is that they get compromised; but now that we have a security team coming, we think they can be better performers. 

We would also like to see these security people accommodated in our legal framework because currently, the law talks about a police officer from the rank of a corporal upwards and it does not talk about the army. Now that you are planning to bring in the army, how can we handle the legal framework to accommodate these people? 

Mr Speaker, one other area that will cause a lot of trouble for us in the water bodies is illegal sale of fish in the lake; it may not necessarily be immature fish but we hope this process of the security arrangement will liberate the lake from illegal fish trade. The buying and selling of fish in the lake before it gets to the shores is a very a potential source of conflict between the boat owners, fishermen and illegal fish buyers. 

I would like to appreciate the minister for the statement he brought; I think that if we follow this direction, we shall have some sanity on our lakes. I would also like to implore you, honourable minister, the statement you made on the water weed needs quick action because the water weed is taking over the lake. I wish you would take a ride and visit Lake Kyoga; you would appreciate the extent to which the water weed is doing damage to our water resource. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That is the honourable member who raised this matter; so can we agree on the interventions and how much time we are going to take? Is three minutes okay?

6.03
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister but I would like to emphasise one thing; that the fisheries resource is one of the most neglected resources in this country. No attention has been paid to this sector at all, by Government. 

It is good that the honourable minister and Government know that this country is losing $429 million every year simply because of illegal fishing and other issues. 

Mr Speaker, the Uganda Revenue Authority continues to permit illegal fishing gear in form of fishing nets. This gear is sold on free market all over shops in Kampala and that is where these fishermen and fisherwomen are buying them. If these shops are here in Kampala, how much manpower do we need? Do we really need a law to go and confiscate these nets? Do we need a law to imprison some of these people that are bringing in the illegal gear? If you asked me, I could mention at least 10 of them because they are known. 

The other issue is the way we allow foreigners into our country; it is not easy for Ugandans to access the Kenyan or Tanzanian waters or any other country. However, in Uganda, we let non-residents access the waters. For instance, in Kiyindi Landing Site in Buikwe District, the whole place is flooded with Rwandese. The same thing applies to Kisenyi and Katosi. 

I am aware that in Constitution, Rwandese are considered Ugandans but this does not apply to all of them. These people were chased from Rwanda by the Rwandan Government because they had illegal fishing gear. They came to Uganda and we received them with an olive branch. They are now busy fishing everywhere with light swimmers and solar everywhere on Ugandan lakes. I think certain things have to stop. 

The minister mentioned a number of action points but the directorate to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is only $10.8 billion as per the –(Member timed out.)

6.07
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, allow me thank the minister but also sympathise with him. I was born in the islands and I pray that I die there; several actions and plans have been put in place from time immemorial but most of these plans have failed. I think that is why His Excellency, in his wisdom, decided to suspend and even disband the activities within the waters of the fisheries and other security personnel. 

The minister has proposed a number of good plans which I appreciate but the most important thing is to sensitise the future folks. When you move to the islands now, there is totally no fish. Similarly, the problem that cropped up in Migingo Islands was an issue of fighting for the fish. I pray that all those actors you have put in place do not spoil your good plans because whoever goes to the waters wants to get rich. 

In 2015 and 2016 in Sigulu Islands, 37 people died in the water simply because they were being chased by the security personnel and the conditions they were subjected to were harsh that some resorted to death. Therefore, since we are now strengthening our force, I pray that we go down and sensitise our people. 

We are also talking of $600 million that we expect to get but as a ministry, do we know how many engines get lost in the water? The pirates from the neighbouring countries steal engines every day and just yesterday, two engines were stolen. We must, therefore, put enough security to secure these people with both their properties and wealth. 

Mr Speaker, I wish to say that from 1998 to date, 137 people have been killed in my area- (Member timed out.) 

6.11
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Allow me first to appreciate the minister for the work so far done. I come from Kumi District and it houses Lake Bisina. It is only unfortunate that there is virtually no fish now. It is only helping us with the ferry, which crosses over to Toroma. 

Mr Speaker, one of my constituents wrote a very long pamphlet to me regarding matters of fishing because he has spent his whole life fishing. It is unfortunate that I did not come here with that document but I guess that man is watching me speak right now; and he must be happy because he told me that I must present his matters to Parliament. Therefore, this is a very serious topic for me. 

Honourable minister, according to this man, the biggest concern that we have is that in the past, they used to ferry fish from Lake Kyoga in lorries but as we speak, they only use a Hilux pickup truck; that is the difference. 

Two, using the ordinary eye to see, the size of the lake is shrinking. Those are his observations. Therefore, looking at what you have already raised here, there are so many issues and one of them is enforcement. The army has been used before and other staff in the fishing department but there seems to be a failure. I know they tried what they could but things are not yet at 100 per cent. We should probably include the civil society like you cited somewhere; maybe those are the battle hardened. Could you please think of putting those people there? 

Let us also look at the clergy. The churchmen might be spiritually possessed in that they would continue doing the right thing. They will be there. 

We are also concerned about the finances; during the State of the Nation Address, the President clearly stated that fishing will be one of our key priorities, if we are to gain the middle income status for our economy. But how much are we putting in? 

6.14
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for this report that has been presented to us this afternoon. I come from a fishing district and the biggest area in Buliisa is actually a fishing community. My people are waiting and they are looking forward to seeing how this Government is going to bring about change in their livelihood.

I would not want us to repeat the mistakes that have been made in the past, especially concerning enforcement. The people of Buliisa have suffered so much in the past because of the way this enforcement was effected. I really appreciate what has been put across as regarding intervention and actions that the ministry intends to put in place. However, I would like to know from the minister what plans the ministry or the Government has for this predominantly fishing community, as you plan to put in the fishing holidays or seasons? Most of our people earn their livelihood from that. What plans does Government have in way of an income generating activity for these people during that time when there will be that kind of holiday? I thank you.

6.16
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Gulu we depend a lot on other districts and other places for fish. Our women also get a lot of problems because of that. Honourable minister, we have three hatcheries in the whole country and one of them is in Gulu District. That would be very important for us because we do not have big water bodies. I know that it would supply other districts in Acholi sub-region.

However, I do not know about the training – you even articulated here that the training is there but we do not even hear of it. We do not even know the number of people trained. You further said that the quality of the fish is a problem. Why is it a problem? Is it because of lack of funding? If it is funding, why can’t we prioritise fish as a very important source of food for us? It is very nutritious, especially for the children. If we want our children to be intelligent, they should eat fish. Why is it that you are not prioritising this? I feel that you need to prioritise this. 

I was once a Member of Gulu District Local Council; the hatchery in Gulu in Laliya was grossly abused. Funding was allocated but it was diverted elsewhere. Why do we do that? It is as a result of corruption. How do we actually try to address this in the issues concerning fish? We know right now that when you talk about licensing or registration in the fishing communities, it is almost like telling Ugandans that they will not be able to freely access water; that they will have to buy it. It was not like that before. I think you need to control the nets and give people freedom to fish freely. Control the sizes of the nets so that they do not fish the young fish in order for us to continuously have sustainable fish supply for our people.

We, therefore, need to work a little more on fishing if we are to have enough fish. I haven’t heard of good fish ponds at all in Gulu yet I move a lot in the communities. Presently, it is only Omoro that seems to have one. Omoro is now out of my area but we need something better in Gulu District. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the issue is that there is no debate. There are issues of clarification that have been raised and I intend to adjourn at a half past. I am going to reduce the time to two minutes.

6.20
MR JAMES WALUSWALA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation. On page 4, part 2(b), section 3 in the paper I have, there are three public hatcheries. One is in the north, another is in central and the other in the west. I do not know whether it was a deliberate effort by the Government then to leave out the east. I would like to get clarification from the minister.

On Page 7 on the action plan, I think the minister should be more cautious. I see some items lumped together – they have been planned and budgeted for, for example, the water hyacinth. The time and the cost have been properly planned for. Other activities have planned periods but the costs are embedded together.

With the simple mathematics, when you go to aquaculture management and developments, there is some mathematics and I have tried to calculate the fish ponds they are going to equip with fish, it is Shs 3.51 billion. The other activity is going to take Shs 12.45 billion and yet it looks to be a minor activity. I, therefore, would like to request the minister that he comes up with these activities – (Member timed out.)

6.24
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): I will talk about the fisheries officers because I support the planned action of controlling importation and usage of illegal fishing gear. While I was working at the Attorney-General’s office, there are many cases that came in against him in the name of the fisheries officers, for the offenses they committed. These offences involved arresting people with illegal fishing gear, which is okay. They were trying to do their work but it makes them timid. Government needs to coordinate their effort in controlling the importation and usage of illegal fishing gear in order to give those people confidence so that they do their work without getting negative feelings from the population.

In many cases, the illegal fishing nets are burnt; so, can Government come in to coordinate those efforts and sensitise people and protect the fisheries officers, in other words strengthen the fisheries office? Thank you.

6.24
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there are no lakes in Moroto Municipality but we also enjoy fish. Whenever I travel to my Constituency, I pick fish from Jinja, which is about 400 kilometres from Moroto. 

The minister talked of planning fishponds and that the ministry is in the process of constructing dams in Karamoja and the neighbouring districts. Do you have plans of introducing fish in Karamoja? If not, what about the neighbouring districts like Soroti, Kumi and Ngora so that the people of Karamoja cannot only rely on meat but also enjoy fish?

6.26
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable minister for the good report. Kalangala District depends on fishing as its economic activity. However, when I hear on the Floor of Parliament how the fisheries issues are being handled - the situation on the ground is alarming. I know majority of you want to come to Kalangala because you want to eat fish but where is the fish? It is no longer there because of the illegal fishing activities.

Why do we have illegal fishing? My colleague has talked about the issue of importation of illegal fishing gear. Why should Uganda import them? We all know that nobody wants to engage in illegal fishing in our communities but it is because of the high taxes on fishing gear that prompt them to. Government has done nothing to reduce these taxes and the fishermen are left to suffer alone. I am a fisherwoman with boasts on the lake; however, at times these people go fishing and come back with nothing; we incur losses all the time but for how long shall we keep incurring losses? In Kalangala, children have not yet gone back to school because of the low fish catches. 

Honourable minister, you talked about different interventions that are good but you have not talked about how you are going to support –(Member timed out.)

6.27
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister for the statement he has given us. In West Budama North, we do not have a lake but we have traders. These traders are sometimes victims of the ping-pong that goes on between the various players and stakeholders in the management and control of the fish trade.

The Ministry of Trade and Industry issues licenses to the importers of the fishing gears and more so, the undersized fish nets. The traders go and buy the fish but it is impounded along the routes. Unfortunately, the impounded fish finds its way to the market but the traders lose the capital and their lives are destroyed. This is a big challenge. 

I call upon the honourable minister to find a way of harmonising the operations between the various key ministries; that is the Ministry of Trade and Industry, that of Finance through the Uganda Revenue Authority, and the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, so that there is a joint programme where you all communicate along the same front.

If the Ministry of Agriculture says immature fishnets should not be allowed in the country, then the Ministry of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives should not allow such gear to enter the country. Otherwise, it becomes very difficult for the traders because they become victims of circumstances of which they have no control.

Honourable minister, I have seen a budget, a work plan and activities, interventions, sanctions and so forth, but you have not told us whether the money that you need is what you have in the budget – (Member timed out.)  

6.29
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the chance to seek clarification from the honourable minister. We do not have a lake but sometimes the most workable solutions come from lay people. 

I am accurately aware that Lake Victoria is a shared resource and there are interventions that would be undertaken on the lake. I would like to know how much your interventions integrate into what other regional governments are proposing.

Secondly, someone alluded to losses fishermen incur. I have observed in most markets in our country that there are no good technologies or preservatives. When I look through your proposals for management of fishing, I do not see interventions such as deploying technologies that can preserve fish that is already out of the lake. Is that going to be taken into consideration?

Thirdly, you have proposed to deal with weeds on our lakes and I realised that Uganda has always depended on foreigners. If Egypt had not helped us, we would not have dealt with the water hyacinth and with this particular one, there have never been any efforts to deal with it. I would like to know what plans you have for weed control. Are there any preventive measures you are going to put in place?

Finally, I need to understand from you; there are districts that do not have strong fishing activities but we find them with fisheries officers and complete budgets to deal with fishing programmes. I do not know, in your opinion, if that is not a waste. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to respond on the issues but not one by one. I will give you about three ministers to wind up. 

6.32
MS JUDITH FRANCA (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, you noted very clearly in your report on page 2 that there is a drastic decline in fish production for both local and international supply.

However, in your underlined deliberate effort, on Page 4, you fall short of a lot of information that we would require. We would be happy to know your roll out plan. What is your plan to roll out in other districts that have potential to do fish farming especially through small farms like ponds. Fish is not enough both locally and internationally.

For instance, in Agago, we do not even know how Tilapia looks like save for us who come to Kampala and enjoy it. Therefore, it is important for you to roll out this programme so that we are able to grow fish through the small ponds in the villages to supply in the local markets for the local needs. The ones who do the large scale farming can help to increase fish export. 

Lastly, honourable minister, we know the importance of fishing and how it improves on our income; it would be very good for you to tell this Parliament exactly what you think we should do. 

6.34
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to re-echo the concerns my honourable colleagues have alluded to. 

Key to that is the fishing gears that are used to catch fish in the lake - the most dangerous I know is the one called sail net, which is locally made by the fishermen. It sweeps anything from frogs, to small fish to whatever is in the water. Interestingly, you will find that most of these nets are owned by technical people in the fisheries industry. I do not know how the minister is going to fight this.

It is interesting that behind the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, these nets are being used in broad-day light and even at night. When you try to critically analyse, it is the technical people from the ministry who own these nets. 

I also would like to emphasise that the volumes for exports, for which country earns foreign exchange, have drastically dropped. I have been following the statistics and I think we were only able to export 20 per cent to the European Union. Tanzania, our neighbours are doing around 40 per cent and they are doing very well because they have managed to cab illegal fishing in the lake. 

There was a joint team but the problem we have is that our people are not committed because they are in the business. The fisheries industry is very fluid in a sense that there is a lot of money that people are free to give out so that they continue doing illegal activities on the lake. The ministry needs to come out with very tough laws and regulations so that -(Member timed out.)

6.37
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement; this time it is clear, unlike before. 

Mr Speaker, I have some few concerns and one is the declining output of fish in the lakes. In Ngora, we have lakes - there is Opeta, Agu, Kokong, Kobuin and others. At the same time, there is a bit of illegal fishing which has affected the productivity of some of this fish. I am concerned because as a result of the depletion of the fish, more than 13 factories have closed down. Jobs have been lost, foreign exchange has also been lost and that means Uganda is suffering on one side. 

Secondly, in the minister’s statement on page 4, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has planned for quite a number of things. However, according to the Uganda fish processors and exporters association, they are saying that 99 per cent of the fish being exported from Uganda is Nile Perch. Operation Wealth Creation does not provide for that. I wonder what we are going to export if we are not promoting Nile Perch production. 

Mr Speaker, now that there are plans concerning the issue of promoting fish farming in Uganda, I do not know what plans the ministry has specifically for Ngora, in terms of cage fishing.  My minister here has tried very well she has done a very wonderful job in Kapir, in Ngora. I once visited it and it is good. I do not know what the ministry is trying to do in other places in Ngora and in Uganda. 

Secondly, whenever I go home, the young men ask me to support fish farming especially fishponds. Some of them have dug them but unfortunately there is nothing to be put in there - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the minister. Honourable minister, I have listened to the discussions and there are three issues that I have been able to capture, which were all repetitive. The issue of illegal fishing gear, the issue of stock depletion or otherwise, and the issue of management and control; those are the issues that are central in the debate and I would like you to respond to them.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wonder whether we will be proceeding well if we try to look at a statement from the minister that has skipped a key component in as far as interventions are concerned especially research. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, summarise those issues.

6.40
THE MINISTER FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for the enthusiasm and support to this sub-sector. I would like to make one appeal to you; support the struggle to make sure that our lakes recover their potential. 

I would like to inform Members that Lake Victoria and the lakes around here have the highest recovery rate in the world because of our geography and the freshness of the water. 

If we implement the measures that we would like to put in place, such as restocking and protecting the breeding areas and also getting the lakes to rest a bit, our lakes can recover in a very short time; that has been proven scientifically. We need to work together with all the Members of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, the honourable members from Gulu talked about Gulu and thought that Gulu perhaps has no lake or something like that. However, I would like to inform the Members here that many of these areas have a very high potential for fish farming through ponds. When I go through some of these areas, I see gold all over the place. You can do a lot of fish farming in Gulu and coffee growing. 

I see gold when I go through Agago; you remember when I came and they fed me on your good food. Fish farming is a very lucrative business. The only thing we are going to do is to try and organise our farmers. I would like to say that all the fish folks around the lakes will be organised into cooperatives so that when we get these fishing holidays, the cooperatives will be engaged in fish farming. They will depend on the farmed fish during those times of rest in the lakes.

I would also like to say briefly that research is on-going to get good breeds. We are bringing on many consultants to help us and I think we shall get the best. Like other areas in crop, we have got many countries that have opened doors for us to sell fish to their countries and fish will in the near future be one of the highest foreign exchange earners for this country. 

Regarding the issue of UPDF, the chief fisheries officer has powers to authorise fisheries enforcement. The President is also allowed and as I talk now the President has appointed a commander through Executive order to lead the enforcement. We are working on the details, which I will bring later to you here. 

Mr Speaker, we will also certainly request Parliament to support the review of the fish Act which we are bringing here very soon so that we handle a few things such as the new enforcement, the new areas of fish farming, support to farmers and research which are not there in the old Act.

About the hatcheries, at some stage all regions will have hatcheries. The market has indicated different things. Some countries want mirror carp while others want Nile Perch, and so forth. Therefore, research has to do a lot of work to be able to produce the different species that are needed by the market, including the domestic market.

The budget is in our agriculture sector strategic plan. We shall endeavour because this is where we can easily get money. Fish farming, organising and managing our lakes very well as well as organising this trade in fish will bring in money as quickly as possible. We rather do it or we lose out.

On preserving fish, we are working with the private sector. We have got a very positive response from the private sector. We have local investors who are coming in in a big way to invest in fish feeds, cold rooms and cold transportation containers. All these are happening and you will be briefed. I would like to say that whenever I go to the districts and constituencies, I will keep you informed so that we move together in the whole programme. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, we lost two days as I said and next week we will lose one day. Therefore, we are going to have to be strict with time and see how to move. The statement under item No.4(III) (Update on presidential pledges on education, early childhood development policy and change in education curriculum), was not ready and the other report on the education and sports (item No.9) will have to go on business to follow, until I confirm that there is a state of readiness from the ministry so that they can come at an appropriate time and we are able to engage with those issues. 

We don’t want to bring issues which are not fully covered and the debate again stalls and we are not able to cover everything properly. Therefore, Item 4 (III) and Item 9 on the Order Paper are accordingly deferred on the business to follow. Item I (II) on business to follow has been activated for Tuesday, “Joint statement on the action plan to mitigate food security and the disaster situation in the country.” It is coming up on Tuesday. 

We have three loans that are coming up as well as a report of the Public Accounts Committee. Those are the ones we are going to handle on Tuesday comprehensively and finish. Overloading the Order Paper and we don’t finish does not show very well on our performance. I would like to finish business. Let us come on Tuesday and finish this business and move.

House adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.50p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)