


Tuesday, 25 February 2020

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca A. Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to apologise for the late start but I hope we shall work fast to cover more space. However, in the meantime, join me in welcoming a delegation of staff from the National Assembly of Zambia - Mrs Sarafina Banda, Principal Clerk and Mr Japhet Chanda, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. They are here on attachment in the Department of Corporate Planning and Strategy. You are welcome. 

Honourable members, I have a few matters to communicate. The first is on the unfulfilled pledges by the Government on the issue of the prosecutors in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP). I received a letter from the Uganda Association of Prosecutors expressing disquiet and disappointment at the failure by Government to honour its undertakings to improve the terms and working conditions of the prosecutors. 

You may recall that in June 2017, the prosecutors went on industrial action awaiting Government action to address their concerns. At that time, their demands were as follows: 

    1. That the Government waives taxes on the salaries and other emoluments and therefore, an amendment to the Income Tax Act. 
    2. That professional and responsibility allowance be accorded to staff of the Office of the DPP starting with the Financial Year 2018/2019.
    3. They also wanted a supplementary budget to be raised to elevate their salaries and emoluments to the level of their counterparts at the Uganda Registration Services Bureau within 90 days of the industrial action. 
    4. They also expected the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to fast-track a Bill on the Office of the DPP, which has still not been handled. 
    5. They also asked that the existing vacancies in their structure be filled so that promotions are made but also to ensure that the office is working effectively. 

In spite of numerous correspondences, including a letter, which I wrote to the Prime Minister on 25 May 2018 to follow up on the undertaking by Cabinet on this issue, nothing has happened. Of course, they have written to express their concern. 

I do not want Parliament to be associated with the inefficiency of Government on this issue. I would like to direct the Prime Minister to intervene, especially now that we are starting the budgeting process, to ensure fulfilment of the Cabinet undertaking to improve the plight of the working conditions of the prosecutors under that office. 

I know that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has been recommending the fast-tracking of the Bill for first reading. I, therefore, direct the Attorney-General to expedite the tabling of the Bill for first reading, taking into account that by September/October, the work pace would have slowed down. 

Honourable members, I would also like to talk about the deplorable state of our bridges. I know that some Members are going to raise some issues. I will probably leave it to the honourable members to raise an issue of an incident that happened during the weekend in Saka Swamp; a bridge that collapsed eight months ago. 

We would also like the Ministry of Works and Transport to evaluate the other bridges in the country so that we are able to give timely advice to travellers, on which roads to use for their safety. 

The third issue, honourable members, has to do with the recent Cabinet appointments and changes. There have been reassignments and transfers. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to give us a full list of Cabinet ministers and ministers of state and their dockets. At the moment, I have to keep on guessing which minister is where and what the configuration of the ministries is. Please, help me so that we do not have to keep on guessing. If it could be done today, I would be happy. 

I would also like to talk about the rampant evictions going on in the country. Today, we read about 35,000 people who have been distressed in Kiryandongo in order for people to do farming; this is 9,300 acres of land. When the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) was asked, he said they went there on their own without being allocated. Therefore, Government has come out and allocated the land for serious farming activities, but so far, 14 primary schools, 20 churches and eight health units have been demolished. How could Government have built primary schools on a land that was occupied illegally? It is incomprehensible. We need answers on this. 

Honourable members, the country is creating landless people, unhappy people and increasing poverty by these actions. These days, evictions are now normal in this country. It is no longer raising eyebrows. I hope the Government can come up and tell us what they are going to do. Otherwise, we are creating a very big problem.

The next matter has to do with the zonal agricultural research institutes. In the Seventh Parliament, we resolved here that the Busoga Region should be removed from Buginyanya, which is in the highlands of Masaba. Today, this has not taken place, despite our resolution. 

The Buginyanya Region has the biggest number of districts, 25 of them, which include Busoga, Bukedi and the Masaba Region. On average, the other zonal offices are as follows: 

    1. The Abi Farm – in West Nile, which has eight districts;
    2. The Nabuin Agricultural Research and Development Institute – has 16 districts; 
    3. Ngetta Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute – has 16 districts, which are Lango and Acholi; 
    4. Mbarara Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute – has 14 districts, which are Ankole and Greater Masaka; 

Kachwekano Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute in Kigezi – it has only six districts;
Mukono Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute – it has 21 districts; 

Bulindi Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute, which is in Bunyoro – has only seven districts; and Rwebitaba Zonal Agricultural Research and Development Institute – which is the Greater Tororo, has eight districts. 

You should not be surprised why Bukedi and Busoga are among the poorest regions in this country. If agriculture is being managed from the highlands, for the lowlands, something must change. 

Therefore, the Buginyanya Region is concentrating on crops of the highland, yet, they are supposed to be organising the crops of the planes. This is not right. 

I would like to ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to implement our resolution of the Seventh Parliament that the Busoga Region should have their own agricultural zone. It is not as if we have no capacity. We have Ikulwe District Farm Institute, which has 214 acres. It has administration buildings, staff houses, dormitories, hydropower and a water reserve wire. I do not see why we should be forced to go to the highlands. 

We want answers from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The Busoga Region must be given their own zone so that their agriculture in the region is attended to by people, who understand our soils and crops. 

He must do so this month. We want a letter and he must come here and hand over. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries must come here and acknowledge the need for Busoga to have our zone and to take it to Ikulwe, where we have got facilities. Thank you. (Applause)

3.17
MS MARGARET MBEIZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On the 22nd of this month, eight people perished in Saka Bridge. The bridge was washed away by floods in August last year. No minister has ever gone to see Saka. We have gone and lobbied them, to no avail. I also remember an incident where a trailer, which was carrying Samona products, fell at the same spot and two people perished.

The minister should come and tell this august House when they will work on this bridge. Other bridges, which were washed away by the floods, have been worked on. Saka Bridge is very vital to the people of Kaliro because we are a landlocked area. The bridge helps connect us farther east, where we go for businesses and other issues. When is the minister coming to tell this House when Saka Bridge will be worked on? It is an emergency. We should not wait for other people to die.

I condole with the bereaved families. May the souls of those who died rest in eternal peace.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that the minister should work on Saka Bridge immediately without fail and the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should visit the families, which lost their loved ones in the bridge.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue is frustrating because on 30 October 2019, hon. Lubogo stood on the Floor of this House and raised this as an urgent matter. The bridge collapsed as far back as last year. The minister was required to come and tell us what they were going to do about the bridge. We are now going to the month of March. I do not know how many people are going to die in that place. 

There is even no indication that there is a problem there. I wish the Government could indicate something – if the road is damaged, they could put there a poster saying: “Don’t use this road.” People just drive and die there. The Minister of Works and Transport should come and brief this House about what they intend to do on the issue of Saka Bridge and other bridges in the country, which have also broken down.

3.21
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning a strange banana disease that has spread in more than 10 districts in the western region. This disease was reported in yesterday’s Daily Monitor, which I would like to lay on the Table. The most affected districts are Mbarara, Isingiro, Sheema, Ibanda and Mitooma.

Madam Speaker, from the findings, western region produces up to 68 per cent of the banana output in the country. This disease has not only affected the lives of people in terms of income but most parents are stranded over school fees because they get loans from microfinance institutions and they sell the bananas to repay the loans.

Most importantly, this disease, according to agriculture experts, is new. It is a 2019 case and they are not sure of the characteristics. We are very worried about the health risks – we are not sure of what is likely to happen in case people consume the affected bananas.

It is unfortunate that the ministers concerned are not here but this is a matter that they should take seriously because - This issue is even worse than the locusts because the locusts are not yet here –(Interjections)- I beg to lay the paper on the Table. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were going to lay the bananas. Is any Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here? They are not here. Honourable members, this is a very important matter. If it is covering 10 districts, it has a big impact on our economy. Can the minister come and brief this House, by Thursday, on how they are going to handle this disease.

3.27
MR HERBERT KABAFUNZAKI (NRM, Rukiga County, Rukiga): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the recruitment in Mparo Town Council. The Senior Assistant Secretary or sub-county Chief of Bukinda sub-county was assigned duties of acting Principal Town Clerk with effect from 1 July 2017, a position he has held for three years, contrary to the provisions of the Public Service Standing Orders. 

In May 2018, 21 positions were filled in Mparo Town Council but the position of the Town Clerk was tactfully not filled, leaving Mr Hassan Rwamango in charge. According to Section 65 of the Local Government Act, Mr Rwamango does not qualify for the appointment to the office of the Town Clerk. He has failed to execute his duties as he has been implicated in many cases of corruption and abuse of office.

Lastly, Mparo Town Council passed a resolution on 15 January 2019 to remove Mr Rwamango from office as required under Section 68 of the Local Government Act but the District Service Commission and the Chief Administrative Officer did not heed the resolution, contrary to the law. Personally, as the Member of Parliament, I have also written to the Minister of Local Government and the Inspectorate of Government (IGG) over the matter but no action has been taken. 

Madam Speaker, this comes as a matter of national importance because we have very many town councils in Uganda and they are disregarding the laws of this country. I request that you invite the Minister of Local Government to make a statement in the House on the reasons for the continued illegal occupancy of the office of the Town Clerk by Mr Hassan Rwamango.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Ministers of Local Government. Both the minister and minister of state are not here. We will ask the Minister of Local Government to take up that issue and give us a response – [HON. MEMBERS: “Minister of Public Service.”]– Okay, let us hear from hon. Karubanga if he knows something.

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by hon. Kabafunzaki touches the human resource function of Government. We are under a decentralised framework and so, it is the district entirely responsible for the recruitment.

In what he has stated, there is the issue of recruitment; the officer not occupying that position substantially and then, there is the issue of misconduct or corruption. The two are different. 

Where a matter involves any misbehavior, we have a rewards and sanctions framework in every Vote. If it involves embezzlement, the Office of the IGG is the one supposed to take care of that. 

For recruitment, as Ministry of Public Service, we seek for requests from all Votes and those requests are supposed to be submitted by 31st December of every year.

As long as wage is provided, I see no reason as to why the district should not recruit a substantial officer. That issue rests entirely with the district since we are under a decentralised framework.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter becomes important if we allow unqualified people to continue occupying public offices and they are paid. Let us ask the Ministry of Local Government to come and respond to us on that issue on Tuesday next week. 

3.30
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My matter of national importance is about the national identity cards(ID). Getting a national ID in Uganda is as difficult as the NRM bush war of 1986. 
In Uganda, it is easier to get a passport than getting a national ID. People come and queue every day, spend sleepless nights and they end up not getting IDs. 

Without a national ID in Uganda, you cannot own a sim card, you cannot access a passport, you cannot get jobs or open a bank account and yet, getting a national ID is a nightmare. 

I lost my national ID but it took me eight months to replace it and I think it was because I was a member of Parliament and they gave me VIP treatment to make sure that I could access mine within a short time; eight months. Moreover, one must strictly pick it in Kampala. Parliament needs to do something. 

The ministry should decentralise this process to make sure that people can access their IDs; replacements and getting new ones, from our districts. 

Secondly, the Government should accept that if you do not have a national ID but you have a passport, it should serve the same purpose. 

Lastly, I pray that the minister comes here with a comprehensive statement to see if we can change the policy or if they can do some modifications. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall in the last session, we discussed the issue of the national IDs at length but it seems that nothing has changed. It is still a very difficult issue. It is the most difficult venture in terms of time, money and distance. 

The minister will have to come back again and tell us how he is going to improve this issue of the national ID. I understand there is a new board of directors but I do not know -
It is very difficult to explain what citizens are going through with this issue. 

3.34
MAJ (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I would like to request your indulgence to elevate this issue higher than the minister who has not been responsive. 

I would like to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa. This issue must be placed where it is supposed to be; we must elevate this matter to the docket of the Prime Minister because hon. Mario Obiga Kania is not here today. 

We need to resolve this matter because it is grave. It should not be one of these issues, which we brush aside because ministers are absent and we say they will respond and then, the matter dies naturally. We should not allow this one to die because it concerns Ugandans who do not have identity cards. 

We should stick to our guns. Even if it means suspending Parliament, we should suspend it until this matter is resolved because I think it is very important. We should not massage it as we have been massaging many other issues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, we discussed it in the last session but it has continued to occur. The national ID is a right of all Ugandans. You cannot access university without it, you cannot access a bank account, a job or join the police. 

Let us ask the Prime Minister to come and make a statement on how they can simplify the process of Ugandans accessing national IDs in this country. Come Tuesday next week, please. 

3.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I also wanted to emphasise what he said about eight months. We have people who are very vulnerable. You cannot ask an old woman of 70 or 80 years, who has never travelled to Kampala, to travel to Kampala. 

Whenever such people go for treatment in Government health centres, they cannot access to those services. It looks like the Prime Minister takes this as something simple. 

If it is about jobs, at least that concerns able people. How about those very vulnerable people who cannot raise something small? Some of them cannot even raise the Shs 52,000, which they keep asking for to renew an ID. Somebody’s ID gets burnt in the house and they need to be supported but you still ask for Shs 52,000 in order for such a person to get a new ID. It is very annoying –(Interjections)– and that is why you hear a lot of information coming up. 

Madam Speaker, I request that you make a directive to the Prime Minister or whoever is representing the Prime Minister to address the concern because it is as if we are doing nothing for our people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I have said, we had a lengthy discussion on this issue. One of the concerns was that it should be decentralised. We took a resolution here that the Government should decentralise the issuance of national IDs. When the Prime Minister comes to report, we want to hear what steps they have taken to implement our resolution. On Tuesday, Prime Minister, come and inform the people of Uganda about how they can access the national IDs. Thank you.

3.38
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the high water tariffs in Uganda, Busia Municipality inclusive.

I carried out a political mobilisation tour last weekend. I would like to bring good news to the regime. People appreciated the good markets that have been built. People have appreciated the good roads and the medical supplies, although they are not enough. However, the biggest problem we have is the high cost of water for domestic and commercial use. 

The money one spends to buy one jerrycan of water in Uganda can be used to buy 10 jerrycans of the same water in Kenya. Because of this situation, my people in Busia cross the border to buy water in Kenya to use it in Uganda. 

They requested me to bring a matter of national importance praying the cost of water should be reduced by the regime so that as they enjoy the markets and good roads, they can also enjoy low water costs. This will reduce the water-borne diseases because our people have resorted to taking water from springs – (Interruption)

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you for the opportunity to give information to this august House. What my brother is saying is true. Apparently, these days the National Water and Sewerage Corporation bills people twice in a month. After every two weeks, you find yourself receiving a new bill and even before you pay it, another one comes. You wonder what is happening. Is there a hidden cost in the water bill? Are there new hidden taxes in there? 

Water should be almost free. It is not like electricity, which is more of a luxury. I really implore you, Madam Speaker, to direct the minister to address this issue to give the citizens of this country, especially those who are underprivileged, the opportunity to have cheap water. We, the members of Parliament, might have the ability to pay but the ordinary man out there cannot. This is an appalling issue, Madam Speaker.

MR MACHO: Thank you, colleague, for the information. Madam Speaker, I will go straight away to the prayers and they are:

    1. That National Water and Sewerage Corporation should, first, stop giving people water metres, which are not good. They are giving people faulty metres. It is my prayer that they should benchmark and copy the Kenyan system, where the water metres are manufactured by the university engineering students in Kenya; that should be the same thing here;

    2. That the cost of water for domestic and commercial use should be reduced with immediate effect so that it can support production in industries. This will also reduce the occurrence of water-borne diseases. In fact, I have been asking: why do we get cholera in Busia every year? It is because our people take dirty water because of the high cost of clean water; and


    3. The Government should allow the private sector to supply water to the water users like it is the case in Kenya so that our people can have enough access to water. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the Minister of Water and Environment to come and first explain to us the variation between the cost of water in Uganda and Kenya and then address the issues that hon. Macho has raised. They should come on Tuesday next week.

3.43
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. While my colleague came with good news, I am coming with bad news. Last week, Uganda Revenue Authority and the revenue authority of Kenya met in my sub county, Sigulu. They said that the fishermen in Kenya and Uganda who do not have licenses to ride boats are supposed to be arrested and prosecuted. We have many categories of boat owners: those ones for transport as well as those for fishing. They are now saying that to be a boat rider, one must possess a license. 

I am asking the Government, through either the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries or Minister of Works and Transport, to come and tell us where the school for training boat riders is, in this country. As I see it, it is a plan to take money from these people. How can you tell someone to produce a licence to ride an engine boat yet, there is no school where you are taking that person to train and acquire a certificate? The minister should come and explain where the training school for boat riders is and how one can acquire a license.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the minister, of course, will have to come and answer. However, I would like to remind the Minister of Education and Sports that Namasagali University is supposed to be the maritime university of Uganda where these issues of coxswains, boatbuilding and ferries are supposed to be handled. However, the ministry has declined to commence Namasagali University since 2015.

3.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SECONDARY EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is not that we are dodging or trying to frustrate the people of Namasagali or of Uganda. The fact is that it is within the ministry’s plan to have the marine department attached to Busitema University, Namasagali Campus. The problem has been the lack of the necessary resources to start the project. As soon as Parliament gives us that money, that programme will get moving. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you had brought the request here, I am sure it would have been given but you have not come to us for that money. Is it in your budget?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, it is not in the current budget but we have always presented such important matters and the answer has been: “Unfunded priority.” As we prepare ourselves, I think this matter will be brought before Parliament. 

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We have been coming to Parliament and crying to the Government, as we raise matters of national importance like the water issue, where someone in the village could easily die due to water challenges.

We have tried to push it. We said the minister should come with the statement but the statement the minister has given is as if this is not the Parliament of Uganda. I would like to, therefore, be guided whether we deserve to sit in this Parliament, when issues that we raise are not attended to. 

I would request that we adjourn the House so that ministers come with solution to our cries of the people we represent. Therefore, is it procedurally correct for Members to be crying everyone now and then, without Government responding?

THE SPEAKER: What particular issue?

MR OUMA: On many things like water, people dying in rivers, animals disturbing people. Madam Speaker, these are some of the things we have talked about here. Soldiers are beating people. I think we should be serious with what we are doing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our duty is to continue raising those issues until they are handled. It would not be right if we just folded our arms and said we are also going to mourn and lament in our offices. Let us continue. 

Honourable members, I keep telling you that we have some powers, which we have not been using. Let us watch out and deal with those errant ministers as our rules allow.

We had asked the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and fisheries to give us weekly briefing about the issue of the locusts. Otherwise, every day, Members come to report that locusts are in their areas. 

Last week, they were in Bukwo, now they are in Toroma. I really do not know how we can discuss this because Members come every day to raise the issue. I do not see the minister here. Can we have the weekly report from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries tomorrow about the situation of locusts in the country taking into account Bukwo, Toroma and Soroti, which has been invaded today?

3.50
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My people in Hima were hit by serious hailstorm and unprecedented winds, which blew off more than 40 houses including one dormitory of one of the Green Hill Primary Schools.

People have haven displaced and life is difficult.   Madam Speaker, I have three prayers. One is that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should support the people who have been affected with food relief so that they can survive in the meantime.

Secondly, they need urgent health attention. The Ministry of Health should go on the ground and assess what needs to be done to have people’s health in order.
Thirdly, I pray that the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees provides and rehabilitates the people who have been affected with at least iron sheets so that they are able to get their lives back to normalcy.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence that I had two matters - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees should examine the situation in Hima Town Council and address the needs there because of the disaster that occurred and should give us an update on Thursday next week. Hon. Makmot, two minutes.

3.53
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the fraudulent or misleading recruitments of security guards in eight districts that include Oyam, Agago, Omoro, Kitgum, Bukedea, Kayunga, Jinja, Abim and many others by a company called Industrial Security Services.

Last week, I dealt with a situation involving Accurate Security Company, where about 39 recruits had been taken from Agago. They ended up striking on streets without food yet, their national IDs had been taken. They had not been paid but kept there for some time.

Madam Speaker, when I engaged the directors of the company and spoke to the Regional Intelligence Security Office, who was dealing with the matter, I realised that these companies go to these areas - and I have documents that can show that. They give misleading advertisement about the positions that these youths are supposed to be getting. They even specify the salaries that they would be getting.

When they take them to the training camps, their IDs are taken away. They are not even paid. This group stayed there for about a month but they went on strike and the police intervened.

Madam Speaker, this situation has been on social media. I have heard reports from other districts complaining about the same problem. As a Member of Parliament, I was concerned about the issue. 

My prayer is that the ministry responsible should investigate this matter and bring it to order. Otherwise, it is causing a lot of suffering to these people and putting a lot of pressure on members of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I did not get the name of the company. Is the company located in Kampala?

MR MAKMOT: The company is called Industrial Security Services but the particular company, where these 39 youths from Agago were recruited in Jinja is called Accurate Security Services. I have information and spoke to the managing director, the human resources and the security officers, who were involved in that fracas that led to this concern that I am raising today.

I realised it is a crosscutting issue. I have seen information on social media regarding this matter and relating to other districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, private security companies are under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would like to request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to investigate the issues raised by hon. Makmot, where he says they are operating in different parts of the county and duping unemployed young people. The minister should give us an update in a fortnight’s time. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROGRESS OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS IN SEED SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTRY

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Statement on the progress, challenges faced and mitigation measures for seed schools under the Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfer (UGIFT) programme.

As you are all aware, the Government of Uganda in partnership with the World Bank is currently implementing the Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfer programme, which commenced in the Financial Year 20l8/2019 and is running for four years.

Over the disbursement period of four years, the World Bank is
expected to disburse Shs 460 billion to the education sector for the non-wage, which includes capitation grant, inspection, curricular activities and development, which caters for the construction seed secondary schools.

The construction component of this programme will see 232 seed secondary schools established across the country in two phases.

Phase I shall have 117 currently under construction and phase II 115 to be constructed. With completion of these schools, Government will enable 13,920 learners to access quality education. 

I have attached a list of all the districts and sub counties that are going to accommodate these schools. I do not know whether I should go through all the districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is important but we had also asked you to tell us the contractors for these schools.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I take you through the list, it is also important to note that since we started this project, we have made quite a number of achievements:

(i) 	Capitation grants for learners in Government aided schools have tremendously increased: Universal Primary Education for example has been raised from Shs 8,000 to Shs 14,000; Universal Secondary Education has been raised from Shs 41,000 to Shs 55,000. Universal Post O’level Education programme has been raised from Shs 80,000 to Shs 88,000.

(ii) 	The other achievement is the construction of the first batch of 117 seed secondary schools. The first batch of these schools is expected to be ready in December, 2020. Currently about 60 per cent are already at roofing stage. 

However, we have had some challenges, which I would like to share with you:

1. Land ownership issues:

This remains a very big constraint to the smooth implementation of this programme in regard to the construction of the seed secondary schools. 

During the design of the programme, it was agreed that the seed secondary schools were to be constructed on at least 5 acres of public owned land free of any encumbrances. However, this was not the case for many Local Governments, which had sub-counties without Government aided Secondary Schools. 

Many local Governments fronted land owned by religious bodies,
which made it very difficult to title since the ownership was not readily transferrable. 

We have cases like Wakiso, Mukono, Buhweju, Luwero and Mpigi among others. It should be noted that one of the conditionality for this loan is that the funds should not be used for transfer or purchase of land.

As a mitigation measure, the ministry advised local Governments to enter into memoranda of understanding with religious bodies to ensure that the land ownership is transferred into the names of the beneficiary schools. 

Local Governments with no clear land ownership status shall not benefit under the second phase of the programme and we are very serious about this.

2. The other challenge was weak capacity of contractors and size of the lots.

Based on guidance from Cabinet, the ministry clustered the contracts for the seed secondary schools in groups ranging from 3 to 5 schools per lot. This was done to ensure that the contracts are not awarded to “briefcase” companies. 

Unfortunately, the size of the lots and the distances between the Schools has made it difficult for some of the local contractors to implement the project without delays. 

The affected local Governments include; Omoro, Gulu, Amuru, and Nwoya whose contract were awarded to Ms Davrich Company (Ug) Ltd. 

The ministry continues to engage the contractors on a case by case basis to provide support where necessary as we implement the project.

For phase II, the ministry will reduce the size of the lots to a maximum of 3 schools per lot. Island districts will be limited to one.

3. The other weakness is monitoring and supervision by the beneficiary local Governments. 

We have noted with concern that local Governments were not closely following up the construction works and the guidance provided by the ministry. For instance, some local Governments have not yet recruited clerks of works. 

During the design of the programme, it was agreed that some roles would be shared between the Central Government, that is Ministry of Education and Sports and the local Governments.

For the case of supervision and monitoring, it was agreed that this would be done at five levels, which include the District Engineer, Clerk of Works, Construction Management Unit of the Ministry of Education and Sports and Ministry of Works and Transport.

To-date, a number of local Governments are yet to recruit clerks of works, yet, the ministry sent funds for this purpose. Some of the local Governments include: Apac, Amolator, Napak, Nabilatuk, Kalungu, Mubende, Butambala, Mpigi, Kiboga, Nakaseke, Budaka, Kibuku, Bukwo, Luuka and Kaliro.

During phase II of the implementation, local governments without a clerk of works in place will not be granted a no-objection to sign a contract for the execution of the works.

4. Conflict and political interference in regard to location of the facilities. 

In some instances, there have been disagreements among individual stakeholders in the beneficiary districts, ranging from choice of sub-county to location of the school within the beneficiary sub-county. 

Some of these local governments include Manafwa, Bulambuli and Bushenyi. To date, civil works at Sibanga sub-county in Manafwa are yet to commence as stakeholders continue to disagree about the final location of the Seed Secondary School.

5. Environmental issues 

Some local Governments ignored environmental safeguards by selecting sites that were situated within the wetlands. This means that the land provided was not suitable for construction of the seed schools based on the approved designs. One of the cases is Mbarara Local Government and we have not gone far. 

As a mitigation measure, environmental screening will be
jointly done by the Ministry of Education and Sports and the local Governments prior to advertising all sites. Phase I has got Amuru Secondary School, Nwoya -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister just stated that he has a list attached to the report. When I look at my iPad, I do not see his mail. I do not know whether you have that list attached. Is it procedurally right for the minister to tell us that a list is attached and yet, we do not have it? Even the statement is not there. I do not know whether you have the list.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not think we have that list. I do not have it; I only have the statement. Do you have the list of seed schools? These are primary schools.

MS BAMUKWATSA: Madam Speaker, there is no statement uploaded on the iPads but they have just sent the list as an attachment. I do not know whether the people sending the statement are selective to some iPads. It is a very important statement, which is going to help all of us to follow up the questions, because it affects all of the districts.

THE SPEAKER: My list was attached to the answer on lightning arrestors. (Laughter) That is where my list is, under lightning arrestors.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I signed that statement yesterday and it was dispatched, including the two lists - one for phase one and the other for phase II. As for who has the responsibility of uploading it on the iPads, I think that is not my responsibility.

Madam Speaker, may I proceed to read out the names, now that some Members have and others do not?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, I am sorry to disrupt you but what we wanted to know is which are those seed schools, what stage they are and who the contractor is. That is what we wanted to know. There are those which were at foundation level, there are those which are almost complete and others have only materials. We wanted to know school by school who the contractor is, how far he or she has gone and when they will be completed. That is what we wanted. This is good information but it does not answer our question. (Applause)

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry. At least I said that on average, 60 per cent of the 117 schools –(Interjections)– I can come back again if they want the details per district; otherwise, I can confidently tell you that 60 per cent are –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us get all the details in writing. One of the reasons we wanted to know the contractors is that I was told that the contractor of Kamuli, with four schools, is the same contractor for Buyende, Luuka, Iganga and Tororo. How can a company work in five districts? That is why we want to know which school, which contractor and what level of construction.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, on the contractors, the company which they gave our seed school - Kagwara Secondary School in Kasilo – is a contractor who failed to complete a school in Ngora. We are wondering how such a contractor that failed to complete a school and a magistrate’s court is given to do that school.

Secondly, on the issue of the political interference which you were talking about, definitely it was true. Where the church had given 14 acres, because of the politics they shifted to another place. When I brought it to the attention of the Permanent Secretary, he said he had sent a team there and it is not in another parish; it is opposite. This was not true; it is in a completely different parish. It is one of the issues that should have been raised here.

BRIG. GEN. KULAYIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Why don’t we receive the report first and then we discuss it? I think if we had gone by what hon. Okupa had raised, we were doing well. We do not have the statement but you have gone ahead to raise questions. Are we procedurally right? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have told him that we are not satisfied with the report. It is incomplete because it does not have the list of schools and contractors, an update on each school and the stage of construction. It is incomplete.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I can come back with all those details.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, debate is deferred. The minister is required to bring complete information so that we can discuss it. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek your indulgence. In today’s Press, there is a big story about Ugandan medical schools being closed down for lack of standards, including the famous Makerere University Dental School.

Makerere University Medical School, according to the inspector’s report, is operating at 60 per cent, yet everybody knows that this medical school has been a centre of excellence within the region. There is a regional report about the performance of the medical schools in this country. Uganda Christian University Medical School has actually been closed down by the regional inspectorate school.

May the minister – as he comes tomorrow – bring details about that report and explain to this House the performance of the Uganda medical schools in all universities and what the inspector’s report is saying about them? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that report is very important; let us not mix them together. Let us finish the seed schools and then probably on Tuesday, you bring the one of the closure of medical schools – it is alarming – so that we can discuss it also.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter hon. Katuntu raised is very critical and we would like to go with your guidance. I think the minister tried to bring a half-baked or half-cooked statement because of the robbery, thuggery and corruption in these procurements.

As the minister comes, I would like to request for your indulgence; let him list, as you have guided, the contractor, the starting date, the amount paid and the end date. The information we have is that most of these contractors were paid. If somebody has been paid, why does he have to complete the work? –(Interjection)– Yes, they were paid –

THE SPEAKER: But you are now debating. 

MR WALUSWAKA: No, I am not debating; I am simply giving information.

THE SPEAKER: You are debating, please. Let us go to the islands.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, while the minister was looking at the period of 2017 to date, there were those seed schools that were constructed in 2003. They have never been completed up to now.

I would like him to widen the scope. When he comes, he should tell us – In Sigulu, the seed school that was constructed in 2003 has never been completed up to now. I am asking that the scope should be widened so that when he comes, it is not only 2017 to date but he should also go back to all seed schools, which have never been completed and state why.

It is not only 2017 as the minister is saying but there are other seed schools that were constructed some years back, as far back as 20 –

THE SPEAKER: You will raise those issues when the minister brings a statement because they are all about schools. Let us go back to the Order Paper.

4.16
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to raise this important matter because any time now, any Member of Parliament may be arrested in the country for moving from his constituency to another constituency for whatever reason, whether for marriage or anything. 

Madam Speaker, last week on Friday, I came to your office when you were trying to plead with the Inspector General of Police to allow hon. Centenary to host a function where he was supposed to give accountability for what he has done since he is a first timer in this Parliament. I remember I informed you that I was going to join him, together with Members of Parliament from Kasese, to appreciate what he has done, being a first timer in this Parliament. 

I would like to inform you, Madam Speaker, that despite your intervention, I was advised, when I landed in Kasese, that any other Member of Parliament – it did not matter from whatever party or rank – would not be allowed access to the venue. Only hon. Centenary was allowed. Members of Parliament from Kasese were also not supposed to access the venue. That was supposed to be an “order from above”.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this because it is important. On the same day or a day before, a team of Members of Parliament came to Dokolo because the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance was giving us some computers. I told them I would not be around but I knew they would be in good hands as hon. Amoru was going to be with the minister. We also had hon. Santa Alum who accompanied the minister. There were no “orders from above” stopping anybody from accessing Dokolo. 

I am therefore wondering why an order from above would stop me from going to Kasese to support my colleagues. I think any of these people can invite me, as an individual, to visit their areas. I would like to know whether we are supposed to get a special visa to go to any other constituency other than our personal constituencies –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for yielding the Floor. In the years I have been in Parliament, it has been a common practice –(Interruption)

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We did not amend the Order Paper and we have been moving steadily. We are now on Item No. 4 and you have not amended the Order Paper. I wonder whether it is in order for Members to proceed the way they are when their item is not appearing on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, although the matter is not on the Order Paper, I must confess that on Friday I was embarrassed when I received a call from hon. Centenary that he was making arrangements to meet his constituents but he was not being allowed to meet them in the place where he wanted to meet them, and that no other person was allowed to come to his meeting.

I told him to let me get in touch with the authorities because he has a right to speak to his constituents. He was in the municipality, which he represents, but he was being told not to – Hon. Cecilia Atim came and told me that she was invited but she was not sure whether she was supposed to go. 

Honourable members, as a leader in this country, I would like to know whether we no longer have parties. We fund these parties, we agreed to have them - I was really embarrassed when the young man called me. 

Therefore, I would like to know from the Government why hon. Centenary was being harassed about his meeting and why he was being told where to sit and how many people should come. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I think we can reflect back to advice that was once given by hon. Katuntu to the honourable engineer Gagawala in the Eighth Parliament. He said that names follow, so be very careful about the meaning of your name. Otherwise, if you are not conscious, you will begin assuming roles that are not yours. 

Having said that, I was still giving information to my colleague, hon. Cecilia Atim; in the past, Members of Parliament used to support one another in their constituencies, irrespective of the political party affiliation. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, we used to have an organisation here called Rapid Rescue Front (RRF), which had Members from across the political divide. We used to move doing fundraisings and mobilisation in one another’s constituencies. 

This was the practice in the Eighth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament as well, but in the Tenth Parliament, it has become like the leper in the Old Testament, that you should not associate with anybody who belongs to a different political party. I think that kills the spirit of our individual cooperation amongst us. 

Even in 2005, when we formed the Parliamentary Advocacy Forum (PAFO) and we had membership from across the political divide. Although it was political, we still traversed the country without any interference. 

Madam Speaker, I am informing hon. Cecilia Atim so that she can recollect from there where we have moved from. That is the information I wanted to give my honourable sister. 

MS OGWAL: My prayer on that matter is to plead with fellow colleagues; we all require our colleagues to visit us and it is normal. Even if it is a big function, there is no reason why I should not visit a colleague. 

I am wondering, Madam Speaker, if there is a new law. I am a law abiding citizen and I would like to know that law. Also, looking at my age, I do not want to be manhandled, held by my belt and my gomesi torn in front of my grandchildren. (Laughter) Please, can I know the law so that I know that I can only strictly go to Dokolo and I cannot even go to Kamuli? Even if I hear you are sick, I cannot come and visit you. I must know whether there is a law so that I can restrict myself. You all know I am a very disciplined woman and I will obey the law. 

4.24
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak. I am at pains and I cannot even believe that the same police, who know the duties of a Member of Parliament, could go out of its way and give restrictions even when I had given them notification. They went ahead to tell me, “If you dare allow any other Member of Parliament, even if he or she is from Kasese District, we are going to close down your function.” 

As I was still responding to questions from the electorate, the District Police Commander (DPC) stood by my side three times and asked me to stop. He went ahead to shut down the public address system. The police officers then started dispersing people and the people started fleeing for their lives. 

I asked the police, “Do you know I am a Member of Parliament and I represent people? How could you go ahead and start giving me instructions like, ‘we want you to go and consult your people in a town hall’ even when you know that we do not have…”- I have 60,000 registered voters in Kasese Municipality. We do not have a hall that can accommodate even 500 people. Are you advising me to take my accountability and consultation meeting with the voters in such a town hall?

When I spoke to hon. Obiga Kania, he even went ahead and advised that whoever comes to that hall should come with an invitation letter. I said that I am duty-bound to account to the electorate and it was wrong for him to give me restrictions on how to account to the people. How do you expect me to execute my duties as a Member of Parliament? I am facilitated to do this job for the constituency and even consult, engage and account. How do you expect me to carry out my oversight mandate?

The police, with due respect, is misusing the Public Order Management Act. They have misinterpreted and misapplied it. Some of us may think that probably, the policemen have immunity and cannot be affected by this but just know that that this problem is going to affect each one of us. I know for a fact that one of its proponents, hon. Amama Mbabazi, was also affected by the same law. Therefore, nobody is going to be off the hook and escape it. It is only a matter of time. It will only depend on which side of the coin you are facing.

Honourable members, what I witnessed over the weekend was unbearable and traumatising. Madam Speaker, we need your protection because we are heading for tougher times ahead. One of these days, we are even going to be stopped from having our campaign rallies.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue. I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to come and specifically explain the incident that hon. Centenary is talking about. He actually called me on phone from Kasese. The minister should also tell us what people should do when they want to consult. If there is a new law, we should know. If people will not be able to campaign, we should be told. The country deserves to know. Therefore, the minister should come on Thursday and update us about this issue.

RESPONSES TO THE ISSUES RAISED ON THE DELAY BY GOVERNMENT TO FILL THE VACANT POSITION OF DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF UGANDA, AND ITS IMPACT ON THE BANK’S POLICIES AND STRATEGIC DIRECTION

4.29
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Micro Finance) (Mr Haruna Kyeyune): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 14 February 2020, Parliament directed me to present to the House a statement regarding a matter that was raised by hon. Michael Mawanda Maranga with respect to the delay by Government to fill the vacant –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development - I really know him. When he is not around, I know the other one who comes.  

Madam Speaker, is it in order to see a stranger to the House to come and present something, which is very important about the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were on the Appointments Committee when the honourable member was vetted. Therefore, you know him. Please proceed.  

MR HARUNA KYEYUNE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is not the first time hon. Nandala-Mafabi is attacking me. Anyhow, I would like to advise him - I know the reason. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I know you have been threatening to embarrass me but please advise your people to follow the normal procedures to get money from the Micro Finance Support Centre; otherwise, I cannot overstretch. Do not over punish me because you have not fulfilled the required procedures.

Madam Speaker, as I was saying, on 14 February 2020, Parliament directed the minister in charge of finance to present to the House a statement regarding a matter that was raised by hon. Michael Mawanda. This matter was in respect to the delay by Government to fill the vacant position of Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda and its impact on the bank’s policies and strategic direction.

The appointment of the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda is provided for under Article 161(3)(a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which states thus: 

“The governor, the deputy governor and all other members of the board shall - (a) be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament.”

Madam Speaker, on 14 November 2019, I wrote a letter to His Excellency the President, informing him that the then Deputy Governor, Dr Louis Kasekende’s contract was expiring on 15 January 2020 and further requested him for action.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President is duly considering this matter and in due course, he will make a final decision and communicate to you as provided for in the Constitution of Republic of Uganda.

I would like to assure you and the entire country that the Governor Bank of Uganda, together with the board and management are fully in charge of the bank’s affairs. There is no reason for concern about any lapse with respect to its policies and strategic direction. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have any supplementary question, hon. Mawanda?

4.34
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I raised this question because the governor has distributed the responsibilities for the deputy governor to various directors. These directors have their own responsibilities and cannot take a firm stand on the responsibilities that have been given to them.

Secondly, the deputy governor was a board member in the African Export-Import Bank (Afro EXIM Bank) for eight years, where we are members. We are even demanding from them money for Greenland Bank. However, there was a meeting where nobody represented Uganda to follow up on our money. That is why I asked this question. When I went to the bank to find out who was supposed to attend the meeting, they said they had not nominated anybody.

Therefore, it is not true that there is no crisis. In such a meeting, if we are not represented as Uganda, then there is a problem. I do not think the board can go to attend meetings, which are outside its jurisdiction. I would like to know who is following on the matters of Afro EXIM Bank in Bank of Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, you know that the offices of the governor and the deputy governor are constitutional. In the absence of the governor, assuming that he has gone for a World Bank meeting, who takes charge? Madam Speaker, if you and the Deputy Speaker are not here, none of us can act or masquerade and sit in your Chair.

Therefore, in such a situation in Bank of Uganda, if the minister is saying there is no crisis, who will be acting in the absence of the governor when he goes for World Bank or IMF meetings? Can the minister tell us who will act, because the Constitution is very clear? 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today I do not see why some of my colleagues, especially hon. Mawanda, are so eager about the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda. 

You remember that Mr Opio Okello was just an executive director but they made him act for over 11 years and he went. They could not even make him deputy governor. However, when Mr Kasekende came from the African Development Bank, they just handed him the office.

Hon. Mawanda has mentioned many places. He is like part of the people working in Bank of Uganda, so he knows all information. Is it because Mr Opio Okello was from very far that nobody could fight for him? They now almost want to break themselves when this job only fell vacant last week or the other week yet the other executive directors who are there can also act. If Mr Kasekende, the Deputy Governor, went for leave for a month, would they appoint another? Someone would act. 

I would like know - Hon. Mawanda came here and said he wanted to bring a private Member’s Bill on Bank of Uganda. You gave him authority in May last year. You know what has happened. (Laughter) Now, what is this that he is trying to –(Interruption)

Mr mawanda: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who was sacked by Gen. Mugisha Muntu as Leader of the Opposition –(Laughter)– right to say that I was given leave in May to bring a private Member’s Bill on Bank of Uganda when I was given leave in August? 

I updated Parliament two weeks ago and I was given an extension of a month. We are also waiting for a “certificate of no implication” from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Is he in order to say that I have not brought the Bill on the Floor of Parliament?
 
The Speaker: Honourable member, the Member briefed the House about the steps taken and the fact that he was waiting for a certificate. So, you are out of order.

Having said that, honourable minister, I think it is not enough to say that there is no reason for concern. This is a public institution so I feel that it is important that positions are filled. Encourage the appointing authority to move faster than he is doing.

MR KYEYUNE: Madam Speaker, it is very true. I am going to remind His Excellency the President to fulfil his constitutional obligation. Thank you.

RESPONSE to an urgent question raised by Hon. Lyandro Komakech on The risk posed by the lack of lightening arrestors in some schools in the country and the need for the implementation of the Parliamentary Resolution on installation of lightening arrestors in all schools in the country 

4.40
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Higher Education) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

This is the statement on the risk posed by the lack of lightening arrestors in some schools in the country and the need for the implementation of the parliamentary resolution on installation of lightening arrestors in all schools in the country. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports appreciates the danger posed by lightening at our institutions of learning across the country. As part of our efforts to resolve this long-standing problem, 134 primary schools had lightening arrestors installed in the lightening-prone areas during the first phase of Financial Year (FY) 2018/2019. 

Arrangements are presently being made to install lightening arrestors at 136 primary schools in phase II. I have attached the list. This will be captured in our annual budgets – every year, we shall be including some money until we cover all schools around the country.

Further to this, schools with capacity are always encouraged to install lightening arrestors under the guidance of the local governments and the Ministry of Education and Sports.

As a way forward, it is now a policy of the Ministry of Education and Sports to install lightening arrestors in all newly constructed schools and those being rehabilitated. We are also engaging our partners in the private sector and not-for-profit sectors to join and contribute to our efforts in this regard.  I submit.

The Speaker: Is the honourable member here for a supplementary question? Let us go to the next one. Thank you.

RESPONSE to an urgent question raised by Hon. Muyanja Johnson Senyonga on The exorbitant fees structure of some public day secondary schools especially given the impending opening of the new school term

4.42
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Higher Education) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is statement on the exorbitant fees structure of some public day secondary schools especially given the impending opening of the new school term, which was raised by hon. Muyanja. 

The ministry shares the concern of hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga about the unrealistic and prohibitive school fees charges, which are denying access to secondary education for a number of learners and compromising the Government objectives of providing affordable quality education for all and increasing equitable access to post primary education. It is against this background that the First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports set up the Kayanja Committee in March 2017. 

The objectives of the committee included establishment of the current fees structures for Government and private schools, finding out the cost triggers of the escalating fees, proposals of any other measures necessary in the management of fees and recommendations for controlling the escalation of fees.

The findings and recommendations of the committee were considered and guidelines issued, while taking into consideration the liberalised nature of our economy and the consequent need for Government to regulate rather than control levels of fees by designing guidelines, which schools must abide by. In the long term, the basis of the guidelines for fees structures should be the unit cost for each category of education.

From the recommendations that were drawn by the Kayanja report, the ministry has come up with measures to curb the continuous rising fees charges. These measures were communicated to the schools and the general public through a press release and a circular by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. 

The circular was issued on 24 October 2017 and re-issued on 29 October 2018. The guidelines in the circular included the following:

1. 	No school, private or government, shall increase school fees for whatever reason without written authorisation from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports or the Chief Administrative Officer or Town Clerk as the case may be.

2. 	Other cash and non-cash requirements outside the approved school fees structure are strictly prohibited. All non-cash items must be catered for in the school budget.

3. 	Schools implementing Universal Primary Education (UPE), Universal Secondary Education (USE) and Universal Post O’ Level Education and Training (UPOLET) shall strictly adhere to the policy implementation guidelines. Where parents decide and agree to contribute towards an emergency in the school and permission is sought and granted by the permanent secretary, no learner shall be excluded from the school on account of a parent’s failure to pay the agreed amount, in accordance with section 9 (3) of the Education Act, 2008. As soon as the emergency is resolved, the school shall stop charging the emergency fund. 

4. 	Where a school board/school management committee has to employ additional teachers to those on payrolls, permission shall be sought from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports in case of secondary schools, the Chief Administrative Officers and Town Clerks in case of primary schools, to use part of the capitation grant towards the payment of additional teachers. 

5. 	In line with 4 above, head teachers are warned against employing additional teachers before all the teachers on the payroll have been assigned the minimum required teaching load. All teachers without a minimum teaching load should be promptly reported to the ministry in case of secondary schools and the local government in case of primary schools for appropriate re-deployment. All schools must respect staff establishment ceilings for both teaching and non-teaching staff, as provided by the Ministry of Public Service.

6. 	Private schools must adhere to the approved staff employment guidelines. They should formally recruit, contract and effectively manage and develop staff on reasonable employment terms. 

7. 	All Government and Government aided schools should desist from taking commercial loans. Any schools applying for a loan must also seek authorisation from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, through the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education and Sports, as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. 

8. 	Day schools must desist from changing their status to boarding until such a time when the change in status is approved by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. Day schools desirous to operate boarding sections should seek authorisation from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports. All unauthorised hostels/dormitories must not open for a new term. Several local governments, for example, Lwengo, Mubende, Mukono and Sheema, closed all the illegal schools and boarding facilities. The enforcement of this guideline is ongoing, Madam Speaker.

These guidelines have been widely circulated to institutions of learning across the country through local governments, Kampala City Council Authority and the Directorate of Education Standards. 

Madam Speaker, our prayers are: 

1. 	That the honourable Members of Parliament and all other stakeholders join our ministry to sensitise their communities, boards of governors and management committees on these guidelines. 

2. 	The ministry also requests the honourable members to alert the ministry of any school/institution which flouts the above guidelines so that stern disciplinary action can be taken against these schools. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muyanja, do you have a supplementary question?  

4.50
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I am only surprised. I can only borrow the Four-Way Test of Rotarians and ask whether this report had the truth in it or not. I rest my case. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the next item. 

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. ROBERT NTENDE ON THE FAILURE BY KYAMBOGO UNIVERSITY TO RELEASE RESULTS OF STUDENTS OF NAZIGO PRIMARY TEACHERS’ COLLEGE WHO SAT GRADE III EXAMS IN 2018

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on the failure by Kyambogo University to release results of students of Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College, who sat Grade III exams in 2018. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you are aware that Kyambogo University was created after the merger of the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo (ITEK), Uganda Polytechnic Kyambogo (UPK) and Uganda National Institute Of Special Education (UNISE), of course also in Kyambogo. Before the merger, the Institute of Teacher Education Kyambogo was responsible for the examination and awards at National Teachers’ Colleges and Primary Teachers’ Colleges, where Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College falls.

After the creation of Kyambogo University, this function of examinations and awards was continued by the new university. The National Teachers’ Colleges and the Primary Teachers’ Colleges pay Kyambogo University for these services. Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College had not paid Kyambogo University for the services rendered in 2018 and this resulted in the university withholding the results.

Madam Speaker, I wish to report to this august House that Nazigo Primary Teachers’ College has since paid its dues to the university and their results were released in the month of September 2019.
I submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Ntende so I think there is no supplementary question.

RESPONSE TO A QUESTION RAISED BY HON. LYANDRO KOMAKECH ON THE THREATS BY AN INVESTOR TO EVICT GULU SENIOR SECONDARY SCHOOL CLAIMING OWNERSHIP OF THREE-QUARTERS OF THE SCHOOL LAND

4.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr John Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement on the threats by an investor to evict Gulu Senior Secondary School, claiming ownership of three-quarters of the school land. 

Madam Speaker, the Registered Board of Trustees, BAPS Swaminarayan Santha, is the registered and legal owner of land comprised in LRV 661, Folio 12, Plot M.54 and LRV 662, Folio 12, Plot M.60, which is occupied by Gulu Senior Secondary School. They have been registered owners since November 1963 and September 1966 respectively.

Upon grant of the rights and powers to re-enter the subject land, the registered owners, BAPS, were denied access and repossession of the property on grounds that the land was being utilised for public and common good in the form of a secondary school that was educating the children of the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, on the above argument, the Board of Trustees of Gulu Secondary School approached the Ministry of Education and Sports for advice and a proposal was made that Gulu Secondary School continues to occupy the property as tenants. The proposal was not effected and the school continued to occupy the subject land.

The Registered Trustees, BAPS Swaminarayan Santha, sought legal redress from court in 2011 against Gulu S.S and the Attorney-General. In May 2015, the court file was transferred from the Commercial Division of the High Court to Gulu High Court for further management.

At the first hearing, on 13 September 2018, the presiding judge observed that since there was a repossession certificate issued to the plaintiffs to repossess the land, it would be prudent for both parties to meet and resolve the case amicably. The negotiations were to be completed by 7 November 2018.

With the advice of the presiding judge and the Registrar of Gulu High Court, parties to the case met on several occasions at the boardroom of the Chambers of the Attorney-General in Gulu and the following transpired:

a) 	During the reconciliatory/mediation session/meeting on 5 October 2018, attended by the lawyers of the plaintiffs, the representatives of the Attorney-General, nine members of the Board of Governors of Gulu S.S and the four trustees of BAPS, it was resolved that:

i) 	The plaintiffs retain Plot M.54 which has their temple.
ii) 	The plaintiffs donate to Gulu S.S Plot M.60 on which there were some structures. This was, however, subject to payment of rent arrears from July 1992 to 31 December 2018.

b) 	Basing on the above discussion, the office of the Attorney-General sought approval of the resolutions from the ministry. In November 2018, the ministry confirmed its support for the resolutions and the entity’s commitment to clear the rent arrears accrued from June 2010 to December 2018. 

The Chief Government Valuer valued arrears at Shs 611,280,000, which the ministry is yet to clear. The funds to cater for the partial clearance of the arrears for this case were budgeted for in the financial year 2019/2020 and a commitment to clear had been made to court. However, the funds were not released.

Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General vide Letter No.7/156/1 dated 8 January 2020, requested the ministry for an update on its commitment to resolve the matter amicably by paying rent arrears and the vacant possession of Plot M54.

In our response, we reiterated the ministry’s commitment to pay rent arrears in the first and second quarters of financial year 2020/2021. Since the school had vacated Plot M54 at the beginning of term 1 this year, we encouraged the Attorney-General to execute the consent in court. The plaintiffs were also encouraged to repossess their premises. The ministry would subsequently make a formal handover of Plot M60 to the registered Board of Trustees BAPS Swaminarayan Santha. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Lyandro, so maybe there is no supplementary question. 

4.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I think you should save the people. There are some other people who can really make claims. When you say this, I hope Gulu Senior Secondary School is not going to be disturbed anymore. You should take a step and also send that communication – or if it is documents. 

It is not the first time this is happening; there have been several times. It is the Indians. How can we be sure that Gulu Secondary School is not going to be disturbed again?

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, we have been working hand in hand with the board of governors of this school and everybody, including the management and administration, are aware. However, I take this advice. I think we need to communicate to all the stakeholders so that there is no disturbance at all in the future.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 89/04/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT 

4.59
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): “Okororo Piped Water Project has stalled for more than 10 years, despite resources being provided to the Ministry of Water and Environment for piped water projects.

i)	Why has the Okororo Piped Water Project stalled for all this time?
ii)	What plans does the Ministry have to ensure that water and sanitary facilities are delivered to this community; and in what time frame?”

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Water and Environment. Let the matter be reflected again on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Let us go to Question 5 (b).

QUESTION 67/03/01 TO THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

5.00
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): “Article 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for promotion of public awareness of the Constitution by translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible; and providing for teaching of the same in all educational institutions. Why has the Constitution not been translated into local languages; and why is it not taught in all educational institutions as provided for by the Constitution?”

5.00
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, hon. Francis Zaake, MP Mityana Municipality says that Article 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for promotion of public awareness of the Constitution by translating it into Ugandan languages and disseminating it as widely as possible; and providing for teaching of the same in all educational institutions. That is the provision of the Constitution. He asks why the Constitution has not been translated into local languages and why it is not taught in all educational institutions, as provided for by the Constitution. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to confirm to the House that the Constitution has been translated into major local languages, beginning with Swahili. There is a version of the Constitution in Swahili. There is also a version of the Constitution in Luganda, in Lukonzo, Runyoro-Rutooro. There is also a version of the Constitution – if you go to the library, it is there – in Runyankole-Rukiga; I have a copy. There is a version of the Constitution in Lumasaba, in Alur, Lugbara, Ateso. 

There are also translations right now, as I am speaking to you, planned. The languages planned are Lugwere, Madi, Aringa and Kupsabiny.

There are also languages which are in print right now. These include Lugbara, Leb-Lango and Rufumbira are in print. Acholi is currently being printed, as it has run out of prints.

The second part of the question was why the Constitution is not being taught in all education institutions. I can confirm that in the new curriculum, this is planned.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to know whether this translation was done by the Government, because that was the duty that you were given when the Constitution was made. Are these volunteers or was it Government that translated it into these languages? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: What I have stated, Madam Speaker, are translations which were done by Uganda Law Reform Commission and that is a Government institution.

5.04
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has just reported. As the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have interacted with the Uganda Law Reform Commission. Actually, they brought us some copies and we have given them out to those who are able to read them or find them to be useful. 

That is why in the budget, they need an additional Shs 6.5 billion to make more copies available, including for updating our laws. When some of these things come – The other day, I thought I had asked them to do a copy in Jopadhola. They said it was not one of the major languages but they are considering it. (Laughter)

The truth is that they need the support of this House. In fact, the President had directed that they should be given Shs 7 billion shillings for the printing of these other translations. However, they had a challenge, which I believe the Attorney-General is handling. That is one agency without an accounting officer. Several people were interdicted. The sooner the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs – I think the Attorney-General directly – resolves those issues, the money – We have made recommendations in this other Budget for additional funding of Shs 4.5 billion so that they can fast track. 

The Uganda Law Reform Commission is ahead of us on translation. The copies are available with them but of course, not for free. Now that the interest is here, Madam Speaker, I can let them tell us where members can access these copies. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is very good news. Minister, you should not be shy; you should have come out dancing and saying, we have done it. It was an obligation under the Constitution and all along I have been thinking you did not do it. This is something to celebrate. 

5.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, we cannot celebrate until we have seen. 

Secondly, we need some kind of dissemination or teaching in schools. For us who studied in those days, we had civic education right from P.3. Some of these important laws would be disseminated through schools to pupils and students in order to reach all parts of Uganda. That is the best way of disseminating information but civic education is not there. Can you say something about that? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should support what the Chair of the Legal Committee has said. Why don’t we support the Law Reform Commission to get more money and ensure that all of us get this? This is good, minister. 

5.08
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we support the chair, he ably mentioned that the accounting officer was suspended. In fact, it was out of public outcry. The people who know the law were the ones getting Shs 6 billion in cash. The house needs to be put in order and they should know that even if they go to court, nobody will handle them. 

We have been discussing with the Accountant-General and these are untouchables. Unless they clear the house, the money, which will go there, may be abused again. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you talking about the Law Reform Commission?

5.09
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Uganda Law Reform Commission actually falls under my direct supervision. The problem was that recently, there was a whistleblower and the IGG went in to do some investigations. 

As a result of those investigations, about three or four members of the Uganda Law Reform Commission were interdicted. However, the chairperson’s contract has lapsed and that chairperson is the accounting officer. 

As we speak, we are in the process of recruiting a new one and by the end of the first week of March, we shall have a new chairperson at the Uganda Law Reform Commission and, therefore, an accounting officer. Then we can gladly receive our help.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, we were due to consider clause 20. We had a lengthy debate about issues of appointment, assignments, secondments and others. I do not know whether the Minister of Public Service is ready with a brief on that issue before we proceed to other provisions. 

5.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Our ministry was requested to give clarification on the implications of the different wordings. Briefly, I would like to mention that the wordings were “appointed”, “seconded” and “assigned”. 

I would like to go to the definitions. “Secondment” is where an officer is posted to serve in an institution of Government outside the mainstream Public Service for a specified period of time. 

The seconded officer retains the position and salary in the sending institution. He/she administratively reports to the authorities in the receiving entity which takes responsibility over his/her performance, attendance to duty, leave, supervision, payment of duty facilitating allowances, among others. 

Upon expiry of the period of secondment, the officer returns to his or her job. 

The implications of secondment are that the officer continues to receive salary from the sending institution, retains his/her job in the Public Service and his/her position cannot be filled while he/she is on secondment. 

Finally, the period of secondment is regarded as continuous service and is pensionable. 

I would also like to talk about “leave without pay”. “Leave without pay” is leave granted by the responsible permanent secretary under the following circumstances:

    1. When a pensionable officer is employed with an international body against a national quota of personnel vacancies and when it is in Uganda’s interest to fill its quota of places on the staff of that body for a maximum of five years in accordance with section C-c of the Public Service Standing Orders.

    2. Employment on contract under Government projects and programmes for a maximum of five years.

    3. Gender related grounds where either a public officer wishes to join a spouse undertaking an approved course of study or join a spouse working in foreign service or to attend to a challenge related to child raising for a maximum of two years in this case.

Leave without pay under condition number (2) and (3) is provided for in the Establishment Notice No. 2 of 2015, which amended the provisions of Section C-c of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders to provide for additional circumstances for granting leave without pay to deserving officers.

Madam Chairperson, the implications of leave without pay include the following:

    a) An officer granted leave without pay ceases to receive a salary and other privileges and benefits from the sending entity for that period.

    b) For officers granted leave without pay under circumstances in No. (1) above, the position is not filled because he or she is filling Uganda’s quota in an international body in the national interest. Upon expiry of the leave without pay, he or she re-joins the service at the grade applicable at the time of grant of leave without pay.

    c) For officers granted leave without pay under circumstances in No. (2) and (3) above, the position is declared for filling upon approval of leave without pay. When leave without pay expires, and after the officer has indicated readiness to return to the Public Service fold, he or she is deployed to the previous post, if still available or otherwise he is considered for redeployment elsewhere in the Public Service to a post he or she is qualified for. In the event of failure to deploy the officer, he or she is retired in accordance with the existing regulations.

    d) The period of leave without pay for all circumstances is not pensionable in accordance with Regulation 20 of the Pensions Regulations. It is regarded as qualifying service as per regulation 2 of the Pensions Regulations. If the officer is to retire, and in the event that the officer has not served for the required period to qualify him or her for pension, the qualifying service is used for eligibility to qualify the officer for pension but it is not included as part of the length of service for computation of the pension benefits.

Definition of Assignment

Madam Chairperson, “assignment” is where an officer is assigned to perform a specific task or tasks in addition to his or her routine duties. The officer assigned additional duties remains a staff of that entity but only receives duty facilitation allowances and other facilitation to enable him or her execute the assigned task or tasks. Assignments are normally temporary and go for short periods. All benefits and privileges attached to the substantive appointment remain applicable to the assigned officer.

Definition of Appointment

“Appointment” – according to the Public Service – is for officers going to serve outside the institution of the mainstream Public Service and it takes place in the receiving institution. In the above circumstances, it only applies to the officers granted leave without pay and the rest of the circumstances do not require appointment of the officer in the receiving entity.

Conclusion

Madam Chairperson, considering that the different concepts have varying implications on the service entitlement, privileges and benefits, it is important that they should be separated in the Bill to the extent of their applicability. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Minister of State for Public Service. Now that we have got that guidance, is the committee chairperson still interested in moving the amendment?

5.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, I believe the Minister of State for Public Service has done a lot of work together with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General. Our amendment on clause 20 was very brief. We had only proposed to replace something – for clarity – on subclauses (2) and (4). Probably, I will resume my seat and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney-General will say something before I concede.

5.16
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Chairperson, we would like to propose certain amendments to clause 20, after the explanation from the Minister of State for Public Service and the proposed amendments read as follows: 
“
Clause 20: Service in other institutions
    (1) Where a judicial officer or a person in the Judiciary Service - 
    (a) is appointed to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer or person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence without pay from the Judiciary; and
    (b) is seconded to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer or person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence from the Judiciary.”

	Madam Chairperson, this was to cater for that fact about the person drawing salaries from two places.

    (2) “The Judicial Service Commission may grant an applicant, under subsection (1)(a), leave of absence without pay and other benefits.

    (3)  The period of absence granted to a person in respect of service under section (1)(a) shall not be counted as part of the officer’s period of service for purposes of computing their lump sum retirement benefits, which is granted under section 26.

    (4)  Where a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of the Court of Appeal or a judge of the High Court is granted leave of absence without pay in accordance with this section, the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoint an acting Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal or judge of the High Court, whichever the case may be, to act in place of the judicial officer, in accordance with Article 142 of the Constitution. That person so appointed shall not be entitled to retirement benefits granted under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, this was to address the issue that came up last time during debate. This is to emphasise that under Article 142, the appointing authority has the powers to appoint an acting person and that, that person shall not be entitled to retirement benefits under this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still want a clarification. When this person is given leave of absence without pay, does that mean the position is not filled? What happens in the old office?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, that is the one addressed under clause 20(4), where the acting person is appointed, as the case maybe, the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoint an acting Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal or judge of the High Court to act in place of the judicial officer.

For clarification, if you go to the substantive constitutional provision on the appointment of judicial officers, Article 142, it says: “(1) The Chief Justice, the Deputy Chief Justice, the Principal Judge, a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of the Court of Appeal and a Judge of the High Court shall be appointed by the President acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission and with the approval of Parliament.

2. Where –
(a)	the office of a Justice of a Supreme Court or a Judge of the Appeal or a Judge of the High Court is vacant;

(b) 	a justice of the Supreme Court or a Justice of  Appeal or a Judge of the High Court is for any reason unable to perform the functions of his or her office; or

(c) 	the Chief Justice advises the Judicial Service Commission that the state of business in the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal or the High Court so requires, the President may, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission, appoint a person qualified for appointment as the Justice of the Supreme Court, or Justice of Appeal or a judge the High Court to act as such a justice or judge even though that person has attained the age prescribed the age prescribed for retirement in respect of that office.”

The rational here is that, that person need not to be within the age prior to retirement. For example, he can pick a retired judge like Odoki or Wambuzi to so act. That person will simply be entitled to a salary not by insertion of section 20 not to retire benefits. So, there is not double -

MR AKOL: Madam Chairperson, my concern is that we have some appointments that can go for five years. After five years, it can be renewed for another five years, which makes it 10 years.  Sometimes, it even goes for 15 years.

The person will be acting for 10 years, when he or she is not even entitled to a retirement benefits. Madam Chairperson, I do not think that would be right. This is why I need clarification to that kind of situation.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Having listened to the Attorney-General’s proposed amendments, there are three or four things, I would like to request him to address.

One, if you look through the current Bill as is, the retirement benefits are not tied to the years of service for a particular judicial officer. So, those particular amendments would then not be applicable in the circumstances, unless we amend and make the retirement benefits to reflect the number of years served.

Two, it would be been prudent that you subdivide clause 20, into aspects of where a judicial officer is appointed and give a situational position of what should happen. If the appointment is for five, seven or ten years, why should you still retain that particular officer in the Judiciary?

If it is on secondment, what timeframe should this officer be on secondment for him or her to retain the position in the Judiciary? If it is an assignment – recently, we had a clear example of Justice Bamugemereire. She was assigned to head the Commission of Inquiry into Land Matters initially for six months, but it ended up being four years. So, you must restrict the timeframe if it is an assignment so that this particular provision is not abused.

The Judiciary has been depleted of its human resource under the guise of appointments, assignments and secondment. We would support if you do surgery on this particular point by limiting timeframes and other incidental matters thereto.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the Attorney-General. Like hon. Niwagaba said, I would like to inquire whether we are making a just law or we are being discriminative and selfish in the way we are doing things. Is this Parliament making a law for a foreign country to entertain circumstances or are we making a law for Ugandans? I need to be helped so that I can understand. Otherwise, the Bible does not agree with this proposal. 

There is no fairness and justice as far as the proposal to this clause is concerned –(Interjections)– I do not want to waste your energy here. However, I would like to say that there is no fairness and justice to what the Attorney-General has talked about. This is why I would request the Attorney-General to be clear.

Madam Chairperson, many of these judicial officers are facing big challenges. Yet, you are bringing something that cannot provide any solution to this country. This is why I would like to request the Attorney-General to tell me whether we are making this law for a foreign country, where we do not belong or we are making it to favour some Ugandans. I need to be helped to understand this.

MS AMODING: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for the attempt that he has done in trying to resolve this empathy.

The earlier discussion was around picking benefits from both sides. You are a serving justice in Uganda but serving another assignment and picking a pay here and in the assignment you are performing - I think that was the greatest concern we had. If we provide that there would be no benefits, that seems to be agreeable. 

Section 23 says the period of absence granted to the person under this section shall be counted. The amendment that the Attorney-General proposed is that it shall not be counted as part of the officer’s period of service. I think we would be very unfair to these people because they are serving on an assignment, which is a public job they are doing. 

Madam Chairperson, the period of service is very important to the service of these people on that bench. I, therefore, think that we could maintain the period of service as a useful contribution to this person’s other entitlement in life. I really think it is not unfair for us to –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and honourable member, for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek from the member is: If one is a judge of High Court and they have gone to serve elsewhere maybe in Zimbabwe or Seychelles and they are being paid a salary there - the reason you have gone to serve there is because you have noticed that the terms are better than here.

The clarification I am seeking is: If one has left office, how do we count, when you have done nothing for that office?

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, my understanding is that this kind of assignment usually comes from within this Government; it is not outside Government institution. 

Most of these assignments are secondment from this country to another country; for example, the International Criminal Court. If I have been assigned to go and serve as part of the justices on that bench, and after my term has expired, I should be able return to my country that seconded me. Are you saying, my service will not be regarded as a contribution to the world justice system? I think it would be very unfair, if we say that, that service should not recognised. If I have returned to Uganda and I want to be assigned another service in Judiciary, should I not be considered as someone who has been working and serving the world or the country in that instance? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank members. Honourable minister, the reason hon. Abala asked about the equity - he even mentioned how the Director of Public Prosecutions Office is almost laying down tools because their friends are now getting better “bed” as they are now going on “a dry rock”.

Honourable members, if we do this law the way the minister has brought you will see a stampede; the prosecutors, CIIDs will leave work for these judges. 

When prosecutors left work for almost one-month people suffered. For example, engineer Badru Kiggundu left Makerere and up to now he is not a lecturer, he is surviving. Why are these people very special? 

After the Electoral Commission, he was assigned other work. If you do your work diligently like him the appointing authority can still assign you work so if you leave judiciary kindly leave we are creating employment. How can you appoint someone for five to 10 years and you say you will not get benefits because you are keeping a position for other members.

This was what hon. Kabafunzaki said that instead of advertising there is someone acting for so many years. You told the minister of Local Government to come and reason it will be the same way; we are not happy with this Bill.

Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Niwagaba, he has been very objective. How do you bring someone for five to 10 years and you do not count him because you are keeping the position for others. Honourable minister, for wellness- my senior brother hon. Kafuuzi please wash yourselves out of this, thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us be clear. The judges are appointed and are told they will work until they are 60 years. It is not a question of keeping a job of somebody; those are their terms of employment. So, if you have taken some few years away, but you are not yet 60, it is still your job; that is what we are trying to resolve.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There are three questions that I am asking the Attorney-General: 

(i) 	Is there any appointment that the President can make without consulting the concerned judicial officer? Before the President nominates any judicial officer, they must be consulted and must know of the privileges and benefits that accrue to that appointment. 

ii) 	The second scenario is, the officer who is now going to act in that position of that officer who is going to be on leave without pay. The officer is supposed to earn a salary of that period when the other judicial officer is away. 

iii)  	There are appointments and secondments that are more lucrative than what the judicial officers in this country earn. For example, if someone has been seconded to the International Criminal Court; their benefits, privileges and allowances are far much better than what they earn here. 

You have been consulted and have agreed to leave; why should you continue to be considered as if you are in active service and yet there is another person in the acting position in the office that you have been occupying.

I think we should not put taxpayers to double costs; let the taxpayers pay those people who are doing work for them. If you are not doing work in this country or if you are doing work in this country and are being paid from that agency where you have been nominated and seconded - you get paid there!

The rest can be paid from where they are working and I agree with the Attorney-General because the truth is one must be paid where they have worked.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Last time I had raised this matter and now that the Attorney-General is here; what we are discussing appears to suggest that once a judicial officer, justice of the court of appeal or a supreme court is appointed, seconded and assigned as per the definition of public service - we are trying to move that they should be removed from the service of the Judiciary. It also raises a constitutional matter because under Article 144(2) you cannot simply remove a judicial officer because they have been appointed or assigned elsewhere; and this is a constitutional matter.

The proposal by the Attorney-General - and we must accept unless we amend the Constitution to provide for other options of taking away a judicial officer from the service. We shall leave with the fact that a judicial officer will remain a judicial officer whether they are within the Judiciary or not because there is a procedure in the Constitution on how they should be removed.

Since the Attorney-General guided on their payment, I think that position is more acceptable to this House without violating the provision of the Constitution. Once we say that we are going to remove we shall not be passing a valid law. I beg to submit.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When debate started on this particular issue, what was the mischief and what are we intending to cure? 

Are we intending to cure a problem of the judicial officer earning twice because that is what has been happening. My answer is no because they have been taking leave of absence, so there is nothing new being introduced here.

The mischief is we do not want to deplete the Judiciary by getting judicial officers and assigning them to other responsibilities for a long time without having an opportunity to replace them.

When they go there and they are still occupying this position you cannot replace them. How do we treat that mischief? These are my proposals:

(i) 	We can limit the number of years of service outside the Judiciary on secondment or appointment; we cannot ban it, because when a judicial officer goes, I will give you an example, to the International Criminal Court, he is getting more experience in that field which might be of benefit to this judicial officer and to the Judiciary.

It is more or less benchmarking; if you go and serve at the African Court of Justice you are enriching yourself as a judge and you will come and share that experience with colleagues within the Judiciary. Do we need our judicial officers to be exposed? My view is, yes, we do. However, how do we expose ourselves because we do not have many judicial officers?

In the High Court alone, the gap is about 30 judges or so, now. We already have a deficit of 30 judges. How do you take away two judges for 10 years, when you already have a deficit? It does not make sense –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for allowing me to seek this clarification. Madam Chairperson, the clarification I would like to seek from hon. Katuntu is how he reconciles that proposal with Article 142 of the Constitution, specifically clause (3), which in effect, has not been invoked.

Appointments have been made outside the Judiciary. The President is under obligation to appoint acting judges or Justices but those appointments are not being made. That provision does not have time limits. 
The appointment, it seems, can be – The person who has been appointed in acting capacity can serve indefinitely. The Constitution did not put it because it says that either it is revoked by the appointing authority or the period is specified.

The Constitution itself envisaged this situation, where people would be appointed in other capacities – especially Justices or judges – and they would be replaced for a period not specified. How does your proposal reconcile with that provision of the Constitution?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, hon. Basalirwa. As you know, when it comes to issues like these – let me give you my interpretation: Whenever you have a Constitution, it gives the general principle. You must then enact a law to operationalise the Article of the Constitution. 

Article 142 gives the President powers to appoint acting Justices and that is where it end; the details of which are the ones we are actually discussing. Therefore, we will actually be within the confines of Article 142. A judge appointed by the President under Article 142 shall not serve for a period of this and that; you will be acting within the confines of Article 142. That would be its implementation. That should not be a problem at all.

Having said that, let us balance this, Madam Chairperson. Can’t we think of a period which is reasonable, where the Judiciary can afford to temporarily lose its judicial officer because it enriches but then he has to come back? We can think of a period of one year or maybe two years; it is possible.

However, look at this instance. The current chairperson of the Electoral Commission is serving a renewable contract of seven years. This means that if the contract is renewed – which has been the practice after the first term – he will be away for 14 years, yet the President cannot replace him. (Interjection) He can because that position is there, occupied by him.

Therefore, I suggest that we think of a specific period of one or two years. I wouldn’t mind two years but –(Interjection)– About the period? If it is the period, yes. I will take it. I do not want to usurp the Chair but let me take the clarification.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. Hon. Katuntu, thank you very much. Hon. Katuntu, you are lucky you are a practicing lawyer. However, if you go one day go to court as a litigant, you will feel it when court delays. Who delays it? The moment the judge is unavailable, there will be a problem.

Let me give you an example: If a judge leaves a station for six months, then they appoint another one, he will say, “I am still studying.” In the end, something which should have taken maybe six months or one year ends up taking three years. 
 
Hon. Katuntu, imagine yourself as a litigant; why don’t you consider six months? Who has ever gone to the hospital when he is sick and says, “let the doctor go for leave,” while he is feeling pain? Judges are like doctors; when you are feeling pain, you need to be treated.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, honourable. In my mind, I have been thinking of two years and I think they are still reasonable. However, we can debate that. Having said that, –(Interjection)– hon. Amoding, I would like to conclude. I will take the clarification.

MS AMODING: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu. It will help in deciding the timeframe that you are proposing. I wonder; if a Justice of the Supreme Court is appointed or seconded to the International Criminal Court, how do we cure that because we are also legislating in view of international jurisprudence?

Supposing his appointment is maybe more than five years, how do we cure that? We are then proposing in our law in Uganda; how do we reconcile that kind of lacuna?

MR KATUNTU: Before you take on that assignment or appointment, you first look at your local law. Does it allow you to take on 10 years or not? So, it is not about saying, “Well, I have been appointed for 30 years.” You have to look at what is permissible within your law. 

Lastly, Madam Chairperson, I see the learned Attorney-General is proposing computation of the retirement period, less the stay away period. If I understand you correctly, are you saying that in this Bill, in computing the retirement benefits, we are going to base it on the years of service? 

If that is the case, I have no objection because you have now even gone to the Schedule because it is the one which gives the formula for computation of the retirement benefits. If it is going to be based on the years of service, I would not have any problem because if you are suggesting it here, then on the Schedule, it has to be computed on the years of service.

If it is not being computed on the years of service, then what you are proposing is redundant because retirement benefits, according to the Bill as it is now, are not based on the years of service. That will help. If that is the case, then we may not even have much debate on the schedule.

THE CHAIRPERSON: As I invite hon. Okello, I think there has been a deficiency in activating Article 142(2). I am sure that on the appointments of Justice Ssebutinde and Justice Bbosa - I think if we had acted in time and notified the appointing authority that there is now a vacancy, there would be people acting in these positions. However, we have not activated that particular part.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, you almost spoke my mind. (Laughter) I have tried to look at the spirit of the committee in clause 20 and also the opinion of the Attorney-General. I take it that the spirit behind these proposals is to maintain the human resource in the Judiciary. 

Madam Chairperson, in an attempt to maintain the human resource, we seem to be treating the symptoms rather than the disease. We may need to be interested in the organogram of the Judiciary because there are huge gaps in the organogram that need to be filled. 

Even to say that certain people will be appointed to act is not sustainable because you cannot have people acting for a long time. Some of the people are appointed, say for five years. Their appointment can be renewed for another five years, making it 10 years. I think this proposal, in itself, is redundant. 

Madam Chairperson, in 2019 - I do not know what it could be now –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member. Are you suggesting that the Justices who should actually qualify for secondment or appointment should be those who are approaching retirement age so that when they go, they go for good?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I think you will benefit from my submission, as I proceed. 

Madam Chairperson, I was giving an example of the Court of Appeal in 2019 that had 11 Justices to handle a workload of over 7,000 cases. If you want to appoint anyone of them to go for any duty, different from the duties they are supposed to handle here, it would affect the work of the court. 

Like hon. Katuntu said, there were 52 High Court Judges but the required number, as approved by Parliament, was 82. So, there was a gap of 30. At that time, the workload of the 52 judges was about 63,000 pending cases that they were supposed to handle. With this gap in the Judiciary, it would be extremely difficult. 

If the gaps are filled, picking one or two or three judicial officers would not be a very huge problem. Actually, you would not notice if one or two of them were picked but because there is a gap, we are trying to legislate on matters that would avoid depletion of the human resource in the Judiciary. 

I strongly feel that if the ban on recruitment is lifted, you can appoint a judge or two or even three. You can assign or second and the gap will not be felt. I think this is something we can deal with and I request my colleagues –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank my brother. The information I would like to give is, there are judges who have retired. For example, a High Court Judge retires at 65 years and a Supreme Court Judge retires at 75 years and the other one I think retires at 70 years. 

Why go and pick those who are 58 years, 60 years or 45 years, who are still energetic to do this work instead of going to pick from that old force? Those ones do not need secondment; you just appoint them to do that work permanently. This would avoid the problem of depleting the human resource where the number is not enough. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I think that is very useful information that Government could pick on. It could actually save the Judiciary, in addition to recruitment, to fill the vacancy gaps that exist. Thank you.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When I look at clause 20, there are two things here. When you are looking at the assignment, what particular assignment are we talking about? If somebody is a judicial officer, whether the assignment is judicial in nature or not – For example, a judicial officer can be picked and assigned to a duty that may not be related to his profession. Say he is deployed as an ambassador; is that in line with his previous job? 

In this particular situation, I thought that we are looking at deploying somebody in line with what he has been doing. If such a person is deployed in line with what he has been doing then the period he serves must count because it is just like performing the same duty though not at the current station.

On gaps being created, these judicial structures are not static. What I know is that at the moment, many of these posts are not being filled and that is where there appears to be a problem. If they are filled, this issue can never be a problem.

On the issue of acting, I do not know whether judicial officers are different from other public servants. This is because the law provides that the acting position should not to be occupied for more than six months. That is where I have an issue. We are trying to handle a situation where, when people are moved, gaps are created and the workforce is affected. All this is as a result of lack of recruitment and failure to fill these posts. 

Madam Chairperson, that is my humble submission. If the officer is sent to do similar work, the period he serves should really count. Thank you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with my honourable colleagues, especially hon. Abdu Katuntu, that our problem has been a lot of judicial officers leaving without pay. Now, we are operationalising Article 142 in respect to defining the period. I am happy with the suggestion in terms of the timeframe but it should not be less than two years. 

My question is, a person appointed –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which area are you addressing?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: The acting position, which is clause 20; those who are appointed, seconded and assigned –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is a conflict of interest. Is it allowed?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The conflict of interest between who and who?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, my brother’s wife is a judge and he is arguing for the period because he knows his wife can, at any time, ask for the same. (Laughter) Is it, therefore, not a conflict of interest to -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are completely out of order. I do not think that when she became a judge, she knew that we were going to discuss this money. You are lifting the veil. Please conclude.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I know hon. Nandala-Mafabi likes to be disruptive; that is why he was even disturbing hon. Kasolo.

The question of the person appointed in acting capacity - we know that our judicial officers - if one joined the judicial service and they are appointed judge at 55, to retire at 65, it means they have only 10 years of working. If they are appointed to act for five years, does that time contribute to their pension?

If pension is with the same standard as we do for the rest of Ugandans, that it is by the number of years served, the salary at exit for the computation of your pension and that annuity factor - the replacement rate, which is proposed to be 50 or 60 per cent of the exit salary - when a person is acting and they have interest to go further and/or they have been asked to act, what happens to the person in acting capacity?

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Achia. The clause we are looking at is specific. It talks about the appointment of a judicial officer, who is serving and not acting. It is about secondment of a judicial officer who is serving and not acting or assignment of a judicial officer not in terms of acting justices or judges.

In view of that, would you agree with me that a serving judicial officer who has been appointed to an intuition outside the Judiciary or assigned in an institution outside the Judiciary or seconded to an institution outside the Judiciary, should have the leeway to remain on that appointment or assignment as if the existing officer in the Judiciary does not matter? 

Would you not agree with me that there should be a timeframe and if that timeframe is exceeded, that judicial officer maybe should be deemed to have resigned in that particular office?

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I totally agree with hon. Niwagaba, Madam Chairperson, because that is what we are specifying here. It is about the timeframe being defined and if one has been asked to act for a certain period, what I would like to seek from the Attorney-General is; is that period computed as part of their pensionable period.

Why should you let one act for five years on behalf of somebody who has a job and qualifies for pension for the period they are out and the one acting does not qualify? I would like to seek clarification on this because the period of being a judicial officer is so limited. It is that one maybe a judge at 65 and if they are in the Supreme Court, it is 70 years?

We need to clearly define these acting positions and impact on pension and appointments or assignments with respect to the computation of pension so that we understand how to treat the pension.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to strike a balance such that the issues, which have been a concern, are addressed. However, at the same time, we do not want to create leeway for people to do whatever they want. Even the dogs know that when they are at every party, they will miss the bones. So, they must focus on at least one party.

Therefore, in light of that, I would like to propose that we go with six months. Within six months, if the officer does not return, it means they have chosen to forfeit their position and Government can move to appoint a new officer. This is my view. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thought that the explanation of the Minister of Public Service and the proposed amendments by the learned Attorney-General had put this to rest. If you remember the committee position was that we replace sub-clauses (2) and (4). 

We were doing away and speaking more strongly, however, when you look at the tenure - how can a judicial officer lose his or her job? In the Constitution, hon. Jonathan Odur here, whom I know as a businessman, was trying to help us to appreciate that it is a matter of the Constitution. 

Now, if we are making the Administration of Judiciary Act and we are stipulating that after this period, one will be deemed to have lost their job, we would be making it unconstitutional. There are only a few instances upon which a judicial officer maybe removed from office. Now, we are adding another one in an Act of Parliament not amending the Constitution. 

Therefore, the concern was that it would be unfair for a judicial officer to get benefits from two places? Like now, we have –(Interjection)– my wife is not a judge; protect me from –(Interruption)
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There are circumstances for leaving an office and absenteeism from work is one of them because if you do not work, that is ground enough but may not be explained here. What I am looking at is: you are looking at only one set of people, the judges and I have not heard you talk about the lower cadres. 

There are those who have come and sat - he left Makerere at 24 years and has not worked elsewhere until retirement age. However, for others who are well placed and are appointed to the level of judge are the ones we are more concerned with, by prescribing the law for leaving office. How about the lower bench, which does a lot of work? Because those are the ones we would recommend to go ahead – on that one, Mr Chairman, don’t we have manpower in this country? If we do not have manpower, what do we do?

MR OBOTH: The reason we are not looking at doctors or teachers is simple; we are handling a Bill on the administration of the Judiciary. It is not about the teaching service or medical practitioners. We need to isolate this. 

When we were handling matters of administration of Parliament, it was about Parliament. The law can decide to be that selfish and that is a reality. Now, a law that is dealing with the judicial officers takes care of judicial officers only. 

I have heard several accusations here, Madam Chairperson. You may not be a judge now, you may not even be a lawyer but this law is not going to end with us in this Parliament. This law is for posterity and generations to come. This law is for posterity and generations to come. To look at some people with suspicion because the chairman is a lawyer - this is just a privilege that I happen to be. To look at other people and say, this one’s wife is a judge, you do not know that tomorrow, your daughter will be a judge –(Interruption)

Mr basalirwa: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The information I would like to give is to the effect that this particular law is intended to operationalise chapter eight of the Constitution. Since this Constitution was promulgated in 1995, other chapters have received legislative attention but chapter eight has never.

Therefore, we are debating it in that context and Members should appreciate it in that context; that it is about chapter eight and that has nothing to do with discrimination.

Mr oboth: That is quite brilliant and useful and we thank the people of Bugiri Municipality. That is exactly the information I wanted to share with Members. 

We can move to more clauses of interest but this one - we should be able to move. What the Attorney-General proposed as an amendment would be an issue that would resolve this matter and we go to another clause.

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Fortunately, the chairperson has just done the clarification about what we were trying to cure with the amendment. Except that my colleagues forgot that what we are trying to cure is the complaint that the person leaves and is still entitled to benefits from the office that he has left.

The Chairperson: It is not only that but he or she retains that job and it is not filled.

Mr byaruhanga: The first segment is about leaving with the benefits, which this removes. The second item in terms of keeping the job is the one where we proposed to cap the period for the person to leave. We are open about the whole thing. 

We are saying that we are trying to legislate for the country and for the future. That is why I am telling hon. Nandala-Mafabi that if somebody’s wife is a judge, then we must get the experience he has first-hand because we are legislating for the country. Your daughter may become a judge tomorrow; I know that you have some daughters.

In that context of capping, we could debate the period of time. Of course, six months is terribly unreasonable because that is the time when somebody is just sitting in and changing the furniture of the office –(Interjection)– may I kindly finish, sir. We listened to you so faithfully.

Madam Chairperson, I wanted to answer hon. Katuntu but he is not in. He talked about what the mischief was. I explained it. He talked about what we were trying to cure; that the absentee man does not receive benefits.

Hon. Niwagaba talked about limiting the time of service. Hon. Abala sought clarification whether we were making a law for Ugandans. I did not understand the question but I assure you that the law we are making is for Ugandans.

Hon. Waluswaka asked why we give the Judiciary special treatment. As a Member already mentioned, we are operationalising chapter eight. The honourable chairperson has told you that when we were addressing Administration of the Legislature, that is what we were working with. We cannot do everything at a go. 

Hon. William Nzoghu, I thank you. You spoke very cleverly today –(Interjections)– I mean that in an honest way. You always speak very cleverly, including today. (Interruption)

Mr nzoghu: Madam Chairperson –

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you very much. I cleared the air. Hon. Odur, I thank you. We are just trying to cure. Therefore, having answered all the questions, I propose that we move this amendment. (Interjections)

The Chairperson: I think we need to summersault around it. 

Mr mwiru: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose a year for the reason – (Interjections)– but this is Parliament; we are not in a market.

I listened to colleagues and this job of being a Member of Parliament requires courtesy. I propose a year because we are dealing with suffocating an institution. When we propose a year, it does not mean that we do not appreciate that we must build capacity of judicial officers who are in the Judiciary. 

We also appreciate that but we are striking a balance because if the resource envelope allowed and we recruited sufficient numbers in the Judiciary, this would not be an issue now as to whether we should second people or not since we would have a sufficient number to dispense justice.

It is on that premise that I propose a year since when we take away judicial officers for long we shall affect the bench, thereby affecting the dispensation of justice. I beg to submit.   

The Chairperson: In that one year, does the President appoint someone to work?

Mr mwiru: No, for a reason that in Government - for my colleagues who were saying, “No, no, no” - there is when they appoint under inter-ministerial arrangement. You may be an officer in the Judiciary but there can be an inter-ministerial committee where you can be seconded for a year. During that time, you remain a judicial officer.

Mr karubanga: Madam Chairperson, from the position of the Public Service Standing Orders, these are our public servants in the mainstream. We have five years. We are now talking of a judge and you say, it is one year. I do not think that would be fair.

Since you ruled that we have not been triggering Article 142, I think if indeed we feel there is a gap in service delivery, the Judicial Service Commission should be able to advise the President to appoint. However, giving a year should be fair.

Mr byaruhanga: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Specifically on the basis that in an attempt to cure Article 142(3), which leaves it open, at least there is a proposal of the number of years.

What would be the compromise, first of all, is that we would agree to the capping.

Therefore, I propose that on the basis of the Standing Orders of the Public Service, we propose five years –(Interjections)– even speaking on my feet, I can propose why – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please! 

MR KARUBANGA: Five years is generally a period within which a person would be expected to make an impact. I am saying that, at least, we should concede to the capping. Let us kindly agree to the five years, Madam Chairperson. That is what I propose. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are we going to have different parameters for the Public Service Commission and the Judicial Service commission? Soon, we shall also include the Parliamentary Commission. 

Considering the fact that we have agreed to activate clause 142(2), if someone has gone out, the Judicial Service Commission immediately advises the President to fill that vacancy, since that person is away for five years. Would that be a problem? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek for your guidance. The Attorney-General is right that when somebody leaves, the vacancy is supposed to be filled; someone is supposed to be appointed.

If you read Article 144, it clearly states that: 

“A judicial officer may retire at any time after attaining the age of sixty years, and shall vacate his or her office…”

The moment one is 65 years in the High Court and the other one is 70 years, that means the moment he shall – if you get the one who is 71 years old, he cannot – because the law says he has to vacate the office. In short, there will be very little room for manoeuvring. Madam Chairperson, that is the reason I want to seek your guidance. 

That is why said that if we go by the Public Service Standing Orders, then the pension should also go by Public Service Standing Orders. If you want to make a special law, we should go by that. 

The reason we are coming up is that these people are so special that we should make them special terms so that they are able to be there to provide justice. If we do not want, then, you should bring that to five years as is in the Standing Orders of Public Service –(Interruption) 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Of course, the standing orders being quoted by the Attorney-General, are a statutory instrument, which is an inferior law. It is not an Act of Parliament. It is a subsidiary legislation and here we are, making a substantive law.

That said, we have had a caucus with the Government side. There are secondments of judicial officers to international bodies based on treaties signed by Government and approved by Parliament. In accordance with such treaties, definitely, if a person is on secondment, then the timeframe stipulated in the treaty would apply; like the East African Court of Justice, which is four years. However, that excludes those other provisions of treaties.

Honestly speaking, if a judicial officer is taking up an appointment or a secondment outside the Judiciary, for a period of two years, it would be reasonable. However, if it is beyond two years, then, let him be deemed to have resigned and then somebody else takes up the office. 

In my opinion, five years would be too much and we would not cure the particular problem we are addressing, which is depleting the Judiciary with the small human resource that is there. 

I beg, Members, if you agree with me, that we should go strictly to amend this clause with those proposals and move forward. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I think my senior brothers, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Wilfred Niwagaba read my mind, especially in reference to the standing orders. He has used the proper words, “an inferior law.” It is something subsidiary. That is why we should not be talking about it now here. If you are talking about it now, you are inviting something else to the law and that becomes a problem. 

Since we are talking about something special, let us handle it along those lines. That is basically what I would like to say so that as we talk, as the learned Attorney-General – I am not a lawyer. However, at the beginning, you mentioned absentee judicial officers yet they are not the ones who created - it is the appointing authority, which we are not questioning. 

That is why we are now saying that we should go with the proposal of the two years and then from there, we proceed instead of us wasting time. If you are bringing your standing orders here, we are going to tell you the pension should be as per Public Service, outside this law. That becomes a problem. I thank you. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, as I already stated earlier, and we have already agreed that we are trying to do this for posterity, I already conceded to a capping. However, somebody brought an interesting point. He asked about the period of retirement if the person has been there until 60 years. I am ready to make a further concession and state that, first of all, we have already shown that we are happy to do the capping. We are saying a capping of five years or when the person reaches the retirement age, whichever comes earlier. That means that if during the assignment or the secondment or whatever you want to call it, the person hits the retirement age, that job will automatically be covered.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you now make the proposal for the capping? 

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, in any case, our capping concession is five years. We have conceded to the capping and our view is that the five years is a reasonable period of time for the capping. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What I wanted to hear is the actual amendment including the capping; the formulation. 

MR KATUNTU: Can I make the amendment? I would like to substitute for clause 20 the following: 
    a) Where a judicial officer or a person in the judicial service is appointed to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer/person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence without pay from the Judiciary.
    b) Is seconded to an institution outside the Judiciary, that officer/person shall apply to the Judicial Service Commission for leave of absence from the Judiciary. 

    2) The Judicial Service Commission may grant to an applicant, under subsections (1)(a), leave of absence without pay. 

    3) The period of absence granted to a person in respect of service under 1(a) shall not exceed two years and be counted as part of the officer’s period of service for purposes of computing the retirement benefits granted under Section 36. 

    4) Where a judicial officer accepts an appointment or secondment to an institution outside the Judiciary, for a period exceeding two years, that judicial officer shall be taken to have resigned the office of the judicial officer. 

    5) Section 3 shall not apply to a judicial officer who has been seconded to any institution outside the Judiciary under a treaty or international obligation of Uganda. 

For example, if a judicial officer has been appointed at the ICC, even if it is for seven years, then we have nothing to do on that one. At the East African Court of Justice, where we are obliged by the treaty to second a judge there to serve for four or five years, there is nothing we can do. So, that exception should be able to cater for all those who should be outside the two years. However, for the voluntary ones, it should be two years. I beg to move.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This proposal seems okay but we are not restricting the secondment outside the country to the administration of justice. This country can still second somebody under a treaty to go and be an organising secretary under an international agreement. Even at the East African Community, you can second a judge or Justice to go there but to do something else, not related to administration of justice. I find a problem with that – that we need to first restrict it before we can.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think now you know why I insist that I want to see the amendments early enough so that we can appreciate them and see how they fit in. I am proposing that the amendment be circulated and we stand over this particular clause. Let us move to the other; we have spent an hour on this matter. 

For all those who have amendments, I take it that you are giving notice. Circulate them between today and tomorrow. Let us go to the others; we are standing over this one. He is going to circulate it so that we see how they fit in together.

MR KATUNTU: does that mean we are going to handle it tomorrow?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. 

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us see how it fits in with the others. All of you should circulate the amendments and then we can synchronise them. Let us go to clause 21. There is no amendment. This was the retirement benefits of the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice under Article 144. We have deferred clause 20.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I agree –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you on clause 21?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Madam Chairperson, even clause 21 has an implication because the moment you determine what it shall be – I would like to give an example: The example I would like to give is that somebody is appointed a Chief Justice when he is only remaining with five years to retire and he has not been in the Judiciary. He has five years to retire, he has come –

Let me give an example; maybe Nandala is the one appointed. I am coming here with pension from Parliament –

THE CHAIRPERSON: And Bugisu Cooperative Union.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, and Bugisu Cooperative Union. I go there for only three years. I am given all benefits of a Chief Justice and pension, yet where I am leaving, I have been earning a pension.

For this one of the Chief Justice and the rest, a timeframe would matter because you must consider how long somebody has been on the bench so that people leave when they are okay.  There are those who have been career judicial officers and joined at 25, who should also be those to be considered.

Madam Chairperson, clause 20, which we have stayed over, has an implication on retirement benefits. I would like to propose that we stay these ones over and also circulate our proposals.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you jumped in before the mover of the Bill could present theirs. Please, present clause 21.

Clause 21

MR BYARUHANGA: I need ways of convincing you. That is why we are parliamentarians; to convince each other. Madam Chairperson, our proposal for clause 21(1) under application is that the provisions – it is an insertion of a new clause.

The provisions of this part apply to:

    a. The Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, the Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, the Registrar and Magistrate, who retires after the commencement of this Act.

Madam, Speaker, I think you had raised this last time.

    b. A retired Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate, who retired before the commencement of this Act and who, on the commencement of this Act, is currently receiving a pension in respect of his or her service under the Pensions Act.

Do the Members want me to repeat it? The application is under clause 21. Our insertion and proposal of a new clause is that the provisions of this part apply to – Now this is the preceding part that we have been debating and that we have said we shall send for tomorrow.

We are saying the provisions of this part apply to:
 
    a. The Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice – we are categorising the people – Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate, who retires after the commencement of this Act.

That is part a. In part b, we are also making a provision for the retirees. In part b, we are saying,

    b. A retired Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of the Court of Appeal, Principal Judge, Judge of the High Court, Chief Registrar, Registrar and Magistrate, who retired before the commencement of this Act and who, on the commencement of this Act, is currently receiving a pension in respect of his or her service under the Pensions Act.

Madam Chairperson, I think you are the one who raised it last time. What were the circumstances of the Chief Justices Emeritus who have retired? My answer to you then was that they were receiving pensions under the Pension Act. Even in our proposals, even when we are going to make a proposal for the misapplication of the Pensions Act, we are now including them under the retirement benefits in our current amendments to show that we have catered for everybody. This includes – I think again it was hon. Nandala-Mafabi who was talking about them – magistrates; they are all covered. Maybe, your uncle is a magistrate; he has been covered. (Laughter) 

I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from the Attorney-General. How different is the proposal from clause 27, which we have in the Bill here?

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Whereas I appreciate the submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi about the number of years of service, the position of the Chief Justice, that of the Deputy Chief Justice and that of the Principal Justice are administrative positions. 

They should be distinguished from the position of other judicial officers because it is like – for example – this House. We have a different law that caters for the retirement benefits of the head of this institution, different from those of members of Parliament. It is like the Prime Minister. There is a different legal regime of the Prime Minister for his pension or retirement benefits. 

As we discuss the retirement benefits of the heads of the institution of the Judiciary, it should not be uniform to all other judicial officers – the judges. 

We should provide distinctly for the Chief Justice, the Head of the Judiciary, his deputy and his principal judge like we do provide distinctly for the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, different from members of Parliament; just as we provide for the Prime Minister, different from the Cabinet Ministers. These are heads of these institutions and I think the Attorney General should – 

MR BYARUHANGA: Is hon. Katuntu proposing that for those two offices, we propose a higher regime? I would like clarification.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like clarification from hon. Katuntu. If you look at the schedule, the Chief Justice is provided with some benefits that do not run to the other retirement officers. For example, he will take a car and he will have a house. These are not given to the lower cadres of the bench -(Interjections)- it is there in the schedule. 

The clarification I want from him is that when he looks at those schedules, doesn’t he see a reflection of the recognition of that unique role for being the heads of those institutions reflected in the schedule since they are provided with something else that the rest do not have. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to the proposals by the Attorney General, to the effect that even the Justices who have retired and are currently receiving pension will graduate to this new scheme if it is passed. 

I would like to refer to the ruling of the same judges who now want to benefit from their own – In the committee report, they brought up this ruling of Mande Mabirizi – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it seems to me that the remaining clauses are all interconnected, they circulate around the same issue. I think they are really intricate. 

I would, therefore, like to suggest that we defer the rest of them and continue reflecting on them and then we can arrange for time to complete this Bill. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.48
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 20 of the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” and stood over it. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to look at the Pensions Act. We also need to study the interplay between those provisions. (Interjections) All those areas need to be looked at before we complete. Can you do some networking, honourable members?

6.51
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, a Bill, like proposals of any law, is a living document. That is why you could have heard the Attorney-General trying to move new amendments. It is purely because of the various considerations that they have probably had. 

Madam Speaker, if it would please you – because for some of the proposed amendments, I saw Members of the legal and Parliamentary affairs committee vehemently participating – I do not want to say, opposing. 

If it would please you, to give us an opportunity to caucus over this and give us a longer adjournment, may be to Tuesday, so that tomorrow we can begin on other legislation. This seems to be the consensus from the Attorney-General and the minister – they are nodding in approval –(Laughter)

I call upon Members to harmonise this. They are just a few clauses. The judges and judicial officers in this country are watching us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course this is an important law. It has taken time but we also need to make a good law and we do not want to make mistakes. So let us not do it hurriedly. 

I agree to the deferment so that we complete it on Tuesday; use that time to caucus. Minister of Public Service, please stay close to the Members so that we can move together. We do not often do pension laws here so it is a grey area for us. 

Tomorrow, we will commence on the other Bills for which we have already received a report for the second reading. I invite the chairperson to make some closing remarks. 

6.53
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the 12th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of this Parliament held on Wednesday, 12 February 2020, a number of issues were raised to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs with regard to the revised electoral roadmap issued by the Electoral Commission. 

Notable among them was –

    a) What would happen to the many Ugandans who would be turning 18 years by election time, given that the registration deadline was 23rd December 2019.

    b) Nomination dates and the campaign period for presidential and parliamentary elections.

    c) The verification of academic documents for candidates running for elective offices.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs was directed to have a meeting and report back. I would like to report that we had our first meeting, which I reported here and the second meeting was today. I am happy to report to this House that the committee met with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General.

On the cut-off date of update of voters’ register to include those who will turn 18 by election time, the Electoral Commission submitted to the committee that in order to achieve a clean and up-to-date voters’ register by end of March 2020, the display of the register and the general updates of the register should have been completed, hence the need to set the cut-off deadline. 

In effect, they said the first election where they are going to use the voters’ register is on 6th April. Therefore, in response to the argument that there are several millions of people that will be left out, they cited a provision under section 19 and others to justify their position. We got satisfied with the explanation.

On the nomination and campaign period, the Electoral Commission noted that for polling to take place between 10 January 2020 and 8 February 2020, all related materials need to be obtained. I would like to skip that and just go to the good news –(Interjection)- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle. We assigned him a responsibility and he is reporting.

MR OBOTH: Protect me, Madam Speaker, from hon. Akol for obvious reasons. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You would not want to meet him in the corridors –(Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, nomination dates for the village special interest groups committees’ candidates is still between 6th and 10 April 2020. Nomination for candidates for local government councils, including special interest groups’ representatives, is between 20th and 28 July 2020. 

They gave the explanation that because of the 28 per cent increment in the number of administrative units, the work will be very enormous. There are over one million offices. They will start the nomination processes but the elections will take place immediately after the presidential and parliamentary elections. It will not be different from the past but they will need to start the nomination process a little earlier. The reasons they gave were satisfactory, in the opinion of the committee.

On nomination of candidates for presidential elections, they adjusted the dates from August to between 1st and 2 October 2020. The elections will still be between 10 January 2020 and 8 February 2020.

Nomination for parliamentary candidates is on 7 and 8 October, 2020. Members, this is due to – (Interjection)– Can you imagine, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members.

MR OBOTH: That “can you imagine” is not part of the report. We would like to thank the Electoral Commission, first of all, for them to come down. They acknowledged that the nation will be polarised. People will not work. This Parliament would not have Members to proceed. Those were the considerations. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Do you want to speak on this? No. What is there to speak about? Honourable members, we are the ones who requested for these adjustments. We were worried that if we nominate in August, we shall have to close Parliament and the rest of the country will close. I am satisfied.

MR OBOTH: On the issue of verification, they made an undertaking that they are going to get back to us because verification has a direct link with the nomination dates. Therefore, after setting this, they are going to go backwards. 

Madam Speaker, this was the submission from the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission. I would like to lay the submission, with the correct dates, with our report on the Table. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Those who need verification should start now. Don’t wait for those dates. For those who have equivalents –(Laughter)– go and harmonise them.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
