PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11569Thursday, 1 February 2024MR KATUSABE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.      The structure - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You can get onto another microphone if that one has a problem.MR KATUSABE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your generosity. I am saying given the structure of the Order Paper for Tuesday, there was simply not enough time for the minister to respond to – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I said, “Didn’t we say Tuesday next week?”MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, you said, “tomorrow,” meaning Wednesday.      THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, Government Chief Whip, please, coordinate with the minister. By the time we finish the      session, we will see if we are able to address that. Thank you, honourable. Proceed, Hon. Dr Bwanika with the procedural matter that you have. DR BWANIKA:  Mr Speaker, the rules provide that Members of Parliament ask questions both written and oral. We have done so and written our questions. However, since November, the Prime Minister has not had an opportunity to answer these questions. The rules also provide that it is either the Prime Minister or the Deputy Prime Minister. The two are not available in the House for reasons that might be understandable.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 5TH SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 2.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s Sitting. Let us go to matters of national importance, beginning with the Hon. Patience Nkunda.      Okay, is that a point of procedure?MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On Tuesday, you directed the minister to come and respond to specific issues that were raised here. Allow me to draw your attention to the closure of Bwera Teachers’ College. The only teaching college in Kasese, serving a population of 1.4 million people. Mr Speaker, you clearly directed him to come on Tuesday and accommodate that in his submission. I did not see him yesterday and I do not see him today. What is the way forward? That is a matter that is restless and pertinent to the people of Kasese.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Katusabe, if my memory serves me right, you will help me. Wasn’t it Tuesday of next week?PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11570THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMr Speaker, I request for your guidance because some of our questions are not only urgent but we must receive their answers on behalf of the population. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I would advise that the questions we usually reserve for the Prime Minister, especially written ones, are questions of a policy nature. They are questions that one would need to go back and consult. This is because the people on the frontbench are not computers that they go when they have everything downloaded. They need to go back and consult with the technical staff. Sometimes, they consult through the Government structures and sometimes, they get Cabinet approval.Therefore, for matters that are of an urgent nature, I would request that you always reach out to me or the Presiding Officer so that we cover them under matters of national importance. However, that does not take away the validity of your question. I spoke to the Prime Minister a while ago; she is away and I also spoke to the Deputy Prime Minister. However, today, we have   very critical business of the Government because at that time, the Prime Minister is supposed to be addressing very critical issues related to the Government. I promise you next Thursday, the Prime Minister will be here. For now, the ministers are able to step in because each question falls under a certain ministry. I request the ministers who are occupying the back seats as Backbenchers, to occupy the frontbench.      Also, shadow ministers as we agreed, the front bench is reserved for   Cabinet ministers or shadow ministers. I will exempt – but the seat he was occupying is the same because Hon. Frank has an issue, I usually allow him to sit – (Laughter)  - but that seat is more comfortable for him. I know his situation. He came and shared with us as presiding officers. Honourable colleagues, I have an Order Paper to manage, please, let us reduce on the procedural matters. Let us go to the Order Paper. Honourable colleagues, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of ExCom Members of Parliament and staff of the African Parliamentarians Forum on Population and Development (FPA). They include: 1. Hon. Dr Abdul-Rashid Hassan Pelpuo, President of FPA and Member of Parliament from Ghana;2. Senator Fredrick Outa, Vice President of FPA and Kenyan Senator;3. Hon. Pemela Majodina, Member of FPA and Chief Whip, African National Congress, Parliament of South Africa;4. Hon. Elsie Pokossy, Member of FPA and Member of Parliament, Cameroon;5. Hon. Sebastian Simon Kapufi, Member of FPA and Member of Parliament, Tanzania;6. Hon. Sylvia Muthethwa, Member of FPA and Member of Parliament, Eswatini;7. Hon. Mahur Babur Ajal, Member of FPA and Member of Parliament, South Sudan;8. Hon. Elvis Donkoh, Member of FPA and Member of Parliament, Ghana;9. Dr Farrukh Usuminav, Executive Director, Asian Population and Development Association, Japan;10. Ms Irina Malkmus, General Manager Ruma Consulting; and11. Ms Sandra Awuah, Assistant Clerk, Parliament of Ghana.This has successfully been coordinated by our brother, Hon. Anthony Akol. In welcoming them, I also add Hon. John Faith Magolo and my very own, Hon. Juliet Bashiisha, the one I vote for. (Applause)  In my interaction with them, I assured them that they have managed to overcome the first step in going to Heaven. When you visit Uganda, the foundation for going to Heaven is laid. (Laughter)  The rest do come later. We welcome you, honourable colleagues. Uganda is the Pearl of Africa and we are always happy to see colleagues from other parliaments coming here. (Applause)Hon. Patience Nkunda -[Dr Bwanika]11571THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 20242.30MS PATIENCE NKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on matters of public importance as per Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I bring to this House two matters of national importance. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I will allow one matter, honourable member. MS NKUNDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter relates to the perennial challenge of communities within the proximity of national parks. A big part of my constituency can be categorised as such. Mr Speaker, a gentleman by the name Monday Mashulube, now deceased, was killed in January 2023 from Kameme Cell in Kihiihi Subcounty by an elephant from Queen Elizabeth National Park.  The Government promised to compensate the family of the deceased but to-date, nothing has been done. In the same vein, a lady by the name Gauda Tumushabe from Kankatara Cell in Kihiihi Subcounty was brutally attacked by a buffalo. This has been lying in excruciating pain because she cannot afford medical expenses. Mr Speaker, in November 2023, elephants attacked farmers from Kihiihi Subcounty attending to their gardens at night. This left them seriously injured. Those details were submitted to Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) but to-date no further action has been taken.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers? MS NKUNDA:  My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that Government informs this House and the affected families as to when the compensation to the deceased family will be processed, electric fence will be done as promised, urgent medical treatment extended to Mrs Gauda Tumushabe and the food relief extended to these affected families. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Hon. Migadde, you have a related issue. We can, then, a response at once. 2.32MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, it is related in form of substance but in a different area. On 23 January 2024, a nine-year-old Ephra Namwera was killed by a hippopotamus. This was the fifth victim in a period of two months at Mpondwe Village, Lufu Parish in Buvuma. Mr Speaker, we have raised such cases a number of times. Our prayers have always been that; 1. UWA should camp in the area to hunt down or trap some of these hippopotamuses. 2. UWA should take care of some of these victims because last time, people tried to take responsibility – they killed a crocodile – and UWA, instead, arrested the residents who killed the crocodile. This means the crocodile was more important than the locals. –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prayers, honourable member? MR MIGADDE:  Mr Speaker, my prayer is that UWA should send their team to this area to hunt down and trap some of these hippopotamuses.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable Government Chief Whip, I do not see the Minister for Tourism here.  2.34THE CHIEF GOVERNMENT WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government, I condole with the families that have lost their dear ones and pray that those who were injured get a quick recovery. Mr Speaker, one of the prayers is for compensation and I believe that compensation is provided for under the law. In the absence of the Minister in charge of Tourism, I undertake 11572THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023to communicate this matter to the attention of the   minister for action to be taken. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   Thank you, Hon. Anthony Akol? MR AKOL:  Mr Speaker, you were available in the 10th Parliament. I remember very well that we did some amendments that gave compensation. Unfortunately, up to now, the ministry will tell you that they have not operationalised the law. There are committees that were supposed to be set, according to the law, at subcounty and district level to do assessment and report to them, but nothing has been done up to now. A similar case of wildlife-human conflict has happened in Nwoya, Amuru and Kitgum districts. They were all reported here but no compensation has been done up to now. Is it not procedurally right for you to make sure that they operationalise the law first? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. The Chairperson, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, is there any update you can give us with regard to that issue? You can use the front microphone. I have promoted you for now. (Laughter)2.36THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government earmarked Shs 500 million for compensation and they had started hearing the cases. The unfortunate part is that there were delays. However, we believe they have already started the process of hearing the cases and the compensation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I do not want to put my chairperson to task; he is not a minister to start clarifying issues. Honourable colleagues, I think it is better that we call the minister here and he comes to update us on the compensation issue. All I know, Hon. Anthony Akol, is that the law is already operationalised. In my constituency, the minister came and assessed; the committees are there. However, the biggest problems, one, even the forms – the people affected by these conflicts are mainly local poor people. However, the kind of form they give is for a PhD holder to manage. It is very complicated. People were not understanding. They said: “Now, I, again, have to go and hire someone to fill in this form for me.” ( Laughter)  So, I talked to the minister, saying: “Please, try to simplify it. Number two is the issue of money. If we follow the law and look at the threshold – the percentage we said should be going for compensation versus the complaints, it is about 15 per cent. However, let the minister bring the statement on the issue of compensation of victims. Regulations were brought. Honourable colleagues, you need to check very well; they were laid here by Hon. Maj. Butime and we even had a long discussion about them and had the matter solved.Point of procedure?MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In instances where we have matters of national importance and most of these ministers who are supposed to give answers are not there and the Government Chief Whip takes it up and say “I will convey”, Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right – since we register these issues in office before – that you establish a desk in your office so that in situations where such cases come, somebody takes this up, calls these respective ministers and says: “You have an issue on the Floor. Kindly, make sure that you are there.” This is so that by the time we come to raise – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is what I do. However, you see, honourable colleagues, I was the Government Chief Whip; I know what he goes through. Do you get it? Hon. Katumba Wamala has clearly said he sent them to the ministry. That is why I usually encourage you. We wanted to stop this business of ambushing COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Obua]11573THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024ministers here so that you bring issues early, we inform the Chief Whip and he links up with the ministers, and then you get answers, even after consultation with the technical people; but they do not come. I do not want to be among those ones who say, “Government Chief Whip, go and bring ministers here.” He cannot. I occupied that office, I know how difficult it is. (Laughter)  It is about discipline and people knowing that they have a duty. It is that. Hon. Nakut Faith -2.40MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, the matter of urgent importance I wish to raise is about health care. On Monday this week, we buried a lady in Napak. She was called Nadiye Sarah. She was going to have her first baby but she died.  She was normal; she died and left a one-week-old baby.  Nadiye Sarah is the 12th woman we have counted; an elite woman who walked to Moroto Regional Referral Hospital and died. We do not count the other illiterate women because we do not know them, who are 80 per cent of the population in Karamoja. That makes me worried about the number of women dying while giving birth. There are many questions our people are raising, which are not being answered. As I speak, the population in Karamoja is planning a protest and they have put us, the leaders, on notice because of the number of mothers dying while giving birth.  My prayers: one, the Ministry of Health should review what is killing mothers in Moroto Regional Referral Hospital with the possibility of addressing it with a deeper concern. Particularly, a report on what killed Nadiye Sarah is being waited for because people want that answer.  Secondly, Moroto Regional Referral Hospital and other regional referral hospitals in the country should be equipped with functional ICUs. There is an ICU in Moroto but it is not functional. When there was a complication in theatre, she was rushed to Mulago. By the time she arrived in Mulago, she died. If there had been a functional ICU in this referral hospital, perhaps her life could have been saved.  Number three, the Ministry of Health should deploy specialist’s anaesthetists who will supervise that function in every regional referral hospital in the country.  We have a few regional referral hospitals. It is affordable for the ministry to do that.  Four, because a life has been lost under circumstances, which are careless and the family is depressed, the Government should compensate that life.  2.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Anifa Kawooya):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do condole with the family and I take much consideration and pain into what my daughter, Nakut Faith, has raised on the Floor of this House. Mothers dying during labour in Moroto or in the country as a whole is not just an issue that can be said that the Ministry of Health is not doing anything about it. We all know and are aware that the rate at which mothers are dying is growing countrywide. It is not only growing because of negligence by the Minister of Health. At times, these mothers report late to the facilities. At other times, there are other complications that are beyond our health workers. In this case, indeed, they tried their best to refer this mother. It is very unfortunate but as a ministry, we are trying all the best we can. When it comes to ICU equipment not being functional, it is true, but still, our issue is insufficient funding. As a ministry, we are looking into all of these; have more ICUs at our regional referral centres.  The matter of deployment of specialists has been on the Floor of this House. The ones we 11574THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023have say that they are not well-facilitated.  Those that are there, are very limited, but the ministry is trying its best. I take care – (Interjections) – but let me finish this; I will accept that. I will take information from my husband then I will come to you – (Interjections)  I withdraw that. I take information from the Hon. Sseggona.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You people are you annoyed seeing cross-pollination on the Floor? (Laughter)  An honourable husband.MS KAWOOYA:  Mr Speaker, I do not know of any rule since I have been here that does not allow a husband and wife to be Members of Parliament here. (Laughter)  I have been here for some time. I respect that because I have been here. I refer to him as my honourable husband -  Hon. Sseggona. I am saying I do take consideration – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Colleagues, please, I need order in the House. I can see the reaction of Hon. Sseggona to the news.  I do not know why some of us are complaining because he is the happiest. (Laughter) Let me guide the House. Honourable colleagues, when you stand up twice and I do not pick you or when you say “order” or “procedure” twice and I do not pick you, it is a polite way of declining. You do not continue saying, “order, order, order”. No, there you are disorganising the House.So, please, will you allow your honourable husband? Continue.MS KAWOOYA:  Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I am saying that as a ministry, we are going to look into these prayers and follow up on the case. I do not know why Hon. Namugga, my daughter, who is of the clan of Hon. Sseggona and my husband, Kawooya, is taking offense. I thank you and I allow the clarification.  MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA:  Mr Speaker, you will now agree with me that the Opposition is active and therefore, we are poaching very well from the Government on your right. I really feel for the Ministry of Health. However, as the minister was speaking, before the fondness of the husband came in, I was concerned when she said that mothers report late to the facilities. I have visited a number of health facilities in my constituency but you find the ambulance provided in the subcounty is a “ tuk-tuk .” Coupled with the troubles of our road network, I would like to seek clarification from the minister, how they expect mothers to be delivered in time with that kind of ambulance.  It is a matter of concern and it touches all of us because when you talk about these mothers, they are our wives. Not only that, these are the people that guarantee transmission of life from one generation to another. We must find a way and a decent way of availing maternal health facilities to our mothers.  The clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is: how do you expect fast and timely delivery of these mothers when you do not have ambulance service? I will give you an example; the constituency I represent covers a significant portion of the surroundings of Kampala City. In Wakiso Health Centre IV , the only one we have, there is no ambulance. In Kyengera Town Council, which is heavily populated, there is no ambulance and I am talking about a constituency that crosses from Entebbe Road – (Interjections) - before I am interrupted by the minister called Bright; I will not examine the truth in the name - up to Kakiri, there is no ambulance service. So, how do you expect mothers to get to hospitals in time? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister - procedure Hon. Silas Aogon?MR AOGON:  I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good that Members here realise that the Rules of Procedure are serious rules and they must be respected. When a Member rises on a point of procedure, it is very important. My concern is about the address that we are making in this House, referring to other colleagues as husband and wife. Yesterday, you expunged a statement on the  Hansard . COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Kawooya]11575THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024Mr Speaker, this Hansard  will be reviewed by several people well after we have gone. I thought it would be very important for us to think about it. Wouldn’t it be procedurally proper that we request for this particular statement to be expunged from the Hansard ? This is because it has a lot of connotations out there. Much as we know it is a light moment, when you go to both sides there, what does your husband or wife say? How are the children viewing it? What about the general public? What about those who do not know the background? It is all very important because we should not maintain a bad record. It was not a bad intention, I understand. However, Mr Speaker, I beg for your guidance. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, when in a debate, anywhere, we have light moments. The language that is not allowed is abusive, derogatory language and Hon. Kawooya clearly mentioned at the end, that the husband is from the same clan. Okay? Hon. Namugga is – please! Someone has a husband and knows their clan. I will just listen to people who are saying “you are coming from my clan.” Okay? I do not want to go into it - light moments are everywhere. Just go read the Hansard  from the British Parliament which we copied - everywhere. It is not an offensive matter. Please. There is another procedural matter. Hon. Enosi. MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For the last three years that I have been in this Parliament, I have been following the health ministers. All the challenges we have in the health sector have a lot to do with facilitation and funding. The ministers have been promising us to bring the Health Insurance Bill, which is one way we can raise funds to deal with the challenges we have in the sector. However, it is three years down the road and we have not seen the Bill. Can the honourable minister guide us? When do we expect to have this Bill so that we deal with the health sector challenges once and for all? Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I shared with Hon. Nakut on this matter and some of the information, honourable minister, which was disturbing was that the doctors were not on ground. It is the interns who were in. This is a matter you need to investigate deeply. Send your technical team and try to dig deep so that people can see that, indeed, you are taking this matter more seriously. MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said, as a ministry, we are very concerned and I do promise that we are going to investigate this issue, and other issues, which may come up. I am going to engage the honourable member so that we get more and we will definitely report back. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not need to report back here. Ensure you engage the community. I do not want to clog the Order Paper. MS KAWOOYA: Thank you. As she said, she is already waiting for the report. Mr Speaker, I will start from what Hon. Asiimwe said about the Health Insurance Bill. As you are aware, consultation is ongoing and very soon, I am sure as a ministry, we shall come and update you on how far we have reached. Three quarters of the Health Insurance Bill have so far been covered. On the ambulances, Mr Speaker, I vividly remember I was in this Parliament when many Members raised issues that ambulances were purchased by the Ministry of Health, and most Members were complaining that they did not get ambulances. No single day have I been in this Parliament and heard that a “ tuk-tuk”  was purchased by the Government through the Ministry of Health. For the time I have been in the Ministry of Health, I have not heard of a “tuk- tuk .” I know that even during the Non-Aligned Movement meeting, all the ambulances that were given out to the districts were recalled and have just been returned to their respective districts. 11576THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023We said that the purchasing of ambulances is on-going depending on the funds we shall get. However, I will investigate the same issue raised by Hon. Sseggona and find out about the “ tuk-tuk.”  Even in his constituency, I am aware that at least there are some ambulances that we are given but we shall look into that and investigate. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Timuzigu.2.56MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning lack of mineral information in Ntungamo District, where a number of minerals have been discovered, and lately, lithium, which is causing a lot of challenges. At the moment, people do not know how they should give out their land, either through a lease or selling it. They do not know how to deal with investors. At the moment, investors come and buy land the way they want and people do not know how much they are supposed to charge because they do not know whether they are leasing or selling their land. Secondly, these investors do not go through the district administration and political structures. They go directly to the local councils and therefore, the guidance the residents would get is not simple to attain. Another issue is that the guardian at the moment who is working in Kajara County, who is guiding investors, is Hon. Muruli Mukasa, who is a minister.  Therefore, the local government leadership cannot confront the minister when they find challenges with the investors. My prayers. (Interjections) Prayer number one; the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should give mineral information to the people of Ntungamo District and the entire country, because most of the people do not even know how those minerals look like, and they do not know how they are supposed to deal with investors when they come to acquire land.Furthermore, the minister who is down in Ntungamo, guiding our investors should create a situation where people can get information. Liaise with the minister in charge of minerals so that people can get all the required information and develop minerals without confronting citizens in a bad way. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This requires a very structured answer. Government Chief Whip, how much time do you think you can be able to co-ordinate with the minister to have a statement? 2.59THE CHIEF GOVERNMENT WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Mr Speaker, in the absence of the Minister in charge of Minerals, we are not competent enough to declare to the country that we have discovered some minerals in Ntungamo. I would pray in the circumstances, that time be given probably next week for the minister to come and update the House on this alleged discovery of minerals in Ntungamo District.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would need it on Wednesday but now, the focus is on the process.  How do you sensitise the community to know you have precious minerals here because sometimes, he is saying, “When people in the ministry know there are minerals here, then their people go and buy the land, take over it, and then they come and reap big when locals got peanuts out of their land. Therefore, this should not be only about Ntungamo but generally countrywide. I was in Buhweju with the Committee on Natural Resources; gold miners told us, “I have never seen gold” yet I am the one mining it.” They said these guys have processes in the way they do it. “Personally, I have never seen how gold looks like, despite spending over 20 years mining gold in my own land and selling.” There is a lot of cheating going on; public sensitisation needs to be brought.MR LUBEGA-SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, something has been mentioned of our COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Kawooya]11577THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024honourable colleague, the Minister, Hon. Muruli Mukasa and I find it very strong that a minister’s name has been placed on the Hansard  as having left the Ministry of Public Service - and gone down to guide investors. It raises very serious ethical issues. I am imploring you to guide whether it is not procedurally right that you call the minister himself to come here and clarify whether he is still our minister or he is a broker for investors. How a minister leaves Kampala to go to Ntungamo and guide investors, we want to know whether it is another Public Service job that would raise issues of conflict of interest.Secondly, that we are looking for him in Kampala as a Minister, he is in Ntungamo, or he is there as an investor. We need to have that clarified on the Hansard . It is very serious. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, the statement from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development - when we extract what the ministers are supposed to respond to, all these issues are covered. He said so and so is the one welcoming investors. Did you give him that duty? All these are covered. I expected the statement from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to address all those issues. Then when Hon. Muruli Mukasa feels that he has been mentioned and allegations made against him unfairly, then we apply rule 55. He can invoke rule 55 to bring a statement of personal explanation on the matter and we make the record straight.  Honourable Attorney General, is there anything in addition to that?3.03THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you,  Mr Speaker. I just wanted to add something to what you just said. I want to use the word “complaint.” The complaint as stated by Hon. Michael Timuzigu is that people buy land, he presumes that these people already know that your land has minerals, which they may not have known at the time they buy this land. You all know that land is a commercial commodity, and land belongs to the people. People sell as and when they want. Whoever sells the land and whoever buys it are not under obligation to disclose whether the land has minerals or not. What should happen is that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should do  proper mapping of areas that have minerals so that people know that I am seated on a piece of land that is mineral-rich. If I decide to sell, then I will think otherwise. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Attorney-General, you have put it very clearly. Disclosure - If you are a ministry and you know you have mapped and there are prospective minerals within this same area, inform the community. Honourable colleagues, let us handle this when the statement comes; we shall engage the minister from here. Yes Hon. Namugga, Procedure -MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I should thank you for always taking good welfare of the Members of Parliament and ensuring that we carry on our mandate. You may assume that this House is very normal today but I want to inform you that there is something that has happened to your honourable Members of Parliament. Honourable colleagues, we left this place today with the Office of the Leader of Opposition at 10.00 a.m. We went to the field for an inspection of the roads. We were given vehicles from Parliament to go to the field. Unfortunately, as we were in the field, we were informed that Parliament has withdrawn its vehicles, security and everything. The vehicles had to leave immediately with all our bags, with all our belongings. The vehicles left immediately. As I am here, Mr Speaker, I do not know where my bag is. My colleagues do not know where their properties are. Mr Speaker, in life, I have never seen this for the two and a half years I have been in this Parliament. I beg for your indulgence. It is very abnormal, this is about your Members of 11578THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Parliament. I do not know where my bag is. I may assume that it was confiscated by the person, I do not know, but these were your vehicles, vehicles of Parliament. I need an explanation from whoever is concerned of when this habit started; how the property of a Member of Parliament can be withdrawn even without informing a colleague. Mr Speaker, how can this happen? I want to know where my bag is. I need to know where my bag is. Thank you. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues. Order. Administrative issues are handled administratively. When the Leader of Opposition has an issue that is administrative in nature, he calls me. I have not received a single call. I have been in office. I have not been notified by anyone of what happened. Therefore, when a Clerk calls you on such a matter, then you should call the Speaker and say, “but Mr Speaker or Madam Speaker, this has happened. Have you sanctioned it? Is it right?” Secondly, I would need to hear from the Clerk. I want to know, did we follow the right procedure for getting Parliament vehicles? I have observed on many occasions when we work with the drivers and we have Parliament vehicles. I am not saying that, that is what has been done. Just get me clear, but there is a procedure. So, I will ask the Clerk if the right procedure for allocating a vehicle to an office to go and do work was followed, then what was the problem? Why did you have to recall the vehicles? Then I listen to the Clerk. However, please, these are not issues of Plenary. I want to inform you of this, these are administrative issues. Plenary does not manage how vehicles in Parliament are deployed or how they are withdrawn. I want to be clear on that - No, please. If it is about Members, you reach out to your Speaker; that is why you voted for me. No one reached out to me. You do not wait for me on the Floor of Parliament and you want it to be a national matter, you start raising it here. That is wrong. I have a way of communicating with the Office of the Leader of the Opposition. The Office of the Leader of the Opposition has a Director and staff employed by Parliament. It is not LOP who arranges vehicles but those staff are the ones who should answer. I will go back, now that I have got the matter, I will ask the Clerk and the Director Office of the Leader of the Opposition, what happened. I urge you, honourable colleagues, matters, which are internal to Parliament – if I fail to handle, you can come here and raise them.3.09MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are within the East African Community and as the East African community (EAC), we pride ourselves in the free movement of goods, services and labour.We are aware that in the early years, we used to have a lot of smuggling before the EAC arrangement came on board. After the EAC arrangement, we expect people to be able to move freely within the borders, but of course, within the law.There has been increased high-handedness, increased harassment of our people in Tororo Districts by the Uganda Revenue Authority, resulting into death of some of the people. We just buried a young man early this year, as a result of URA chasing him.The late was called Simon Peter, a 44-year old man who had five young children. The late was carrying a carton of baking flour from Kenya. Just a carton and yet we say that goods that are supposed to be taxed –(Interjection)-  yes, people who move - cross border – there is a threshold, I think it is Shs 1 million. For as long as the items are below that amount of money, somebody is allowed to freely move but URA has been so rough on the people and when I asked why people cannot stop -(Interruption)  MR MACHO:  Mr Speaker, what my sister, Hon. Opendi, is saying is very true. Our grandfathers used to go to Kenya to a market called Chepkube. Chepkube was a market COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Ms Namugga]11579THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024where Ugandans used to go with one fish and they come back with one loaf of bread called Tip Top. That is why you find some of us have mothers who come from Kenya, but with fathers from Uganda. However, these people who have been employed in the name of URA anti-smuggling have forgotten that those are colonial borders that were put there by colonialists. It is always by nature that people who are born in the border do cross-border trade, there is no smuggling at all. Even Kenyans come here and buy fish and we also go there and buy Tip Top bread. Therefore, Hon. Opendi is very right but the harassment of our people at the border must stop. The fact that we have cows that come to graze in Uganda and go back to Kenya, what would we call that? You are very right. They should stop harassing our people. That is not smuggling but cross-border trade. (Laughter)MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Hon. Macho, for the information. Mr Speaker, you are aware that we have been struggling on the issue of the small gate in Malaba, wanting it to be opened. It was closed but it is partially opened. The reason for that small gate is to allow these people who are moving with small goods that do not require passing through Customs to pass. However, the point that I am raising is on the continued harassment of the people who are moving with small items looking for survival and these items are not taxable. I urge the Minister of Finance who supervises URA to prevail on them to stop harassing people who are moving with goods that are below the threshold so that they can be able to live. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Opendi. Honourable colleagues, there are two things. Of course, to begin with, the unfortunate losing of life under whatever means is extremely unfortunate and our condolences.The most important aspect I picked is the high-handedness, on how you handle a matter but again, I want us to be very careful because smuggling is an offense and it is a matter of the law. However, what I have observed is how the information is shared and how the public is engaged. So, I request the Minister of Trade to work with the Minister of Finance together with URA to meet Members of Parliament from border areas.There are cases, which have been coming from West Nile. The ones of West Nile have been really – Hon. Afidra was in my office the other day. Hon. Feta also came over the same issue and nearly all MPs from West Nile have come to my office over these issues.The issue of high-handedness is the main problem but it should be on record that Parliament cannot encourage smuggling. I do not know the threshold; which Hon. Macho is talking about of Tip Top bread. There is that issue of the small gate. Hon. Bahati, please, interest yourself in that issue. You will get details of the small gate. Someone has a key to the small gate. Please, follow up and ensure we do it by next week. These are not issues we need to come back here on. Engage these MPs so that they can have what to tell their people.3.16MR MEDARD LUBEGA-SSEGGONA  (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek your guidance. Earlier on, I wanted to raise this matter with you, but I found you had guests whose conversation I did not want to listen to, even when they were here in Parliament. At the end of last year, you remember you broke discussions that led us into an agreement to refer the matter of kidnaps and abductions to a joint operation of two committees of Parliament, and another one referred to the Human Rights Commission. As we were waiting for those two committees to kick-start the processes as assigned, kidnaps have come back. Just five days ago, one of my councillors in Kyengera was kidnapped. I have been struggling with the family and the local leadership to ensure we have peace. We do not have these demonstrations, which would lead to other deaths. I have been engaging the Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI), specifically speaking with the Deputy Director COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11580THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023of CMI, because we were informed that the drone that picked this councilor called Martin Owen Muwanga, was a drone operated by CMI, this time covered with a police patrol.Now, we are dealing with a family who are coming to us saying, “please, support us because the gentleman who was the breadwinner is missing.” Is there no way we can stop this vice? I did not want to say this when we had guests. At least, I am that disciplined. I am not like the kidnappers. Can’t we find a way of stopping these kidnaps? Secondly, what is difficult about the NRM Government treating people they suspect to have committed a crime in accordance with the law? Thirdly, where do you get the moral authority to enforce the law or claim to enforce the law, if you cannot abide by the Constitution? It is unfortunate that the ministers responsible are not here. However, I seek your guidance on how we can move from here, especially in light of the fact that the committees we assigned work have not started. I perfectly understand that we have had an explosive budget period. May we be guided on when these processes are going to start - because citizens are suffocating? I beg to be guided.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is very unfortunate, honourable and I really feel for you on this matter. I need to make consultations in terms of the committees, how they can come quickly to start the work. Most of the questions you have asked are the ones we wanted the committee to tackle. After the session, you and I are going to meet and see how best we can work together.As we said, as leaders, we always work together on following up these cases. We do what is immediate as we embark on ensuring that the committees start work as we agreed. Immediately after this Plenary, I am going to meet with you. Honourable colleagues, I have some matters – I know I have them here – but they were of structured answers. Okay? They were not urgent and they have entered into my time. Hon. Okot, I know your matter and I will give you time. MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSI: ON THE OUTBREAK OF FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE (FMD) IN THE CATTLE CORRIDOR AND THE RESULTANT QUARANTINE3.19THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to explain to Parliament and to the country, the status of our efforts in controlling the Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) and our ultimate objective of eradicating it.Mr Speaker, I am responding to the issues raised in this House at the Second Sitting of the Third Meeting of the Third Session of the 11th Parliament on Thursday, 25 April, 2024, regarding FMD.Mr Speaker, you specifically directed me to present a comprehensive statement in response to the following issues:(i) How long the affected districts have been under quarantine and how long it is anticipated to take.(ii) The Government’s position on availing the vaccines to farmers.(iii) Government to present the short and long-term measures to manage the economic effects of the outbreak in the affected districts.(iv) How the disease spreads to various districts, yet there are measures put in place?(v) The support needed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal  Industry and Fisheries from the different stakeholders.MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Lubega-Sseggona]11581THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024IntroductionMr Speaker, FMD is a highly contagious viral disease that affects all cloven-hoofed (two hoofed) animals. These include cattle, goats, sheep, pigs and wild animals such as buffaloes, deers and antelopes. The disease spreads very fast, through close contact between infected and non-infected animals. The disease is transmitted through aerosols (fluid droplets) breathed out by infected animals and contact with affected surfaces. The aerosols can be transported by wind to far areas. The affected animals get wounds in the mouth, feet and teats in female animals.FMD is the most dreaded disease in international trade of animals and animal products. Countries that have eradicated the disease do not allow trade with affected countries, or those that control the disease by vaccination. The disease causes significant economic losses to the farmers and to the country due to disruption in animal production, productivity and in trade of animal and animal products. Scientists and economists have estimated the economic cost of FMD to a farmer per unit livestock to be $20 per infection. The cost can be higher with repeated infections. Our target, therefore, as Government, is to not only control the disease but eradicate it.Mr Speaker, the ideal situation that enables any livestock producing country to fully control and eradicate FMD requires the following interventions:i) Undertaking a bi-annual compulsory vaccination exercise of the entire susceptible animal herd in the country (all two hoofed animals; cattle, sheep, goats and pigs). For purposes of universal coverage, compliance and bio-security considerations (since vaccines are live organisms), governments normally offer the vaccines as a public good. This, however, varies from country to country, depending on the number of animals and the budget implications for buying the vaccines recurrently.ii) Another control and eradication approach is the “test and slaughter” followed by safe disposal of the carcasses (burning and/or burying). When the veterinary authorities confirm the outbreak, they determine the affected animals and those at risk for destruction. This, however, is followed with compensation by the government, which is a very expensive practice. This is the practice in developed livestock-producing countries like the United Kingdom, among others. You kill or destroy, but compensate the farmer.iii) In addition to the above, movement control restrictions (quarantine) are always imposed either in part or as a whole in the affected geographical location depending on the epidemiological assessment by the competent authorities. The competent authorities, Mr Speaker, are veterinary authorities. These animal movement restrictions, however, are temporary measures to disrupt transmission but their duration depends on the discipline and compliance of the different stakeholders (farmers, traders, processors and enforcement agencies) and also on the country’s ability to implement interventions (i) and (ii) above.Current situation in the countryMr Speaker, there are 36 districts currently affected and under quarantine. These are; Budaka, Bukedea, Bukomansimbi, Bunyangabu, Butaleja, Fort Portal City, Gomba, Ibanda, Isingiro, Kabarole, Kassanda, Kayunga, Kazo, Kiboga, Kibuku, Kiruhura, Kumi, Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, Kyotera, Luuka, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Mbarara, Mbarara City, Mityana, Mpigi, Mubende, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Namisindwa, Ngora, Ntungamo, Rakai, Rwampara and Ssembabule. All districts neighbouring the aforementioned districts are at high risk, under strict surveillance and the authorities are advised to remain vigilant. These include; Apac, Amolatar, Bugiri, Bushenyi, Butaleja, Hoima, Iganga, Jinja, Kabale, Kaberamaido, Kaliro, Kamuli, 11582THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Kamwenge, Katakwi, Kasese, Kibaale, Kiboga, Kyenjojo, Mbale, Masindi, Mayuge, Mukono, Namalemba, Nakapiripirit – I am trying to remember Namalemba; my apologies – Pallisa, Rukungiri, Sironko, Wakiso and Soroti.Policy and control measures in placeOur policy on FMD is for the Government to avail vaccines to farmers as a public good for reasons explained earlier. For many years, I think since during colonial times, the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been providing a budget item for procuring vaccines. This, however, has been insufficient and only covers 1.1 Per cent of the susceptible domestic animal population, contrary to the recommended at-least 80 per cent coverage, leaving the rest of the herd vulnerable. This explains why the country experiences repeated outbreaks. Although the Animal Diseases Act, CAP. 38, empowers the Commissioner of Animal Health to order for the destruction of affected animals under the “test and slaughter” approach, the country cannot afford to implement this provision of the law due to high compensation budget requirements.Mr Speaker, with the budget limitations alluded to above, our ministry adopted the ring vaccination methodology, targeting the locations with animals at high risk.When we buy a few vaccines annually, the budget we get gives us, on average, half a million doses. We distribute them to district veterinary officers of the most prone districts and those with outbreaks to carry out ring vaccination around the infected herds or kraals. We also institute quarantine and other measures in the affected and susceptible districts to prevent spread or disrupt transmission. Mr Speaker, our total susceptible animal herd that requires FMD vaccination, as per current estimates, is 44 million cattle, sheep, goats and pigs. This, therefore, requires an annual vaccine stock of 88 million doses for the bi-annual vaccination requirement at a cost of $2 per dose. The financial implication for this translates into $ 176 million. The Government has been studying this financial implication and notes the financial stress it would impose on the national Budget, if the requirement for the bi-annual mass vaccination is to be achieved. Accordingly, and with the guidance of the President, a Cabinet Paper is scheduled for discussion at the next Cabinet sitting on Monday, 5 February 2024 to consider a number of policy options, including cost-sharing by the farmer, since the cost per dose is affordable by most livestock farmers. I will revert to this House and the country on the final position adopted by Cabinet. In the meantime, my ministry has repurposed some of the budget you gave us, under the development budget, and managed to avail 2.56 million doses to the country through the district veterinary officers of 94 districts last year. The list is attached to this brief. It shows which district veterinary officers took what. Under the same arrangement, we have ordered for 2.3 million doses, expected in a few months to come.Mr Speaker, another challenge associated with procuring FMD vaccines is that they cannot be bought off-shelf, since they are biological; live organisms with a short shelf life. You order and they manufacture for you. This explains the delay in their supply chain. In the circumstances, it becomes inevitable for the Commissioner of Animal Health, who is the commander of the animal disease control chain in the country, to order or impose animal movement restrictions or what you know as quarantine in affected districts. Quarantines are unpopular and an inconvenience to people’s livelihoods yet again, inevitable as temporary measures to control further spread to alarming and uncontrollable epidemic levels. We can lose the whole herd, if we do not become strict.If the stakeholders can be disciplined and comply with the quarantine protocols, the MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Tumwebaze]11583THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024disease will resolve or be contained in a very short time, as we also wait for the vaccines. This has been achieved in the past.Mr Speaker, we are also working with our neighbours in Tanzania to collaborate in the fight against FMD, since it is a trans-boundary disease. The collaboration focuses on areas of synchronisation of vaccination calendars, as well as coordination between our veterinary authorities in the clearance of animal movement and disease surveillance across the border.In summary, the following measures are being undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and we call upon all the stakeholders to strictly observe them and we shall eventually win: 1. Vaccination - ring vaccination around the affected areas with the vaccine stock, as I have explained. What is given and what is coming; 2. Animal movement control – there are checkpoints;3. Closure of livestock markets. Honourable colleagues, the market is where the spread of disease starts because you bring your cow, it is not bought and goes back with the disease; and 4. Institution of quarantine measures. Mr Speaker, as earlier stated, our goal is to completely eradicate FMD. The policy measures that Cabinet is yet to discuss and approve next week will ensure that adequate vaccine stocks are available in the country in time for the farmers to access. Vaccination will also be compulsory. Proof of vaccination for every eligible animal will be a precondition for animal movement and market access for animal and animal products. On this, I seek your support in enabling us to achieve this goal of eradicating FMD from Uganda.Responses to specific questions raised in the last sitting and by your directive, Mr Speaker, one, how long have the affected districts been under quarantine and how long is it anticipated to take? Districts have been placed under quarantine restriction at different times as the disease appears, depending on when the outbreak occurred and area affected and at risk, provided with vaccines to undertake ring vaccinations against FMD, monitored by laboratory testing for FMD clearing, then quarantine restrictions lifted. This also depends on the compliance of the district officials and stakeholders. Some break quarantine deliberately and we have some districts. I am not mentioning them for now, but we will, if need arises.When the ministry noticed an escalation of FMD outbreak due to farmers and traders moving infected animals to nearby open markets and spreading FMD, a decision was made to institute full quarantine restrictions in all the affected districts and extend the restrictions of the districts that already had restrictions. It is this action that has led to 36 districts being under full quarantine restrictions. It is planned that quarantine restrictions stay in place till the country receives FMD vaccine, distribution and vaccinations are done together with laboratory testing, and then quarantine restrictions will be lifted. This will ensure that the animals are protected, FMD will be controlled and prospects of animals, and animal products trade will be realised. However, with continued surveillance, the quarantine can be lifted earlier, depending on how quickly the disease is contained in an area. Safe trade arrangements in areas not affected by the disease are also being discussed between veterinary officials and district authorities. Honourable colleagues know how this can be done; arranging what they call “ ebipakiriro ” where you gather the cows for loading to final destination markets and not return markets.i. Government’s position on availing the vaccine to farmers. As explained above, in the next one or two months, we expect to receive and dispatch 2.3 million doses of the vaccine to these affected and susceptible districts for ring vaccination scale-up because it was started last year. I will 11584THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023again brief Parliament, perhaps in the next one month on the new policy positions Cabinet will have taken on the matter.Relatedly, Mr Speaker, allow me to also inform you that the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) has started the process of formulating and developing our own FMD vaccine. The scientists have so far formulated two monovalent - a combination of two serotypes of FMD virus - FMD candidate vaccines and they are due for evaluation and further scrutiny by the country’s regulatory bodies, National Drug Authority and Uganda National Council for Science and Technology. When the evaluation of the candidate vaccines comes out successful, NARO will be authorised to carry out trials for determination of efficacy and safety. If this level is also successful, the Government will further support NARO to produce for mass rollout, as is happening with the anti-tick vaccine. We are for a mass roll-out for this one – (Interjection) - we do not do COVID-19 vaccine, Mr Speaker. Someone is mentioning COVID-19; this is not for NARO.ii. Government to present the short and long-term measures to manage economic effects for the outbreak in the affected districts.In the short term, the Government will prioritise availability of vaccines, as explained. We are also prioritising these FMD-prone districts for increased development of water for production facilities because the more animals move in search for water and pasture, the more they spread and become vulnerable. We shall also increase the availability of farm mechanisation equipment for affordable animal feed production to encourage intensive farming and reduce extensive animal roaming that facilitates disease spread. As a long-term measure, vaccine production is being prioritised at NARO. In this regard, I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for visiting NARO with Members of Parliament, and for your pledge to support their research funding gaps. How did the disease spread to various districts yet there are measures put in place? Mr Speaker and colleagues, while the competent authority in MAAIF has put in place these disease control measures, there is a lack of cooperation and compliance amongst stakeholders in some districts. Quite often, there is a clash and sometimes connivance between the local political leaders, enforcement personnel, and veterinary officials to flout these measures. They want markets to go on for revenue purposes yet this facilitates disease transmission. This is how and why the disease further spreads, which makes the quarantine duration inevitably to get prolonged. What support does the MAAIF need from the stakeholders? Mr Speaker, the most sustainable solution is the ideal approach explained above, of routine, biannual, compulsory FMD vaccination for all susceptible animals. In the meantime, as we process the proposed policy measures through Cabinet, we seek support for a supplementary budget - we have a meeting with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, at 4.00p.m. - if you allow me to go - to see the possibility of procuring 10 million doses. Again, we have never gotten any - to cover all the affected and high-risk districts and also support and equip District Veterinary Officials with the disease surveillance tools and resources (motorcycles, facilitation and more personnel) and enabling infrastructure like cold rooms for vaccines because if we get more doses, they require safe storage. ConclusionMr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to appeal to honourable colleagues and fellow farmers to appreciate and support these measures, and bear with the Government as we fight to control and the eradication of FMD. I further appeal to the district veterinary authorities to ensure strict disease surveillance, timely reporting, and ensure transparency and MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Tumwebaze]11585THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024accountability in the demonstration of the Government-provided vaccines. I further appeal to fellow political leaders, especially those in the district local governments, to respect and support the disease control chain of command with veterinary scientists in the lead. Let them lead and we support them. I thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues, for listening to me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. No, colleagues, at the time of debate we do not deal with clarifications; it is a debate. Honourable minister, I thank you for the vibrancy you have brought to the ministry and the passion you have for the agricultural sector with the support of your colleagues, Hon. Afande  Rwamirama, Hon. Adoa, and Hon. Kyakulaga. I visited the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO). Honourable colleagues, I urge each one of you - the minister kept calling me to visit NARO and I kept wondering what I could do at NARO, but now, I think I should visit NARO every month because they are doing a fantastic job. (Applause) These are our professionals who do not know about our politics. They know technical work. The only thing they need is our support because when you look at - if we can commercialise what they are doing, or can even bring down the cost of these vaccines by more than a half. But also, the steady and quick supply instead of waiting for all this period.During this budgeting period, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and the Committee on Budget - please, issues of NARO need support. We are an agriculture-based economy; we cannot run away from this and I promise I will follow up because they are doing a fantastic job. Honourable colleagues, you have heard the minister so, allow me to start with Members from the cattle corridor and professionals in the area. Yes, when Dr Bwanika is presenting on these matters - members of the Committee on Budget, I beg you to listen so that you know what you are going to implement. Let me start with Hon. Kajwengye, then the Member for Kiruhura, the Member for Gomba, the Member for Kyakwanzi - Hon. Kwizera, you do not have many cows in Kisoro -(Laughter)-  but I will allow you to speak. I will allow the Member for Amolatar – Honourable colleagues, what I promise you is that if you do not become selfish, you will take long. Please, I promise to give you time on this issue; just take your time but let us do it very quickly, and then we shall come to the doctor. I am going to pick you, honourable colleagues. Yes, please, Hon. Kajwengye – 3.44MR WILSON KAJWENGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Mr Speaker, thank you so much. I have listened to the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; it’s a very good statement, but I am at pains.While, I also acknowledge that the team at MAAIF is doing a great job, I come here with a heavy-laden heart. My constituents, the people of Nyabushozi, are now under a quarantine restriction. They cannot sell anything, because they depend, 99 per cent, on their cattle. Next week, they are supposed to take their children back to school, yet they cannot sell their milk, they cannot service their loans, they cannot get treated, or even treat the sick animals, all because the minister, who is named the commander of the disease, by a stroke of a pen, imposed quarantine restrictions. Why the quarantine restriction because a viral disease that can be eradicated? Mr Speaker, this country, under the NRM leadership, has eradicated diseases. Why on earth can’t we eradicate FMD? Yet, the livestock subsector contributes significantly to our national budget. Is it poor planning? Is it poor budgeting? I want to attribute it to poor planning. I am sorry for that. Let me say this. The statement clearly says the viral vaccine costs two dollars but treating a sick cow is $20. It is more expensive tenfold. Why can’t we have sufficient vaccine vials in the country? 11586THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Two, our farmers amazingly buy more expensive vaccines on their own. They buy injectables on their own, which is more expensive than the FMD vaccine. If, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries cannot procure sufficient doses to cover the national heart, get out of business. Let the farmers, the cattle keepers, and the cooperatives, purchase these vials. The Government, and all governments worldwide, know what they do best - regulation. Regulate the importation, safekeeping, and vaccine exercise, but let these vaccines be sufficiently available on the market or allow farmer cooperatives like I have in Nyabushozi - farmers have grouped themselves in cooperatives. They have the necessary resources. Require them to have fridges and all the necessary facilities to keep vaccines but allow them to procure vaccines on their own. Mr Speaker, ring vaccination is a lazy policy because it comes after an outbreak. Vaccination or what you can call inoculation comes before the disease outbreak. So, why do we wait for the disease to come then we go for vaccination? That should be treatment. Let us have a bi-annual vaccination of six months, twice a year and complete the process. What do we do? Honourable minister, you mentioned it. Next week, the schools are opening countrywide. What are we going to do with our children? What are people going to eat? What are we going to use to treat our animals? The Government is here. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kajwengye, are you saying you want the Minister to lift the quarantine? When you talk of next week, then you are talking about an immediate and short-term solution. MR KAJWENGYE:  Absolutely! This quarantine is not helping anything, Mr Speaker. I can tell you we are only treating, not vaccinating. There is already an outbreak. You inoculate before an outbreak. It is even unheard of that we should be here on the Floor of Parliament discussing that the whole country has an outbreak of FMD. It is bad for our economy. It is bad for business. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Our fear is, for example, during the time of COVID-19, you vaccinated people but you were also treating them, because COVID-19 had already come. Would you open the country, because COVID-19 was already here or would you first put in place some measures? I am asking this to you, honourable member, because I fear that if the Minister does what you are talking about now, won’t this escalate and go out of control? The people we are saying we want to help, instead we find we are not helping them at all. I just wanted that to be very clear so that the Minister knows what we are asking for. MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. From the statement read by the minister, three-quarters of the country are under quarantine. What are you quarantining for? We need to treat them. Now we are looking for treatment. It is not inoculation anymore. That is my point. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable colleagues, there is no need for panic. I had allowed members from Kiruhura, Gomba and Hon. Moses and the Member from Kyankwazi. I am going to give you time. Hon. Ayoo, I met you buying cows in Mbarara, I hope they had no FMD. (Laughter)3.51MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE  (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the statement. Mr Speaker, you can see what we are going through. I appreciate my colleague, Hon. Kajwengye, for what he has raised.First, we are here, but the people we are representing here are going through a very difficult situation. I am happy that the Minister asked for a supplementary budget. I recommend to this House that we provide that immediately to purchase the vaccine. Two, we need to do mass vaccination. Ring vaccination at the moment is not helping us at all. MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Kajwengye]11587THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024Mr Speaker, thirdly, I want you to put yourselves in our shoes. Our children are not going to school. The districts are stuck. We need to go to the ground and show these people that we are concerned, as leaders in the country. We would like to ask the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to move with us to the ground. Let them go and explain to the people because as we are putting measures in place, we have to show concern. We are going through a difficult situation and we are not happy because people do not see the solution while we are here, as Members of Parliament, when they are suffering. I beg to submit. 3.53MS SYLVIA NAYEBALE  (NRM, Woman Representative, Gomba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister, for the report. I listened in very well and I have listened to my colleagues, Hon. Kajwengye and the honourable Member from Kiruhura too.Mr Speaker, I do not know if the Ministry is aware that on top of the farmers trying to get their own vaccines, the market is also flooded with fake vaccines. I thought the Minister would bring it up on how they are going to curb the fake vaccines on the market. We were here before and talked about it with the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry and the Ministry for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. It is unfortunate that the farmers are buying vaccines, most of which are fake. The Ministry is seated back yet we are suffering. Secondly, I would like to thank the Ministry. I do not know why we always firefight. From the honourable Minister’s report, it looks like we are now doing firefighting, as if we did not know this. He said they are going to have a meeting but we have taken more or less six months in quarantine - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Conclude.MS NAYEBALE : As I conclude, I would like to mention that the District Veterinary Officers (DVOs) do not have enough facilitation. They cannot reach out to our farmers yet the Minister said that he is going to secure facilitation. Facilitation in which particular capacity? Is it for transport or is it for buying bicycles like I have seen here in the report? Can we have enough facilitation, at least for the farmers, to get enough sensitisation? Also, kindly lift the quarantine in areas where we do not have the disease heavily. Thank you.3.55MR ENOS ASIIMWE  (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable minister, for the report. First, I agree, and I want to support the Minister, on the one side. Honestly, ring vaccination works. Of course, mass vaccination would be better but based on his report; certainly, we do not have all the resources to do mass vaccination. Therefore, the best option for now is to take the ring vaccination. At least, it is working in Lyantonde. I must appreciate what the Ministry is doing. However, there is a challenge that comes with that type of vaccine. It takes six months, implying that thereafter, we must revaccinate to boost the vaccine that we have used. Mr Speaker, the question should be, as much as we are looking at giving a supplementary budget, why don’t we channel more money into manufacturing the vaccine locally so that we can deal with the problem for good? We are going to pass the supplementary today but we will not get the answer tomorrow. (Applause)Secondly, there is something the honourable minister mentioned; the type of vaccine that we are trying to manufacture is a two-serotype. What we are using is more or less the same and according to the DVOs, it is not working effectively. They are appreciating the recent one, which has seven variants as much better. I think you were getting it from the UK. Also, for us to invest in a vaccine of two serotypes, which may not work for us, we 11588THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023should invest more in having more serotypes so that it can be more effective than we are planning to invest. Lastly, Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, Hon. Kajwengye raised a very important point about Government doing regulation. I am not imputing any ill motive but I am asking myself: are these vaccines even reaching the common people? Someone with 1,000 cows, how do we buy for them vaccines? Why can’t he sell two cows and buy the vaccine? (Applause) I have my farm and gardens that I am looking after. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should say that before anyone sells a cow they should ensure it has a certificate of vaccination. The people who have big farms, I usually see them bragging, saying that we who do not have cows are not rich. Now, you who are rich, why are you waiting for the Government to give you vaccines? Why don’t come up with a regulation instead of spending Shs 100 billion, then the Government will be able to control the type of vaccine, and the vaccination process, and one is issued a certificate. We can say that for people who own 50 cows and below, maybe we can find a way of helping them. However, someone who owns 3,000 cows and is seated waiting for the Government to give him vaccines – honourable minister, I noticed that you were anxious to do –MR TUMWEBAZE:  Mr Speaker, I plead for a minute. I thank you honourable colleagues, for discussing this issue soberly. I feel for you because our lives are disrupted. The points you are raising are some of the policy propositions that the Cabinet will look at. Let me explain to you why the scientists, this time, insisted that the Government must buy the vaccines and give them out:First of all, those vaccines – I am not a veterinary doctor but I have been coached and I can remember what they told me – (Interjections) - yes, they have coached me because I am not a veterinary doctor - and Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika will correct me if I make a mistake -  these are live organisms and they are biological substances. When you are importing, you import for the type of virus you have. If you allow X, Y , Z to import -(Interjections)-  just a minute, I am coming to that. You can even import for the strains you do not have in your country. Therefore, the options we have now is have it discussed in the Cabinet because it is a policy reversal now; I believe we would have some policy reform. We have established, without any doubt, that a farmer can afford it, even if they are small-scale farmers with three or five cows only. We have established this, and at the ministry level, we have built consensus on it. The guidance from the President, which will be further discussed, is that the Government will import and have a national veterinary medical store for safe storage, and then send to the people to pay through the national repayment system of the local government and the Ministry of Finance. That is why I could not conclusively give you this position until the Cabinet endorses it. We are certainly moving there. The point on why we panic; it is not that we are not aware of this, but as I have told you, perennially the ministry has been getting 1.1 per cent, half a million doses; we are the least funded. The Ministry of Health is able to fight vaccinatable diseases because there are many partners that put money in the basket, which is not the same with the agricultural sector. Honourable colleagues, I feel what you feel. Let us require the money initially, import the vaccines, and ask the farmers to pay for them. I am sure I will push for this position in the Cabinet and my colleagues will support me. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And the farmers will support you.  Yes, Hon. Goli.4.02MR MOSES GOLI (NRM, Dakolo North County, Dakolo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the positions I wanted to present has MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Ms Asiimwe]11589THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024been clearly articulated by the minister. At least let us go for cost sharing. Let us manage a process, which enables us to have security within the system. I would also like to mention that amongst the other policies, which you may wish to consider, and I have said this many times here, is that you are going to work towards ensuring we export the cattle, it must be disease-free. We should be engaging ourselves in policies and implementation of methods, which will allow us to have disease-free cattle, like feed-lotting. Let us start progressing towards feed-lotting. I have seen someone whom I know from Gomba. Her place is disease-free. She does not treat and there are no ticks. Certainly, there is no foot and mouth disease there. That is the right way to go. Thank you. 4.04MR PATRICK BINGI (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi):  Thank you , Mr Speaker. I also begin by thanking the honourable minister, for the statement and honourable colleagues, for their submissions. I have been able to read the non-verbal communication of the minister when he was presenting. I can tell you he is very concerned. However, from his statement, he came up with three approaches.First, is the biannual compulsory vaccination, to which he alluded that the Government can only vaccinate 1.1 per cent of the susceptible animals. I happen to be a teacher by training. If a student scores 1.1 per cent, I would be ashamed to say that the student sat for the exam. So, I can say that there is no vaccination being done by the Government. Second, is the proposal of “test and slaughter” followed by the safe disposal, which he said is not possible, so, we rule out that. Now, we are left with only one option that is quarantine. Unfortunately, it is not productive. My honourable colleagues have already submitted that our cattle keepers are dependent on their animals and animal products, 99 per cent.In my constituency Butemba, people are not poor. Mr Speaker, you put it right when you said that these people could afford to do away with a few animals to spare the others. I liked the submission of my honourable sister from Gomba. (Laughter)  She put it right. The problem is that these vaccines perhaps are not available. Now, that the honourable minister is aware that there are strain-specific vaccines. Can’t the ministry avail these vaccines, put them somewhere in vaccine centres, and these people buy the vaccines?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. That is the policy reversal the minister talked about. Of course, it has to be Government-controlled. Luckily enough, he said after the Cabinet meeting, he would update us.MR BINGI:  My only concern, Mr Speaker, is that this is not the first time we have had Foot-and-Mouth Disease (FMD). FMD has been here.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Bingi, the minister has told you about the policy reversal, which we hope this time round, will give us a better solution. 4.07MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for considering the policy reversal. The policy and the strategy that we have been using for the last 60 years to manage FMD, has resulted into us preserving and conserving FMD in the country yet by now, we should have already dealt away with the FMD.First, among other vaccines for animals, FMD vaccines are only imported into the country by the Government and not private people. You can imagine that it is only the Government that is mandated to import FMD vaccines. Do you see that level of control by the Government? It is these commissioners who plan how these vaccines get into the country and how they are distributed. 11590THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023You can see that there are already complaints of having fake vaccines in the market. How do the fake ones get into the country? Are they being brought in by Government? Mr Speaker, these are issues - I come from Cawente Subcounty and the Banyankole here know what “cente”  means. So, anything on cows, goats and sheep has been part of my life. I went to Kiruhura, Mbarara and Nakasongola to buy some cows. The big were farmers asking, “what is wrong with the Government? We can afford to buy vaccines for FMD, but we are not allowed. You have to go and plead and they give you only 100 doses.” Some of these farmers have up to 4,000 cows.Mr Speaker, we would want to advise that, one, Government adopts a policy where the veterinary officers or vet assistants would go to the field and take blood samples so that we know the strain of the disease, they make an analysis and mobilise farmers to get their own money and pay for vaccines. If the cost of treating a Friesian cow is almost Shs 100,000, why is Government very tight on only Shs 7,000 for two doses of vaccination against FMD?Mr Speaker, I think this policy must - (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika? Clerk, please, establish for me quorum for the next item.4.10DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera, Masaka City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of FMD, it is important for us to look at what we need to do now and what we need to do in the future. For what we need to do now, there are only two things. We must control animal movements; there is no option; it is a must. Secondly, we must avail vaccines. I am in total support of a supplementary on the Floor of Parliament to buy or secure the vaccines. However, Mr Speaker, this supplementary should include the money for the coffee seedlings. That money should be included in that supplementary –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us hear from the Member for Terego. DR ABED:  No, Mr Speaker, I am speaking on behalf of my – (Member timed out.) 4.12MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, wait a bit. Please, honourable colleagues, the Rules of Procedure are very clear. Here, we work through the Rules of Procedure.When a debate is on a certain matter, we debate that matter.  We do not have cows in Mitooma; I do not own cows. Instead, I grow coffee, but the debate we have now is on FMD. Yes, Member for Terego. MS OBIGAH:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in supporting what the minister has just presented on the Floor of Parliament. Our cows in Terego are almost like goats. We have had the honour to have the big cows so that we improve our breed in Terego. If we are going to have these cows dying –(Interjections) -  Mr Speaker, I seek your protection. If we are going to have these cows dying of disease, honestly, Terego will not have the chance to improve the breed of its cows. I think we need to have a supplementary budget so that we can get the right medicine and the control must continue. In this country, fake medicines continue to come, but this does not stop the Government from ensuring quality control. I am in total agreement so that my people can have better quality cows so that we can marry out of them. Thank you.MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS [Mr Ayoo]11591THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Gen. Mugira, I saw you standing up earlier. Okay, was it the Hon. Gen. Kavuma? 4.18MAJ. GEN. SAM KA VUMA (UPDF Representative):  Mr Speaker, I thank the minister for agriculture for the statement and his proposal to reverse the policy on FMD. We seem to be agreeing – all of us – that he has good proposals, pending Cabinet approval. Once that is done, there is going to be another long process. After the approval of the Cabinet, he is going to come back here to brief Parliament and then Parliament approves the money, which is not very little money. After that, the finance ministry will look for the money – I do not know for how long. As we go through all that process, people are in a quarantine. People are not selling milk neither are they selling their cows too. What do we do with this quarantine that is going to affect and has already affected - by the time we conclude this long process, will our people still be under quarantine, suffering? Maybe we need a position on the existing quarantine. I submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, I have my colleague who usually listens to me properly. Today, I saw that he was totally annoyed with me. The unfortunate bit of it is that when I am running this House, I run it according to the rules that you gave me.Under Part XII of the Rules of Procedure, rule 72(1) is about rules of debate. It is the only part to do with debate. Rule 72(1) says; “A speech of a Member must have reference to the subject matter under discussion.” Today, we are not discussing a supplementary because that is against rule 80, which is anticipation. There is no supplementary here – and the minister for agriculture does not bring supplementary; it is brought by the minister for finance. Today, we are discussing a statement on FMD. Okay?Therefore, my brother, please, take it in good faith. I am just trying to interpret the rules. I can only run this House within the confines of the rules that you gave me. I want us to understand each other; I could not go outside. (Applause)Now, honourable colleagues, I have seen that what we are presenting is all the same. Until - listen. You see, it is not about hearing every side. Until a policy reversal has been made so that they come and give us details of that policy – and then the meeting, which is on today. So, honourable minister, if you are handling it today and Monday in the Cabinet, I think, on Tuesday, you will be able to bring another statement that would be more updated on whether the policy reversal has been allowed or not, or whether the budget has been allowed or not and then we continue the debate on Tuesday. Next item.MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, I beg that I report on Thursday because on Tuesday I will be in Soroti. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thursday. I have established quorum, both online and present: 109 and 94. Next item. BILLSSECOND READINGTHE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?4.18THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  Thank you, Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023,” be read the second time. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?  Okay, I seconded by Hon. Ayoo Tonny, Hon. Muloni, the Attorney-General, Uganda People’s Defense Forces (UPDF), Hon. Amooti, Hon. Christine, Hon. Kasolo, 11592THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Hon. Amero, Hon. Aber, Hon. Luttamaguzi, Hon. Santa, Hon. Walyomu, Hon. Milton, Hon. Prof. Mushemeza and Hon. Gabriel.Honourable minister, you can use a minute to speak to your motion. GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Speaker the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 was read for the first time on 30 January 2024, pursuant to Rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, 2021.The Bill was referred to the Sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure for scrutiny. The object of the Bill is to ensure that Uganda is in compliance and satisfactory performance in the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) that commenced on 6 September 2023. The first phase ended and the second phase is on now, and will end on the 8 February 2024; it is to ensure the safety and security of Uganda’s aviation sector. The Sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure has concluded consultations on the Bill and is ready to report on the same. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, I did not call the sub-items under item 3 because the minister had already reached out to me and requested that he will be ready on Tuesday next week. Honourable minister, what did you promise? Which day next week? On Tuesday?GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Speaker, on Tuesday, I will bring a full report on the two items.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, on the roads; the issue of Kampala - Jinja Express Way, Nebbi-Paidha-Goli-Zombo Road next week. Hon. Atkins, do you have a procedural matter? MR KATUSABE:  Yes. Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Globally and this is applied nationally; it can also be applied locally – presidential directives - we have one President and as a country, we can only have one president at a time. However, there is this animal in the room or even in Uganda called “presidential directive”. Presidential directives form executive orders that have the force of law and effect an order of law.Mr Speaker, when our king had the opportunity to meet the President, he asked for an international airport, especially in Kasese and I followed - (Interjections) -  yes, it is a procedural issue. The minister is here and he will be on the Floor on Tuesday. The same President gave a directive to the minister to work on the international bridge but as we speak, the minister or his colleagues, have not made it a point to go and check on the business of the bridge, therefore, as a country, we are losing revenue. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that when the minister shows up on Tuesday, he also updates the nation because as a country, we are losing quite a lot of revenue and livelihood as far as the Kasese population is concerned. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when I followed the rules strictly, I ended up annoying my colleagues here and so, I do not want to annoy another again immediately. However, procedure should be about what is going on there and then - Hon. Zijjan wants to disturb me but no, no. please.  Procedure should be about what is going on there and then.Honourable minister, you have picked the point, so, on Tuesday when you come, please follow up on that. Yes, honourable chair of the committee.4.23THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Dan Atwijukire):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023. I wish to lay, on the Table, the report and the minutes of the meeting.[The Deputy Speaker]11593THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024IntroductionThe Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023, was read for the first time on Tuesday, 30 January 2024. It was referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in accordance with Rules 128 and 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for consideration and report to the House.The object of the BillThe policy and principles of this Bill are to amend the Civil Aviation Authority Act, Cap. 354, in order to:a) bring it to conformity with the Convention on International Civil Aviation (The Chicago Convention);b)  provide for delegation of powers to inspectors to have unrestricted access to aircraft, aerodromes and aviation facilities, including cargo and records of aviation organisations under Uganda Civil Aviation Authority; c) enable Uganda Civil Aviation Authority to recognise agreements of third-party states who are signatories to Article 83 Bis of the Chicago Convention, relating to the transfer of functions and duties; and d) to prescribe additional offences. The amendment of the Act is intended to ensure Uganda’s compliancy and satisfactory performance in the Universal Safety Oversight Audit Programme that commenced on 6 September 2023 and to ensure the safety and security of Uganda’s aviation sector.Methodology The committee held meetings and received memoranda from the following:1.  Minister of Works and Transport; 2. The Office of Attorney-General; and3. The Uganda Civil Aviation Authority. Committee observationsThe committee observed as follows:i) Uganda, being a signatory to the International Convention of Civil Aviation (ICAO) 1994, is obliged under Article 37 of the Convention to comply with ICAO International Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs) contained in the 19 annexes to the convention;ii) The ICAO Universal Safety Oversight Programme(USOAP) for Uganda was carried out between 6th-18th September 2023. It was intended to monitor Uganda’s compliance with ICAO safety-related SARPs or safety oversight obligations under the convention. It audited two critical elements relating to primary aviation and legislation, and regulations made under primary aviation legislation and identified gaps in both the primary aviation legislation and the civil legislation. It also identified gaps in the primary aviation legislation and the Civil Aviation Act. If these are not addressed immediately, they could affect several audit areas and consequently expose the country to adverse audit findings that could have far-reaching implications for the country including a finding of Significant Safety Concern;iii) The Bill proposes to empower the Director to delegate his or her powers to inspectors to have unrestricted access to aircraft, aerodromes and aviation facilities; including cargo and records of aviation organisations under the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority;iv) The Bill proposes to enable the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority to recognise agreements of third-party states who are signatories to Article 83 of the Chicago Convention, relating to the transfer of functions and duties;v) The Bill proposes to prescribe additional offences and stringent penalties for certain offences;11594THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 [Mr Atwijukire]vi) There is a need to harmonise the provision for various offences arising from acts of unlawful interference. These offences are prescribed in Clause 10 under the proposed Section 64D. The proposed Section 64D(1) creates an offence against a person who unlawfully seizes an aircraft or engages in the unlawful seizure of an aircraft, punishable by imprisonment for life and yet some offences created under the above-mentioned clause are similar to the offence of terrorism created under the Anti- Terrorism Act, 2002, are punishable by death;vii) Clause 1, seeks to amend Section 2 of the Act, to define “acts of unlawful interference.”;viii) Clause 2, seeks to amend Section 6 of the Act, to provide for additional functions of the Uganda Civil Aviation Authority to include safety oversight of air navigation services and safety oversight of aerodromes;ix) Clause 3, seeks to amend Section 15A of the Act, to provide for additional powers of the Director-General;x) Clause 4, seeks to amend Section 15C, to allow the Director-General to delegate his or her powers to an employee of authority as appropriate;xi) Clause 5, seeks to amend Section 38A, to provide for the objective of every investigation of an accident or serious incident, as being, to determine the safety factors and where possible the probable cause and the prevention of accidents or serious incidents;xii) Clause 6, seeks to amend Section 38B, by substituting for the word “incident” wherever it occurs, the words “serious incident” to comply with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards;xiii) Clause 7, seeks to amend Section 38C, by substituting for the word “Incident” wherever it occurs, the words “Serious incident” to comply with the ICAO standards. Further, this will allow an investigator to have timely, uninterrupted access and control over an aircraft accident or serious incident site, including wreckage thereon, investigation materials, evidence and documents, including air traffic service recordings and recorders; andxiv) Clause 8, seeks to amend Section 39A, to allow an inspector to have unrestricted and unlimited access to any part of the aircraft, aerodrome land or area outside the aerodrome used by any business that operates at an aerodrome, and any records and information that may be required during the conducting of an inspection.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, we shall go through these clauses at the Committee Stage. Can you go to the recommendations?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends as follows:First, the committee recommends that Government considers the additional amendments in order to sufficiently address the ICAO University Safety Oversight Audit Programme (USOAP) audit findings.Secondly, the committee recommends that the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you - because we shall handle the proposed amendments at the Committee Stage. Honourable colleagues, this is mainly to comply with international standards, so, I do not know the debate we would like to have on it. Why don’t we go to the Committee Stage? Yes, Hon. Silas Aogon.  11595THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 20244.33MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Mr Speaker, I would like to commend the committee, and I wish all chairpersons would behave like this. When you are given work, deliver within three days and we go. I think that should be the way. In a similar vein, we should bring the National Legal Aid Bill, 2022 here and we will deal with it. I would like to move that we go to the Committee Stage straightaway because I do not see any controversies on this. We are on compliance issues. You know when it comes to issues of aviation; the sector is heavily sensitive. We must align ourselves with international conventions and agreements. I agree with the motion. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I now put the question that the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 be read for the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Clause 1THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, chairperson of the committee. 4.35THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE: (Mr Dan Atwijukire):  Mr Chairperson, there are proposed amendments to the Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 in Clause 1 and these relate to the amendment of Section 2 of the Civil Aviation Authority Act. Therefore, we propose that Clause 1 be amended:a)  by substituting paragraph B with the following: “B; damage or distraction of an aircraft in service.”b)  in paragraphs D and E, by substituting the word “airport” with the word “aerodrome.” The justification is to comply with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided for in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention. This goes along with E -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Para -graphs D and E?  MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Yes, paragraphs D and E. Much obliged, Mr Chairperson.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Yes, honourable minister. GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendment.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.MR KAFUUZI:  I agree with the proposal.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that Clause 1, be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.Clause 2MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Clause 2: Amendment of Section 6 of the principal Act, Clause 2 of the Bill -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, I think you had a new clause, Chairperson of the committee.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  It was misread; it is supposed to be Section 5 of the principal Act, and it is amended by numbering the existing provision as subsection 1, and by inserting, immediately after subsection 1 the following: “2.  The primary objective relating to aviation security in Uganda is to ensure the safety of passengers, crew, ground personnel and the general public in all matters relating to safeguarding against acts of unlawful 11596THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 [Mr Atwijukire]interference with civil aviation, to ensure the aviation security remains the highest of prioritises when related decisions are made.”The justification is to comply with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister - let us first listen to the Minister.GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendments.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Insigoma.MR ISINGOMA:  Mr Chairperson, I would like to propose that the terms “Aerodromes” and “Airport” as they occur in clauses 1 and 2 be defined in the interpretation clause.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:   Chairperson of the committee, do you want to respond to that?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  They are taken care of in the definitions in the principal Act.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Committee chairperson, why I am asking is that when I look at your amendments, it is evident that you want to insert a new clause immediately after clause 1, and I am reading from your report.Just go back because I am following. I read through the report and that is why I am following.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you so much, Mr Chairperson. On page 6 there is a proposal -THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Before we go to Clause 5, which are talks about - immediately after Clause 1?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Much Obliged, Mr Chairperson. Immediately after clause 1 we propose an insertion of a new clause. The Bill is amended by inserting, immediately after clause 1, the following amendments on Section 5 of the principal Act, which is amended by:a) numbering the existing provision as sub section 1 and (b) by inserting, immediately after subsection 1, the following: “2. The primary objective relating to aviation security in Uganda is to ensure the safety of passengers, crew, ground personnel and the public in all matters relating to safeguarding against acts of unlawful inference with civil aviation, in order to ensure that aviation security remains the highest of the priorities when related decisions are made.”The justification is to comply with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards and recommended practices relating to aviation, and security as provided for in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention. Thank you so much, Chairperson.GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendment.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. MR KAFUUZI:  Mr Chairperson, I concede. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, I should not be disturbing you because you are one - the Minister can only bring what you have advised him to.MR KAFUUZI:  Most Obliged.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.11597THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024Clause 2MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Chairperson, in Clause 2, we propose an amendment to Section 6 of principal Act. Clause 2 of the Bill is amended by inserting, immediately after paragraph Q(H), the following: “Q (1) Establishing a unit for aviation authority security.” The justification is to establish a unit responsible for aviation security in ICAO standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided for in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention. So, this is still an ICAO requirement.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able minister.GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendment as demanded.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable Attorney-General.MR KAFUUZI:  While I agree to the proposed amendment, the wording should change to say “The establishment of a unit.” It is this section that is establishing a unit.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay.MR KAFUUZI:  It should read “The establishment of a unit responsible for aviation security.”THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, committee chairperson.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  It is okay, Mr Chairperson. I concede.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  As if it is grudgingly, okay. MR ATWIJUKIRE:  It is okay.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able colleagues, I put the question that Clause 2 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.New clause MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you once again, Mr Chairperson. There is an insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 2. The Bill is amended by inserting, immediately after Clause 2, the following amendments of Section 7 of the principal Act:“Section 7 of the principal Act is amended in sub section 2, by deleting the words ‘and security’ appearing in paragraph (i) by inserting after paragraph, (k) the phrase: ‘(i) to conduct aviation security audits, inspections, security tests, investigations and vulnerability assessments and (m) to develop aviation security policies and requirements.” The justification is to comply with the requirements of ICAO standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister.GEN. KATUMBA:  Mr Chairperson, I agree with the proposed amendment.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Aogon.MR AOGON:  I wanted to inquire from the committee and the Minister about the frequency of the inspections, whether in the international benchmark; they are not provided for. The frequency - if you are going to conduct safety inspections for instance, are they talking about how often we do them? Is it necessary?GEN. KATUMBA:  The inspections we are talking about are by our national inspectors, who are allowed to inspect aircrafts, including all associated issues with the aircrafts and the pilots at any one time. This is different from the audits, which come after many years. 11598THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023You cannot dictate the inspection because the inspector should be free to inspect at any time for the safety of the passengers and the aircraft.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that a new clause be inserted in the Bill as proposed.  (Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to.New clauseMR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Insertion of a new clause immediately after Clause 4. The Bill is amended by inserting immediately after Clause 4 the following: “Amendment of Section 38 of the principal Act - Section 38 of the principal Act is amended by inserting immediately, before the word “incident” wherever it appears in the provision, the word “serious”.  The justification is that this is a consequential amendment arising from the amendments in clauses 5, 6 and 7 of the Bill.  THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able colleagues, consequential amendments come after we have finished our primary claus -es. Let us stand over this. We shall come back after. We might refuse to amend the other ones when we have already done the consequential amendments.MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  I wanted to seek clarification from the committee chairperson. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, we have stood over the clause he has just read. On consequential amendment, there is no question. This is because they usually come as a consequence of amending the other clauses.  Clause 5THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Commit -tee chairperson.MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Chairperson, in Clause 5 we propose the amendment of Section 38(b) of principal Act. Clause 5 is amended by substituting it with the following: “Amendment of Section 38(b) of principal Act: the principal Act is amended – (a) by numbering the current provision as subsection (1);(b) by substituting the word ‘incident’, wherever it appears, the words ‘serious incident’;(c) by inserting immediately after subsection (1), the following: “(2) The chief investigator shall cause an investigation to be carried out where an aircraft accident or serious incident occurs in any of the following circumstances – (a) Where the accident or serious incident occurs in Uganda;(b)  Where the accident or serious incident occurs in any non-contracting state, which does not intend to carry out an investigation of the accident or serious incident and involves an aircraft registered in Uganda or an aircraft operated by an operator whose principal base of operation is in Uganda;  (c)  Where the accident or serious incident involves an aircraft registered in Uganda or an aircraft operated by an operator in Uganda and the investigation has been delegated to Uganda by another contracting state by mutual arrangement and consent; or (d) Where the accident or serious incident occurs in a location that cannot be established as being in the territory of any state and involves an aircraft registered in Uganda.  (3)  The chief investigator may, where he or she expects to draw air safety lessons [Gen. Katumba]11599THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024from an accident or serious incident cause an investigation to be carried out into an accident or serious incident which occurs in Uganda or outside Uganda involving an aircraft registered in Uganda or an aircraft operated by an operator in Uganda.  (4) The chief investigator may appoint any person as an advisor to assist in carrying out an investigation.  (5) The chief investigator may, with the approval of the minister, delegate the task of carrying out an investigation into an accident or serious incident to another contracting state or an accident investigation authority by mutual arrangement and consent.”  The justification is to comply with the requirements of ICAO standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided in Annex 13 of the Chicago Convention.  THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Hon. Ssewungu.MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Can we have the Attorney-General comment on this? Who is the chief investigator? Can we qualify him? Is he trained in aviation? Can we qualify that so that we do not create any chief investigator? Thank you.  THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able minister, answer that.  GEN. KATUMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Yes, the chief investigator must be highly qualified, a person who has been in the airline industry for a long time and we normally screen them and look at their CVs. He is either a retired pilot, an engineer, or somebody who has really been in the air industry. It is not that any person can become a Chief Investigator.  MR SSEWUNGU:  I think that we are together. Can we draft it properly or we define him in the interpretation section? GEN. KATUMBA:  We will define him in the interpretation section.  PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  Thank you, Mr Chairperson. Listening to the grounds that make the investigator to order an investigation, I can see they are limited to where the accident has taken place. That is why it says, “in Uganda or outside Uganda.” Why are we not also bringing in grounds of suspected cause, say, terrorism or negligence? We are limiting it to “where.” What about the suspected cause? A serious incident could have been caused by terrorism. But I can see that grounds 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 are in the context of where the serious incident has taken place. Why don’t we also have a ground of the suspected cause of the serious accident like terrorism?  MR KAFUUZI:  Mr Chairperson, if I may respond to Prof. Mushemeza; he is introducing terrorism. This is about investigation. An investigation would cover anything if it included terrorism. It is intended to discover the cause, and terrorism could be part of it. Therefore, we do not need to limit ourselves by being specific to terrorism. We are simply opening up to investigation. If it involves terrorism, it will be investigated as well. (Interjection)  Yes, it might be a pilot’s error, weather, birds or several other causes.  THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Honour -able colleagues, these are issues, which the au -ditors who have conducted the audit have said, you must address if Entebbe is to continue re -ceiving aircrafts.  So, we are going to comply. We do not have much say about them.  Either we do them or Entebbe stops. Yes, this is what ICAO has told us to do. We have little lever -age. And it must be done before the 7th of this month. I cautioned the committee, and that is why this is an amendment from the committee. I told the committee: “Go and ensure that you see what the Chicago Convention says. This is what we want captured so that we do not have issues of gaps again.” That is what they have done. Yes, Hon. Amero. 11600THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023MS AMERO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have listened carefully. They are saying “investigation when a serious accident or incident has happened”. There are aircrafts that are actually in dangerous mechanical condition. Wouldn’t it warrant that this is checked before we get into that serious incident? I propose that these auditors be allowed to check the aircraft to see their airworthiness before they are allowed to fly into or out of our airspace. GEN. KATUMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I appreciate the Members’ concern. Now, we need to separate two things. We talked about the inspector. The inspector would be the one to establish whether the aircraft is airworthy or not, and he has the authority to stop an aircraft from taking off. He has authority to stop a pilot from getting into the cockpit, if he is not satisfied. However, on this one, we are looking at an accident – where an accident has happened. According to International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards, we must have an investigation group, which investigates these serious incidents and accidents. That is the reason for this one. Clause 5THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed – Attorney-General?MR KAFUUZI: Mr Chairperson, there is a typing error. I wanted to make a correction on the proposed (c), where they wrote the word “investigations”. I wanted to remove the letter “s” so that it reads “… investigation has been delegated…” Thank you.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is a clean-up that we do as Parliament. Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.Clause 7. Amendment of Section 38C of the principal Act.Clause 7 of the Bill is amended by –(a)  substituting for paragraph (b), the following - “by substituting for subsection (2), the following -“(2) The chief investigator, deputy chief investigator or an investigator shall not, in the course of an investigation, disclose the following documents to any person for purposes other than accident or serious incident investigations - (a) cockpit records;(b) records from interviews with persons by the investigation authorities in the course of the investigation; (c) communications between persons having been involved in the operation of the aircraft;(d) medical or private information regarding persons involved in the accident or serious incident; (e) recordings and transcripts of recordings from air traffic control units; (f) analysis of and opinions about information (including flight recorder information) made by the accident investigation authority and accredited representatives in relation to the accident or serious incident;(g) a draft final report of an accident or serious incident investigation; and(h) any other investigation records.” (b)  by inserting, immediately after the proposed subsection (2a), the following - “the chief investigator, deputy chief investigator or an investigator shall protect the aircraft wreckage and accident site from access by unauthorised persons, pilfering or deterioration.” 11601THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024The justification is to comply with the requirements of ICAO standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided in Annex 13 of the Chicago Convention. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, honourable minister.GEN. KATUMBA: Mr Chairman, I agree with the proposed amendments. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Enos? MR ENOS ASIIMWE: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The report is more of replacing “incidents”, of course, with “serious incidents”. My concern or the clarification I seek from the minister and the team is: what happens to the small occurrences that might lead to these serious accidents? Who investigates them? Or, how do we deal with them in the Act? THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Yes, Hon. Dr Batuwa. I will first pick those who have not spoken. DR BATUWA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have been following up a number of aircraft accidents and I have come to note that there are two competing companies. One is American and the other is European, that is, Airbus and Boeing. I feel there is need to hide or conceal some of the information at the time of the accident because of the implication on those business giants. At the same time, I have noted that during that time, families are in deep sorrow, so much so that the Government has a duty to keep releasing some information, periodically, that has some form of evidence. Therefore, I see a contradiction with the statement that denies the chief investigator an opportunity to release credible information to the public because of social media and all that. Therefore, I do not know whether that is a fear which we can address ourselves to at this point, or we just comply with what the other people want us to do. Thank you. GEN. KATUMBA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. For example, if there is a tyre burst, that would not call for an investigation because it is a small incident. Otherwise, every time there is something small, you would have a group to assemble and investigate. That is why we say “serious incident” – I think honourable members remember the incident we had with one of the aircrafts from a neighbouring country. That was a serious incident and had to be investigated. A real accident, where there is an aircraft crash, will be investigated. Now, the issue of the investigator preserving most of the information is because, first of all, you have to protect the pilots – the operators. You do not just release information anyhow. If the investigator is given that leeway to release - first of all, you may find that the investigation is going to take more than two or three days and it does not have all the details. You cannot allow him to release piecemeal information. Also, most of the investigation is not for fault-finding; it is not done to find out a criminal act. It is mostly done to find the causes so that in future, they are avoided. Thank you. MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. If I may comment, honourable minister, a tyre burst is not a minor occurrence. Any occurrence on an aircraft can be fatal. Having said that, the clarification I seek from the committee chairman is that I see that section 38C (2) already provides for concealment of information – “A chief investigator and investigators shall not disclose cockpit records and other investigation records for purposes other than accident or incident investigations.” I do not know what is this lacking, that calls for the insertion you are requesting to make.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. She has said what you are requesting is already covered under (2). MS AISHA KABANDA: It is already covered under 38C(2). THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Hon. Silas and then Hon. Mugole.11602THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, when it comes to the restriction of information, I have seen that when we are making laws here, we normally provide an exception. For instance, if there is an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, what do you do? I do not know whether the committee thought about this; providing an exception that when it is ordered by the court that this information is needed, then it can be released. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is a general principle in law. For every general rule, there is an exception. MR AOGON: Yes.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is already provided for. MR AOGON: It is not written here, so it is - THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You do not need to because the court has that power. MR MUGOLE: Mr Chairperson, thank you for the opportunity. Regarding what the minister has raised, whatever qualification it is for serious and minor incidents, this is something that has not been - we have provided for serious incidents. I think the question that our colleague was asking is: where are the procedures that are going to handle the minor incidents? The should be provided for here that apart from serious incidents, the minor incidents will be handled this way. I think that is the clarity I wanted to make.MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Chairman, I think the honourable member should bring a provision for that and we insert it. What I am saying is that in the title of the Bill, the Chicago Convention is already mentioned. I think, as you guided, it will be a clean - We cannot express all sections of the Chicago Convention in every section of our Bill. I pray, Mr Chairman.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is an amendment Bill. It is only providing for what is not provided for and the gaps. The ones that are not mentioned are already adequately provided for in the primary law.Honourable colleagues, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, as amended, agreed to .Clause 8MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman. In Clause 8 we propose to amend Section 39A of the principal Act by inserting, immediately after the proposed subsection 2(b), the following: “(c) interview any person for the purpose of assessing the standards of security or the implementation of the security procedures; (d)  inspect and test the effectiveness of security measures, procedures and performance of security equipment; and(e)  take or use at an airport, airside area or any designated security risk area any equipment, radios, cameras, recording devices, both audio and video, specially restricted or prohibited items such as replica weapons or simulated explosive devices necessary to carry out his or her duties.” The justification is to comply with the requirements of ICAO standards and recommended practices relating to aviation security as provided in Annex 17 of the Chicago Convention. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, honourable minister -GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Mr Chairman, I concede to the amendment.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)11603THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.Clause 10, agreed to.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Conse -quential amendment. New ClauseMR ATWIJUKIRE:  Mr Chairman, insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 4. The Bill is amended by inserting, immediately after clause 4, the following: “Amendment of section 38 of the principal Act.” Section 38 of the principal Act is amended by inserting, immediately before the word ‘incident’ wherever it appears in the provision, the word ‘serious’.The justification is that this is a consequential amendment arising from the amendments in clauses 5, 6 and 7 of the Bill. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted in the Bill as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)New clause inserted.MR SSEWUNGU: I am seeking for the interpretation section to define who the chief investigator is, for purposes of clarity. Mr Chairperson, committee - THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That cannot be a consequential amendment. We have assessed this Bill and it meets the objectives because it addresses the gaps in inspection of what we were told to do; they have been catered for. Let us not go beyond.MR SSEWUNGU: I concede.THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Hon. Ssewungu.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Mr Chairman, I want to clarify the fears of my leader that the investigator is actually defined in the principal Act as he desires; it is already defined.The TitleTHE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Now, you are my counsel -( Laughter ) I put the question that the Title stand part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME5.15THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE5.16THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the House adopts the report of the Committee of the whole House with amendments. THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Do you want the report of the whole House amended because the House has considered it?GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: Mr Speaker, I beg to be guided. I beg to move that the House adopts the committee report.11604THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I need a report. We considered the clauses, inserted new ones, and amended others. GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA: I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Civil Aviation (Amendment) Bill, 2023” and passed it with amendments. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Well done, honourable minister. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, again I need you to move a motion. 5.17THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister.5.17THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read for the third time and do pass. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that the “The Civil Aviation Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023 be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024.”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable minister, congratulations. Your Bill has passed. (Applause)Honourable chairperson of the committee, thank you very much, for the job well done. And I want to thank you, honourable colleagues, who have been here with us. Honourable chairperson, do you want to say anything? Do you have anything to say? It is a culture that we thank Members for the support.5.19THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Atwijukire):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable colleagues, the team that we have been working with, my committee; the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, and the entire House. I want to thank you for the support and dedication that you have put in this Bill. For any other thanking, the Rt Hon Speaker will do the needful. (Laughter)  Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you gave us a crash program; a crash assignment. Do you have any words for Members?GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA:  Mr Speaker, I want to join my chairperson –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, please, listen to the minister; he might give you culverts. (Laughter)GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA:  Mr Speaker, I want to join the chairperson of the committee 11605THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024to thank the House. First of all, I thank the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. They really went beyond the call for duty, plus the technical team. They had to burn the midnight oil to meet the directive of the Rt Hon. Speaker. Thank you very much for the cooperation.I would like to thank the whole House. Members, thank you for the cooperation. This is in the interest of our airline industry. We need our airline industry to grow. We are trying to make our company a hub within the region and if we are going to do that, we must meet the ICAO standards and this is what we are doing today. What we are addressing today are the gaps, which were identified by the other audit, and which would have had an impact on the audit, which is being carried out now. So, we want to have everything in place. Mainly it was legal issues and I think we have done that. So, I want to thank you very much for all that you have done.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The minister came to me when he was in a dilemma and I assured him that this House is always ready to support as long as one comes in the right way, and we are always ready – he is asking me: when you are making the pronouncement on culverts. (Laughter)I am looking at our time - no, we don’t have a lot of time. I have a lot of business, which I want - we have some pending reports, and I want them cleared next week, yet we have very important issues. I am trying to see - I want to establish quorum for the next Bill. I need to see whether there are Members outside so that they can come in.Honourable colleagues, as we wait for that, I want to see whether there are more colleagues who can come in. I remember I gave an assignment to the committee with regard to roads in Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA). My assignment was based on program-budgeting and planning that we do have. I want that assignment handled by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure because that is where the program falls. We have to start conducting our business in the House in that way. It has to be on the right program that is provided for. In the meantime, as I assess, let us handle item number eight. Congratulations, honourable minister and the chairperson. Team Attorney-General, I know how you worked very closely as a team with honourable members on this Bill but I am really happy that we have managed to do your part. Clerk, I need this Bill to go to the President tomorrow because it is a very critical Bill, which by 7th February, should be assented to. If we worked overnight with the committee and the House and we processed it, tomorrow it should go to the President for assent. Let it be cleaned up quickly and we meet the deadlines. Now, let us handle item number No. 8 on the Order Paper.MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT CONGRATULATING HIS EXCELLENCY YOWERI KAGUTA MUSEVENI FOR SUCCESSFULLY HOSTING THE 19TH SUMMIT OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT AND THE 3RD SOUTH SUMMIT OF THE GROUP OF 77+CHINA HEADS OF STATE AND GOVERNMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo, the mover.5.26DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I move this motion under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and its read: “WHEREAS the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is a forum of 120 countries, which are not formally aligned with or against the pro-Soviet socialist bloc or the pro-American capitalist bloc and was founded in 1961, in the 11606THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023context of Cold War confrontation, with a view to advance interests of developing countries; AND WHEREAS the Group of 77(G77) plus China is a coalition of 135 developing countries who are Members of the United Nations that was established in 1964 to promote its Members’ collective economic interests and create an enhanced joint negotiating capacity in the United Nations;AWARE THAT between the 15th and 22nd January 2024, Uganda hosted the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government Meeting at Speke Resort Munyonyo at which more than 120 heads of State and Governments and more than 1000 other dignitaries attended;NOTING THAT the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government Meeting deliberated on a number of global issues including the on-going conflict between Israel and Palestine, the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), investment in sustainable development, effective realisation of the right to development, climate change, youth unemployment, economic challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the rising global debt, the cost of borrowing, the increasing global cost-of-living, poverty, inequality, increase in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) financing gap, the need for urgency of providing sufficient development finance to developing countries and mechanisms for building resilience in developing countries;RECOGNISING THAT the successful hosting of the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government illustrated Uganda’ s competence and readiness to host international and regional conferences, afforded an opportunity for Uganda to showcase its huge tourism and investment potential, attract foreign investors, build international partnerships, thereby improving Uganda’ s image and standing on the international stage and boosting Uganda’ s economy;APPRECIATING THAT His Excellency President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was recognised for his outstanding leadership during the preparation and hosting of the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government Meeting;FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the President of Uganda, was installed as the Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 plus China and recognised as a visionary and revolutionary leader whose experience and exceptional understanding of global issues and the historical and social challenges of African societies will play an important role in achieving unity, solidarity, and collective coordination among member States of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 plus China.NOW THEREFORE, Mr Speaker, be it resolved that Parliament:1.  Collectively congratulates His Excellency the President of Uganda for being appointed as the Chairperson of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 plus China; and2.  Collectively congratulates His Excellency, the President of Uganda, the National Organising Committee led by Uganda’ s Head of Public Service and the people of Uganda for successfully hosting the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government Meeting.”  I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Rose Obigah, Hon. Mushemeza, the Attorney-General, Gen. Katumba Wamala, Hon. Bwire, [Dr Buturo] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11607THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024Member for Iganga, Hon. Sauda, Hon. Milton, Hon. Gabriel, UPDF, Hon. Tom, Dean of Independents - Hon. Christine is saying, “Even this side, Father” – the Member from Gomba and the whole House. I see everyone standing up. The whole House has seconded the motion. This is the most overwhelmingly seconded motion. Hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo, use five minutes to justify your motion. DR NSABA BUTURO:  Mr Speaker, it is well understood that the hosting of the two recent summits was the first of their kind on Uganda’s soil, East Africa and possibly Africa, where Uganda was entrusted with hosting intercontinental summits of breath-taking prominence. To refresh your minds, both NAM and G77+China, presented a unique opportunity for collaboration and collective problem solving on pertinent global issues of concern such as climate change, poverty, inequality and barriers to regional integration.By all accounts, Mr Speaker, convening the two summits on our soil was a historic moment for Uganda. For two weeks, global attention was on Uganda and when both summits ended, delegates hailed Uganda for the excellent working conditions which had been made available to them. Uganda scored highly, in terms of organising the two international summits back to back without any hitch. The successful hosting of the global summits proved that Uganda has capacity to become a meeting, incentives, conferences and events destination. Mr Speaker, the two summits took place in Uganda at a time of unprecedented economic and social inequalities among nations around the world, where countries of the South, including ours, suffer from multiple global challenges, which are constraining their development and further compounding their operations, exploitation and suppression. The scale of global challenges indicates massive responsibilities awaiting His Excellency, the President who is now the chairman of the two global bodies. The sheer scale of the member states: 120 NAM member states and 137 G77+China member states, represents a mega market of 6.4 billion people, which is 80 per cent of the world population. Clearly, our President’s new roles come with great stature and influence to engineer a more equitable and inclusive world order. Mr Speaker, electing President Museveni as head of global bloc is a vote of confidence in Uganda and also his leadership . (Applause)President Museveni has made the citizens of Uganda really proud. His election holds promise and potential to channel international attention and resources towards initiatives that directly benefit the ordinary Ugandan. Mr Speaker, Uganda now has a platform to continue negotiating optimal deals and secure commitments that directly address our failures and challenges. By harnessing the momentum generated from the two summits, Uganda has the opportunity to pave the way for inclusive and sustainable development. Accordingly, Mr Speaker, it is incumbent upon all of us, irrespective of our diverse political persuasions, to appreciate President Museveni’s leadership, whose influence is now global as never before.Mr Speaker, when the two summits were going on, it brought into sharp focus how important and urgent it is to define and defend our national interests, in terms of Uganda’s immediate, medium and long term goals and objectives. There is a compelling case, Mr Speaker, for Ugandans to be able to distinguish between what constitutes national interests, on one hand and personal or political party interests, on the other. National interest matters override, for example, goals and interests of political parties. Considering that both NAM and G77+China summits constituted our national interests with regard to jobs, security, employment, investment, infrastructure, mega market and international visibility, attempts by two 11608THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023opposition leaders and their supporters to demonstrate over alleged poor state of roads as the summits were ongoing was grossly unfortunate, regrettable, misplaced and misguided. (Applause)Mr Speaker, the inappropriate shenanigans and manoeuvres of these leaders are a stark reminder that a conversation on what constitutes national interest needs to be urgently held for all citizens. This would enable Ugandans to learn to distinguish between matters, which are of national interest and those that are of, say, political party interests. It is critical that the Government ensures that there is this conversation in place, as well as a comprehensive set of national policies for safeguarding Uganda’s interests. Mr Speaker, it would be an understatement to say that hosting NAM and G77+China countries has placed Uganda on a higher plane of possibilities that are likely to directly impact the lives of ordinary Ugandans, as well as qualify Uganda as a developed nation in the not-too-distant future. This will be on condition, though, that as Ugandans, we are able to collectively address ongoing glaringly damaging unethical and immoral practices which currently are bedevilling the governance of the Pearl of Africa.Finally, I invite all Members to congratulate His Excellency, the President, the Government of Uganda, the organising committee of the two summits, which was headed by the Head of Public Service, Ms Lucy Nakyobe and the people of Uganda, for the work well done in successfully hosting international delegates. I also invite the honourable members to wish His Excellency the President, God’s blessings as he takes on the onerous leadership of 6.4 billion people, for the betterment of not only Ugandans but humanity as a whole. Mr Speaker, I submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when you travel the world and see how the Global South has been looking for a leader to champion their issues and you see how our President has stood up to that task, you feel proud as a Ugandan. I have moved to many places and people say, “You have a President and a half”. (Applause)  I saw how the Speakers were asking for his speech when he came for CSPOC. We should have also thanked Dr Baryomunsi who mobilised the smiles - (Laughter) - only that he did not provide us with pegs, when he instructed us to use them to sustain the smiles. You were on top of your game during this summit because you mobilised Ugandans. Otherwise, it can be a summit of just presidents and the citizens do not feel it that much. We also thank our colleagues, Members of Parliament, from all sides for passing the resources required here, for being cooperative, and the civil servants who handed over all their vehicles; everyone sacrificed. I now believe that the leadership, which Uganda has taken on regarding these very critical issues will provide a new direction for issues of the Global South to be listened to on the international agenda. This is a very important issue. Honourable colleagues, allow me to pick a few people for debate because after, my proposal is that we receive the report for the Sugar Bill, then the debate will ensue on Wednesday. Let us receive the report so that you are able to go and read through it to prepare for a debate. I do not want us to take a long time. Let me start with our tourism ambassador – (Mr Aogon rose_)  The seconders, sorry. Hon. Silas, followed by the Hon. Fr Onen, are the seconders.5.42MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Mr Speaker,  first of all, I thank you for having been steadfast, sitting in the House up to this time, for the good of this country. When you want to get more from someone who has given to you, learn to say “thank you” to them. For that reason, I stand to second this motion because I find it very important to say “thank you” to the President because we successfully hosted these conferences. Our [Dr Buturo] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11609THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024stage is now lit up with success. Everyone around the world can see what Uganda is able to do. The doubters have been put down; they can no longer doubt what Uganda can do. Start from the airport and see what has changed there. We need to appreciate the UPDF because we have seen the job that they have done within a short time. (Applause)  Soon, we might even need to amend the law. This thing of wasting resources on procurement all the time yet the UPDF can deliver, is something for us to consider. (Applause)  We learned that they were able to save over Shs 130 billion out of the time that they invested in that place. Therefore, the President deserves the voice of this House, in terms of support and thanking him. Mr Speaker, the roads have been shaped up. If we were a bad country, people would have eaten this money. Go now to Arena Mall and look at those junctions. See the foot bridges; see how we are mapping out Kampala to be a real destination for the whole world. We are now becoming the centre of the world. (Laughter)  I can tell you that is the truth. Go up the sky and look down; you will see Uganda now is at the centre. Walk on foot; you will see Uganda is at the centre. Ride a bicycle; you will know we are at the centre. That is where we are because that is who we are.Mr Speaker, the private sector played a huge role. Of course, we must thank Mr Sudhir Ruparelia; that group also did its part. Yes, we have weaknesses but for now, we must thank people. They delivered a marvellous conference centre within a short time and without any quarrel. That is Uganda for you. I think we are moving very well.Finally, the President is somebody I have followed for a long time and I have noticed one thing; he is naturally gifted with wisdom. He can talk about African history starting from I think 1500 AD and he brings you steadily up to today without looking at the papers; that is him. Africa needed a leader who can be able to understand the world, not just Africa alone, and from the past up to now. That is the kind of person we are thanking. What else do we need to do? We simply need to thank him. For God and my country. (Applause)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Fr Onen, as a seconder – switch it on, Father. 5.45REV . FR CHARLES ONEN (Independent, Laroo-Pece Division, Gulu City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to second this great motion. He rightly stated that the choice of His Excellency, the President to lead the great summits, NAM and G77+China, was a vote of confidence on our President.  To me, this was a revelation from God. Prophetically, it has indicated that His Excellency will extend his reign of leadership beyond 2026. (Applause)  You know that Ugandans are good at betting. There are those who have started betting that Hon. Dr Abed Bwanika might become the President, Chairman Mao might become the President, Bobi Wine and the rest. So, they can keep in the queue and wait after 2026 – (Interjections) – yes, His Excellency Bobi Wine. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, these were not merely events that we should thank ourselves or the Government for. It was a global moment and an opportunity for our country to position itself. I strongly believe that these events greatly made Uganda known and Uganda will be appreciated for its great richness in culture and tourism potential. I believe this will increase our sources of revenue at a later time. The effects of these great events will not only end in the past months, but they will also continue to make Uganda to shine now and forever. I thank all the Government entities, the different ministries and those who stood to see that these great events took place. The finance ministry, the ministry in charge of infrastructure – the roads and the rest – made sure that this country shine and that we were ready to host visitors from different countries –(Member timed out.) 11610THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member.5.48MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend you for your style of leadership. I always see that if something is legal, you get our expert lawyers here to direct the House. Yesterday I saw it when we got accountants here to direct the House. I thank and urge you to continue that way. I thank the House for whatever we did for NAM to take place, most especially our President. It was tremendous and we now have a convention centre. The spiral effects of a convention centre are great and enormous. Uganda will not be the same again in terms of tourism, trade and many other infrastructural developments. It is at this time that, as Parliament, we should ask the ministry for finance that because we have a convention centre, and because we are going to have these spiral effects that are important to this country, the caps given to the tourism sector should be looked at and elevated. It is very unfair to have such a convention centre but again limit the monies that are going to the tourism sector. That is the area that is going to spur this country more than any other sector. As Parliament, as we talk about issues of looking for sources of finances, this is an area and the number one person is the President who made it a point that we host NAM and the G77+China summits.I thank the Minister of Information Communication Technology and National Guidance. When he said “smile” – in the hotel industry, we have what they call a “special guest satisfaction system” and “s” stands for smile. I wonder how he got it – a doctor who got such a thing in the profession of tourism. A smile kills many things. Even if somebody is annoyed and you smile at them, they will not bark the way they would have. We thank you. You have put a milestone. If we continue on that trajectory, I am very certain that the sky will be the limit. I thank the mover of the motion for bringing it and I suppose that everybody will support this motion. I submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the honourable lady from Iganga, honourable lady from Rukungiri, honourable lady from Kibale, honourable lady from Kanungu, honourable lady from Arua, honourable lady from Terego, honourable lady from Kiboga and the honourable lady from Butambala. (Laughter)  Let me start with the ladies – and the honourable lady from Napak. Please, in that order, let us do it quickly and then I go to the honourable men. (Laughter)5.52MS SAUDA KAUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also stand to support the motion. I congratulate our President for the trust that he was given as the chairman of the two summits. I also take this opportunity to appreciate all the Ugandans because they were cooperative; many roads were blocked, but they adhered because we had visitors in the country. (Applause)The other thing, now that the honourable minister for works is here, is about the speed of working on the roads that was put in. I wish we could continue with such speed – especially around the Mukwano Roundabout; it looks so beautiful at night. How I wish they could extend the speed and good work elsewhere, even in Mabira, so that we do away with the potholes that are in Mabira. I was getting worried that if the delegates were taken to Jinja for a trip, how would they see the beautiful forest with such potholes? I am asking the honourable minister about the speed they used around the Mukwano Roundabout. It is nice work, but they used a shorter period, not like the way they have been doing work in the other places. Thank you. We congratulate our President for such a huge post. Thank you. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11611THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.5.53MS MIDIUS NATUKUNDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking our President for having held two successful summits: NAM and the G77+China. I also thank him because we saw him do an oversight in the capital before the summits were held. We saw him visit the convention centre in Munyonyo and some of the roads. So, we can see that as part of this oversight, the summits were able to be successful. However, they say that behind every successful man, there is always a woman. Therefore, I take this opportunity to thank Mama Janet for standing behind our President to make sure that everything went on as planned. (Applause) I thank her for holding the side line meetings alongside the conferences. We saw her with the spouses of our guests at Serena. She also took them through the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre in Entebbe for tourism. We thank her for being an example, and for cheering us up. If they had gone upcountry to tour some places such as Bwindi and Queen Elizabeth, maybe it would have shown a bigger picture of how beautiful Uganda is. Nevertheless, we thank Mama  Janet and the President for the successful conventions hosted. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, Kanungu ? (Member rose_)  No, I do not want ‘my ladies’ to be interrupted. Procedure and other issues will come after ‘my ladies’ have spoken. (Laughter)5.55MS PATIENCE KINSHABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I join colleagues in thanking His Excellency, the President of Uganda for successfully hosting the two summits: NAM and G77+China. Having successful summits will open doors that have been closed for Ugandans for long. It will also help us to participate at the global level, whereby we can express our views and address challenges such as human rights and others. We can now even confidently express our agenda on climate change and poverty eradication. It will also enable Uganda to address issues that affect the country and other developing countries. Uganda will also benefit as a nation, for example, allowing her to voice their concerns and actively influence policies in decision making as a global nation. In Kanungu District, we benefited because we have two national parks, like Bwindi where we have gorillas. Most of these people who attended conventions managed to come and tour our gorillas. Economically, we benefited. I would like to congratulate everyone who participated in these summits. It changed Uganda’s image because globally, many people did not know how beautiful Uganda is. We want to congratulate President Museveni, for his successful convening of the summits.5.57MS LILLIAN PAPARU  (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the President and Ugandans at large for the successful summits hosted. Uganda is the Pearl of Africa and I think we portrayed it. Those who did not know Uganda very well have now believed. I would like to urge Government – (Interjections)  - yes, the President is the chairperson and he has done his part. The ball is in our hands to support him. Let us use all the platforms and opportunities that we can to make Uganda benefit from our President chairing. Our tourism is one of the areas that is generating a lot of tax. We can use this opportunity to market ourselves. This opportunity is going to make the world respect Uganda. That means, if we table our agenda very well, we can negotiate because our voices will be respected. 11612THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023We have challenges. Climate change is a global challenge and Uganda is facing it as well. We have not been complaining but we have financial gaps in tackling some of these things. So this is an opportunity that we can use to benefit Ugandans; to table our agenda, look for finances and regulate or improve on our climate issues, but also improve our tourism as well as the investment opportunities. There were a lot of side meetings, like one of my colleagues has said. Let us carry on those so that we can benefit. It can go into history that within this period - the impact will be seen on our achievements, in what we have received, in finances, in partnerships, in new negotiations and new contracts in the global world. I thank you.5.59MS NOELINE KISEMBO  (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank my senior, Hon. Dr Nsaba Buturo, for moving this motion. I join my colleagues to congratulate His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, on successfully hosting these two international events. Indeed, it was an excellent organisation and we did not have any bad incidences. We want to thank God that they ended successfully. We have registered a lot of achievements internationally because in the areas of tourism and investment, we have been able to showcase our country. Mr Speaker, my concern is one: we need to consolidate the achievements we have made. In the area of infrastructure, we have had a lot of roads worked on, as my colleagues have already alluded. However, we need to ensure that this expands and those that have been put in place are maintained. I have noted with concern - I pass along the northern bypass on a regular basis – that some of the guards that we put along the roads are already getting hit and spoiled in a short period. I appeal to Ugandans that we take care of and consolidate the achievements we have gained during this period.Now that the Minister of Works and Transport is here, let me say that we need to do something. I appeal to the House that when we have a request to expand the infrastructure in the metropolitan Kampala, we support it so that we do not have to rush when we have visitors coming in next time. Otherwise, it was an excellent organisation and I congratulate Ugandans because our flag has been raised high. Thank you.6.01MS FAITH NAKUT  (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join colleagues to support the motion to thank His Excellency, the President, for successfully hosting the two events back to back. A lot was done to make those events successful.I appreciate the opportunity that those events have given our country; the opportunity to chair Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) for the next two years, G77+China, for another one year and Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers of the Commonwealth (CSPOC) for another two years. It is a great chance for our country to influence what goes on in the continent and globally. We can push the agenda of trade, given that we are a landlocked country; the opportunities are many. Therefore, it is good to host. My colleagues have already explained the other benefits; I will not emphasise them. However, my memory has been refreshed by what happened. When the suggestion was brought to this House that we needed money to put up a conference facility, which we are now very proud of, the House opposed it, unfortunately. It caused the President to invite us to the State House - all the party whips - to again explain why we needed money for this facility. I think going forward, we should, even though we oppose, oppose objectively. Not everything that comes from Government is bad. Now we have a conference centre that we are proud of yet earlier on, we opposed it. Honourable colleagues, let us benefit from the age of our President. It comes with wisdom. When [Ms Paparu] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11613THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024we reason, let us do so objectively, not just opposing because it has come from the other side. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us listen to the Member for Terego and then Member for Kiboga.6.03MS ROSE OBIGAH  (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in congratulating the President of the Republic of Uganda. The culture that was displayed in form of dances was so unique. All the delegates enjoyed and I know many more will still come back to enjoy this. If you saw the art and craft that was displayed, the most unique you can ever find on this universe, it was because we hosted NAM and G77+China.Having the President as the President for G77+China and NAM, shows the level of intelligence. The intellectual capacity of my President is undoubtable. I want to allude that the President is going to take us on, come 2026. We are very proud of His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda. Every man has a mother. If you do not have one, you have a grandmother or a sister. This is because a woman nurtured him very well. We are proud to be women who nurtured our President. We are proud to be Ugandan. Thank you very much.6.04MS CHRISTINE KAAYA  (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would rather request that we change the motion to congratulating all Ugandans for having hosted the conferences. Congratulating the President for having won them two presidencies would, maybe, come from another subject matter. For sure, based on what other Members are sharing, we are congratulating very many people and interests. Mr Speaker, I am a climate change activist and I was very happy to see climate change as one of the discussion topics and issues for the conferences. At least, some of the global questions to Uganda tried to come out although not very well, especially on oil extraction and how they are saying we are contributing to carbon emissions. We needed to stress it and show them our readiness to offset the carbon emissions from our oil extraction. There was the issue of induced migration. We needed to share our current capacity as Uganda because some of these members have always pushed different nations to bring their populations here.Mr Speaker, we saw how some of the vegetation was planted and dried in two days, and we were like – we need to embrace urban agriculture because this will promote floriculture, which specifically plans for ornamentals. When we talked about a clean environment, I saw people concentrating on waste management, collection, and beautifying the city. They were talking about planting flowers. That is exactly what we want our urban authority to think about. It should not be that we are planting already full-grown seedlings that dry after two days and we get ashamed. I was very happy to see the programme of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). It was also non-aligned.I saw the First Lady moving with the other First Ladies and I was like, “Oh, we need to bring out the Office of the First Lady.” It is enough for her. We should remove the burden of the education ministry business from her because I saw that managing the businesses within the Office of the First Lady is enough, and based even at her age now. So, we were very happy to see a number of meetings within – I saw The Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) nations coming, and very many members of Parliament were shocked by the programme. Mr Speaker, it is also good to orient - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Aisha Kabanda.  11614THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20236.07MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in support of the motion. When I learned that NAM was coming here, I had a checklist of things I expected of NAM – of course, with a bit of scepticism. To me, one major issue was a tick to give a thumbs up. I expected NAM to come out strongly and speak about the war in Gaza. When I heard member states in NAM speak about it; condemn the war, and call for a ceasefire, I was like, “Yes, thumbs up.” That was enough for me. I congratulate my country and the member states of NAM that sat and looked at the plight of the children. By the time of the NAM Summit, over 10,000 children in Gaza had been killed. Over 1,000 children in Gaza had lost limbs – either a leg or a hand. Over 97 health centres had been destroyed. So, for NAM member states to come out openly and condemn the war in Gaza and call for ceasefire, was a thumbs up. What is the way forward now? I look forward to seeing my President, who is the chairperson of NAM – now write strongly to his colleague, President Biden, asking him to call for a ceasefire because the war in Gaza is still there because Israel has the support of the American President. If it were not for them and the United Kingdom (UK), the war would not be there by now.  I want to say thank you so much; for standing with the oppressed in the time of need. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I now pick the host Member of Parliament. 6.09MR DERRICK NYEKO (NUP, Makindye Division East, Kampala City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As colleagues thank the President and the country for hosting the NAM summit, it would be a disservice for my people if I do not raise issues that were left hanging. Mr Speaker, in a way of acting in panic, our Government came up with a Rapid Response Unit that cleared off people from the streets, including those of Gaba Road, Kibuli, the hosting community. They went far beyond the roads; over 300 homes were demolished. Today as I speak, there are mothers that do not have where to sleep. There are children that cannot go to school because they too do not have where to sleep.Our request is simple: Government should compensate the people that lost their homes, whose houses were demolished. It has been our calling and our request always.When Uganda hosted the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), these people on the roadside were affected. It is now, NAM and our people on the roadside are being affected. We have been requesting for a modern market to be constructed around that area. Not all the time that Uganda is hosting delegates that the locals and the hosting community have to suffer.Mr Speaker, it is therefore, my request that those who were affected and are homeless today, be compensated so that they can as well benefit from the fruits of NAM. We shall be doing a disservice to those people who think that they would have benefitted from NAM and today they are left homeless. Therefore, it is my appeal to the Government to come up and compensate these families.Mr Speaker, I have a petition to Parliament compiled by those people who lost their properties – even those whose homes were broken. I want to share this information with the Government so that it can reach out and see how it can compensate these people. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable member, compile the list and we will hand it over to the Government side because you are a Member of Parliament and you are speaking for your people. Thank you. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11615THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024MR NYEKO:  With your permission, Mr Speaker, I can lay it. The list is already compiled.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sure, you lay it on the Table. You have to read the document.MR NYEKO:  Yes, I read to you a petition by the people of Kansanga, Kalungu Heritage Zone and Kiwafu, by those people that request compensation for their properties that were lost during the preparations for the NAM summit. Allow, Mr Speaker, colleagues, to lay this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Such a petition, I can send it to either the committee or the minister. So, I am referring it to the minister responsible, for action. Thank you. Yes, honourable member for Nakawa.  6.13MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was told that Uganda qualified to host the NAM way back in 2019 but because of COVID-19, it was pushed to this year. Therefore, we had a lot of time to plan. We have all seen our deteriorating roads, particularly in Kampala, the hosting City. If we had planned well, believe me, you, Mr Speaker, we would have benefitted even much more under the Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibitions (MICE) industry, which is now one of the best industries. I do not think that there was justice that was done. Parliament also approved the supplementary budget of Shs 60 billion to Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), for preparation of NAM. But to date, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) has only released Shs 20 billion yet KCCA made commitments with contractors. As we appreciate the host President, there are people that are crying, particularly the contractors. More important to note is that even the works they did, because they were doing it under panic, they did cosmetic work. It is my humble request that if we know that we have such events, we do prepare early.Last to note, Mr Speaker, is that one of the great principles for NAM is human rights. My brother here has spoken about people whose human rights were violated, particularly those that work on the streets of Kampala. Because they lack decent work spaces, this is where they have been earning from. They were evicted from such spaces without alternatives. They are now crying; their children are not going to school because of NAM.It is important that we consider the petition and support these people. Otherwise, if we had prepared well, worked on the roads, particularly those that are going to Kidepo, because I was told that the roads going to Kidepo where we have toponymic features are not good enough for the tourism industry to benefit from. Therefore, I pray that in the future - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable Members of Parliament from Kampala, at least you benefitted from infrastructure development. Your constituencies – I drive in your – my brother Nyeko’s constituents; you now drive on carpets. I really hope that one was a positive despite the other issues.That helps us - colleagues, what I have learnt is that when people are looking at life, they need to look at it from an aspect of a glass being half full, not half empty. When it is half full, you are appreciating the effort that has been made, but that cannot stop you from putting questions on what has gone wrong. When it is half empty, you are not appreciating whatever has been made, even if you need one dose to make it full. The MPs have told me they have appreciated the Parliament. Now that I am done with my ladies, let us hear from our brother from Vura, Hon. Yovan Adriko? 11616THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20236.17MR YOV AN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues to congratulate our beloved President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Commander-in-Chief of the UPDF. Mr Speaker, for sure our beloved President deserves being appreciated. The President has done a wonderful job, and so, we Ugandans need to appreciate and support him. Although we have our challenges, like corruption, which everybody must join hands together to fight because it is not an issue for one person; it is a general issue. If Ugandans united to fight the corruption, I am sure Uganda is going to be the best.Secondly, I am happy that our beloved Minister of Works and Transport is around. While I congratulate him too, I would like to ask him to at least improve our roads in West Nile because right when one drives to Arua, they will have challenges arriving there well. Honourable minister, I request you - people love our beloved President and Uganda but our challenge is only the roads. At least I request you, my brother, to try to help us; if you improve our roads, Uganda will be the best. Otherwise, congratulations to H.E, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, and congratulations all my colleagues. Let us join our hands to support our Mzee  in 2026. I beg to move. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We have a colleague who is the Chairperson of the Chamber of Commerce for West Nile - Hon. Atima, the business community must be –6.19MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua City):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion and I want to join my colleagues in congratulating His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for successfully hosting this summit and G77 plus China.Mr Speaker, from what I followed out of this summit, our President was able to lecture the world’s presidents for a very long time, by giving a speech from his head without reading from papers any point that he raised. This has never happened in the history of Africa, that an African leader lectures the entire world from his head. That tells us that we have a President who has wisdom.President Museveni is a special gift to this country. Many countries would have loved to have him, but we are blessed to have His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni.Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the ministers who supported the summit, especially in hosting the heads of state from various countries. The company that they gave to them, the image of this country that they portrayed really indicated that Uganda is a country that is a destination to be moved to.Lastly, I thank the security team. Without the assurance of the security of this country, other heads of state will not come to this country. I thank the security, all the agencies, the Internal Security Organisation (ISO), External Security Organisation (ESO), Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), and Special Forces Command (SFC).I would like to say this; President Museveni gave tough words – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Just conclude.MR ATIMA:  Thank you very much for this opportunity. President Museveni gave tough words to the world presidents in the sense of where many countries would want to impose issues on other countries’ affairs. He came out clearly and told them that they should allow every country to handle their issues domestically. That was a very strong statement that no President can issue because of fear of being, you know, victimised or whatever. But I love our President for that strong resilience of standing for this country because our motto says “For God and my country.” MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11617THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024As a God-fearing President, he really stood for this country. I congratulate him and thank him so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chairman of the Committee on Climate Change. These are the global issues, which needed to be tackled.6.22MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the mover of this motion to congratulate His Excellency, the President and the people of Uganda, for successfully hosting very important meetings, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and the Group of 77 plus China. Also in between there was the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and previously there had been the Speakers’ Conference.It is only someone who is informed and exposed that can manage to host such summits. In September 2023, when I went for the UN General Assembly in New York, there were sentiments that; “Is it possible for Uganda to host two meetings concurrently?” What will happen to heads of state who are coming to Uganda for all that long? I am very happy that Ambassador Ayebare gave all the assurance that it was possible and I am very happy that we managed to host these very important meetings. The NAM summit comprising 120 member states, a number of them attended this meeting. However, when you look at 1961 in former Yugoslavia or in Belgrade, there were only 25 countries that attended a similar meeting. And it moved from there and we congratulate President Tito by then who initiated that. And it came to Nehru in India, then later to Egypt. These were very important things. Now the question is for Uganda to position herself: how can we benefit from NAM and Group of 77 plus China? The President of Uganda has now become the President of Group of 77 plus China and also the NAM. All these countries are looking at us in terms of all sectors of the economy. They are looking at us on all issues from climate change to human rights to democracy to world trade issues. These are things now we need to position ourselves in. Positioning means if someone is doing construction, you supply the building materials; you will all work.Now, the area which we need to exploit is the one of tourism. Mr Speaker here knows that there are tourism roads in western Uganda. We need to improve on them so that we can attract more tourists. We need to keep our country clean. Azerbaijan hosted the NAM Summit, and right now, there are so many meetings going to Baku in Azerbaijan. In November this year, the Climate Change COP29 will go to Azerbaijan because they have now put up facilities to host the world.We need to look at the issues of market. But the market should not be anyhow. The market should be where we have a comparative advantage – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now conclude, honourable member.MR SONGA:  Thank you very much. When we take coffee, for example; Arabica coffee is on high demand in the world and our competitor in Africa is Ethiopia, which is nearby. When you look at countries like Vietnam, they are growing Robusta coffee. So, we need to identify our priorities and take this high value crops where we have comparative advantage. Lastly, –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I would like to add that those who doubted our capacity to host two big meetings concurrently, tell them we hosted three, because we added on the IGAD Summit, so we even went beyond. But some of you are calling it “Siskop” (Laughter) It was CSPOC. This is just a light moment.11618THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023There is a NAM Parliamentary Network, which means Uganda is automatically the Chair and our Speaker, Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among is the Chair and I am the Deputy. Therefore, you should congratulate me as well.  (Applause)  That is always held alongside the IPU conferences. So, Uganda will have that on the sidelines of the IPU conferences. Honourable colleagues, I want to pick two people from two constituencies – people with disability and the youth. And of course, to conclude for us, the Backbencher will be the professor of international matters and political science. The rest of us will listen.6.27MR MPINDI BUMALI (Independent, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues to congratulate His Excellency the President and Ugandans for having these successful conferences. Mr Speaker, I congratulate you because I remember when we were discussing the supplementary budget, specifically on having the convention in Speke Resort Munyonyo, Members were bitter, but you guided that we needed to host it there because they have facilities and that helped us to pass the budget. I congratulate you because we now have a convention centre.I congratulate Ugandans, especially the Kampala residents because when the leaders of the Opposition, Hon. Kyagulanyi and the forces of change wanted to disorganise NAM Summit by planting banana plantations in the middle of the road, they resisted it. (Applause)  We thank Kampala people for that. On the other hand, I thank Members of the Opposition because they did not follow their leaders. They stood with Ugandans and NAM was successful. Thank you. (Applause)6.29MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I join the rest of the colleagues in congratulating His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the people of Uganda, for successfully holding two global summits.Secondly, there is a popular book, “The Wretched of the Earth”,  by Frantz Fanon. In that book Fanon says  that every generation, out of relative obscurity, should be able to identify its generational mission, and it chooses to either fulfil or betray it.I thank President Museveni because he has been a man of all seasons. He demonstrated the ability to identify every generational mission and he chose to fulfil it. He is a leader of all generations; very relevant now, tomorrow, and even in the future. We congratulate him. Mr Speaker, hosting the two summits has demonstrated and agree on three fundamental grounds, which are relevant to the youth.One, is that the summits have all acknowledged the youth as a fundamental ingredient for development of our countries.Two, both summits have also acknowledged the youth as not only the future, but even the present of all our countries.Finally, both summits have also acknowledged that the greatest contemporary challenge of the youth now is unemployment and must be addressed tomorrow, not even today. God bless NAM and President Museveni. 6.31PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County, Sheema):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in congratulating His Excellency, the President, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, the organising committee, the people of Uganda for a successful hosting of the summit, and our Speaker and the Deputy Speaker – our beloved presiding officers – for now hosting the Non-Aligned Movement Working Group in Parliament. In the world of scholarship, we say that foreign policy is a reflection of domestic policy. In the [The Deputy Speaker] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11619THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024words of Cabral, theory guides practice and practice shapes theory.The Uganda government has been very consistent in its clarity on its ideological convictions. (Applause)  Our ideological conviction of struggling for freedom and justice, supporting liberation movements in the global south, our principle of Pan-Africanism, undoubtedly attracted the NAM movement and it was no surprise that we were given this opportunity. When I used to lecture at Makerere University, I was a coordinator of a programme called International Relations and Diplomatic Studies. In a course of diplomacy, one of the topics we taught was the Non-Aligned Movement. Our students came from the Greater East Africa. It was very gratifying for our former students and even the current students to see the Non-Aligned Movement Summit being hosted here. The things we were teaching them, which they thought were theoretical, were now seen in practice.However, Mr Speaker, there is an area where we have not been doing very well, but which we can take advantage of NAM to improve it. Our representation on international bodies. When I make a comparative analysis of Uganda, Ghana, Nigeria, Egypt and even Tanzania here, I notice that our representation is very low. We can now use this opportunity to promote our highly educated and professional people, regardless of their political convictions, to represent us on the international arena. Finally, is the issue of the global markets. Yes, we can talk about regional markets, COMESA, IGAD, East African Community, but the much-valued foreign exchange we need, we must penetrate the global market. That is why a point was being driven by one of the MPs here. We need to promote our coffee. Our coffee is very valuable and on high demand, in China and elsewhere. This is an opportunity for us to promote our commodities and bring the foreign exchange we need, so that we can - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Conclude, professor.PROF. MUSHEMEZA:  If we can address the challenges of the market and income. Lastly, His Excellency, the President, is super. Listening to him using the political economy lens analysis, he brought the world on his desk, and dissected it without any fear or favour. Uganda is now a global leader. I congratulate him and the entire people of Uganda.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Bahati? 6.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (IN -DUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Thank you –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : I just want to confirm what the professor said, in terms of what he taught because I am one of his students of International Relations at Makerere University. Professor, you are vindicated. We were doubting, saying we don’t see this thing that you taught anywhere. Now, you are vindicated.MR BAHATI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We would like to thank God that we hosted these events. If there is anyone who doubted the position of Uganda in the international community and if there is anyone who wondered about the confidence that the international community has in President Yoweri Museveni, then, the hosting and electing of the President to chair NAM and G77 plus China is the answer to them – and we did it extremely well. (Applause)Mr Speaker, I was given an opportunity to be a courtesy minister for the head of state of The Bahamas. The Bahamas has a population of 400,000 people, but it has nine million guests every year. It is very strong in tourism. In one of the meetings we had with him, he said he had been reading about Lake Victoria in history, but had never had an opportunity to 11620THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023come. Therefore, he requested that we take him to Lake Victoria.We went to one of the islands on Lake Victoria, Chimpanzee Island, and he saw those animals. He also went to the zoo. This is what he said: “Uganda is a land of potential.” (Applause)  We would like to congratulate President Yoweri Museveni and Mama Janet, for the work well done. We would also like to congratulate, as many Members have said, the security. I witnessed how the security of this country worked during those days. They never slept. (Applause)  I was on the boat to Lake Victoria and I saw – you cannot imagine the capacity we have for marines. It is amazing how this happened. We would like to thank God and all those who participated.However, Mr Speaker, NAM has 120 countries and we have 80 per cent of the world’s population. This is very crucial for us and significant in terms of markets. So, we would like to appeal to everybody who is involved in any activity that can support trade and industrialisation, to take advantage of this huge market from which we can earn and improve the balance of payments for our country. It is important that we look at it from that perspective.Finally, Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the leadership, including Members of Parliament here- (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you need permission to switch it on again? Okay, you can conclude.  MR BAHATI:  When we host events of this nature, we need to be one; we need to be Ugandans. I saw how Members of Parliament were one, supporting NAM. It is unfortunate that some of these incidents happened on the streets of Kampala. However, Mr Speaker, Shakespeare once said: “All is well that ends well”. So, if there is something that happened that was not well, let us take it that all was well. Congratulations, Uganda. I am proud to be a Ugandan.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Leader of the Opposition? 6.39THE SHADOW MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Joseph Ssewungu):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In any society, there is nobody who would not wish to have visitors or guests in their home, and so, it is about the preparation one does for the visitors. I would like to thank the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance who took his time to ask Ugandans to smile because he was seeing Ugandans not smiling before the conferences. Indeed, this is about sensitising the masses. When the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) was coming here, I remember the late Kagole Kivumbi, who was the spokesperson of Parliament, spent a lot of time moving around the country – going on radios – to educate the masses about the importance of the conferences. Therefore, if you bring a conference or summit to the country and you think that Ugandans will take it wholesomely without knowing its interests and benefits, you will face challenges. Secondly, when we come here to give our evaluation, it is for you to go and correct the mistakes that you may have made. For example, everybody is praising soldiers in Uganda, but facts are telling us they were not paid properly. As I talked to one of them, I noticed that they were given Shs 30,000 for the work they did throughout the conferences. That is not equitable. I pray and I beseech the Minister of Works and Transport, Mr Speaker, through you – if there is anybody who suffered through this conference, they were the pedestrians. In Uganda, being a professional teacher, if I get any teacher in my school asking any question about the meaning of zebra crossing in Uganda, I will ask the [Mr Bahati] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11621THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024teacher to remove that question temporarily. This is because as we speak now, I doubt whether even citizens in Uganda know what is meant by a zebra crossing; drivers cannot wait for pedestrians to cross the roads. All these were the challenges. I happened to meet – the traffic jam we had throughout these conferences around the roundabout to Mityana. There were challenges. I had to get out of my car to talk to soldiers because they were all holding sticks. Conferences must look beautiful. When you close roads – for example, I have seen on X  (formerly Twitter) that wherever the President is, they must put lorries to stop people from using or accessing the roads around that place. That is not what happens in other countries. Let us desist from all that.Guns can be kept away. Once you sensitise Ugandans, they will not commit any offences. They will respect your conferences. However, the first impression of Uganda is seeing vehicles, big motorcades, guns and artillery that are welcoming guests into the country. Those are ugly scenes. Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Conclude. MR SSEWUNGU:  A while ago, we had the Minister of Health here. You know what she said – they had to collect ambulances from all hospitals to assist the NAM guests. What were the alternatives for the hospitals at that time? Yes, I have an ambulance in Kalungu; you took it. What did you give me? What have you given to these hospitals after returning the ambulances? Did you service them? Have you given them some consideration for what they did for you? What happened at that time to the patients that were in the hospitals? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Gen. Kavuma wanted to clarify something.MAJ. GEN. KA VUMA:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to clear the record on what the LOP said. I do not know whether it is allowed, but since you have allowed me -  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are a Member of Parliament. MAJ. GEN. KA VUMA:  In his submission, he mentioned that he interacted with one of the soldiers or some soldiers or security operatives who revealed to him that they were not paid or they were paid less; he mentioned Shs 30,000. I do not know how much they were supposed to have been paid, but I want to put it on record that security people do not demand payment for conferences or whatever comes. For us, we serve the people of Uganda. (Applause)  We are paid our salaries. If allowances come, they come. If they do not, we do not go to the streets to demand for –  Hon. Ssewungu rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, please, Hon. Ssewungu. Do not harass the general. He listened to you in peace; so, allow him also to speak in peace. MAJ. GEN. KA VUMA:  So, really, I do not know the kind of soldier(s) you interacted with. If he said that, then, that one is an undisciplined soldier and, please – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, General. Hon. Ssewungu, I guided the House: Once you speak twice on information, I will not allow you.MAJ. GEN. KA VUMA:  I just want to clear that, Mr Speaker. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ssewungu was very concise because he knows soldiers put on uniforms, which are written with identification; so, he said, an “operative”. (Laughter) If you ask him for evidence, he does not have. I will ask the Hon. Dr Baryomunsi on behalf of the Government side.6.45THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also add my voice to thank, Hon. Dr 11622THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023Nsaba-Buturo, for the motion and honourable members for overwhelmingly supporting it. I also stand to support the motion that we congratulate our President Yoweri Museveni upon being elected the Chairperson of NAM and G77 plus China.Just allow me few comments. I will also respond to some of the issues that have been raised. As we thank the President, I also want to thank you, the presiding officer of Parliament and Members of Parliament because the resources we used were appropriated by this House, therefore we want to extend our appreciation to the House.  (Applause)We thank the media for covering the events both locally and internationally because the whole world was focusing on Uganda. We had accredited over 400 media houses; so, for that week, the whole world was focusing on Uganda. To the public servants who were involved – I went to receive the Vice President of Iran at 5.00 a.m. at Entebbe. The security officers, protocol officers, immigration officers were up and running and working very actively as if it was midday. We thank all the public servants that were involved in the arrangements. If you wanted to see the mood of the delegates and how they appreciated President Yoweri Museveni, you should have been there at the closing ceremony. The President spoke from his heart without a written speech. He got a standing ovation from the delegates. They were impressed with the way he summarised the whole conference and the message he gave the delegates. Therefore, it is worth appreciating the President and congratulating him upon this victory.Mr Speaker, it is the first time, in the history of NAM and G77 plus China, for a President of a country to be chairperson of both organisations simultaneously. (Applause)  NAM now has 121 countries because South Sudan has joined. The G77 plus China has 134 countries constitute over 80 per cent of the global population and it is not automatic that when you are a member, you are allowed to host. There is a lot of diplomatic foot work that you have to do but also, they assess your ability, capacity on whether you can hold these conferences.For Uganda to be chosen to host these two conferences meant a vote of confidence and trust in the President, the leadership of this country as well as Ugandans.In the coming years, the President and indeed Uganda is going to play a very big role in influencing global decisions and processes, addressing issues of South-South collaboration ranging from skills and technology transfer, issues of the youth, climate change, Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), financing development, the debt burden and many others that affect issues in the global south.Therefore, all of us, like you said, Mr Speaker – even as the spokesperson of the Government, I will be speaking for over 80 per for NAM and the South-South region. Therefore, we are poised to benefit a lot as a country in terms of tourism, trade and investment, strategic markets for our exports and many other benefits. Finally, there are a few issues that honourable members raised and as Government, we take note of them and where we need to improve, we shall.On the issue of infrastructure, we call upon Ugandans to maintain the infrastructure and the developments, which were put in place. The beautification, the flowers, and the grass we have planted, let us maintain. Visitors have not gone with them; they are here to stay.The Government is committed to ensuring that we address the gaps in infrastructure. We did pass resources here in this House from ADB and World Bank to fix the transport infrastructure in Kampala Greater Metropolitan Area.We passed these resources. However, I have information that the leadership of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) is frustrating those efforts. I hope Gen. Katumba, who is here, will work with Kampala and its leaders so [Dr Baryomunsi] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION11623THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024that those resources are made available, and we fix the remaining roads in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area so that the potholes we are taking about become an issue of history. I would like to explain that all of us were here - during COVID-19 we put most of the resources to the management of COVID-19 because we are expecting these resources from ADB and World Bank, this explains why some of the roads have not been fixed. Once the resource is ready, the roads should be worked on.Hon. Nyeko has brought the petition, we receive it, we shall look at it and address it. However, as we receive it, let me quote for you a law that we passed here, the Roads Act.  If you read section 65(1)(e), it prohibits anybody who does business in the shoulders, sidewalks and road reserves. The law creates an offence that if you are convicted of that offence, you will pay 168 currency points or seven years’ imprisonment. What was done, Mr Speaker –(Interjections) - hold on, Hon. Balimwezo.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Information is always for the one holding the Floor.DR BARYOMUNSI:  What was done, Mr Speaker, to the best of my knowledge is that in an effort to create orderliness, it is those who are actually flouting the law. Doing business in the road reserves, in the shoulders of the roads who were advised to go to the right places. We shall look at the petition and formally respond to it since it has been brought to the House. Otherwise, the law was made by this House that we need to respect the road reserves, sidewalks, and the shoulders of the roads. We shall not allow people to do business on the roadside in conflict with the law. Hon. Nyeko - the honourable minister has already issued a circular to that effect. If there are contractors who have not been paid, they will be paid because we passed resources here.I thank you very much but we take note of all issues which have been raised. Finally, I just want to propose a small amendment in the prayer that the Hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo has given us to pass. Number one, he says, we collectively congratulate the President of Uganda for being appointed the chairperson. It should be “for being elected” because he became chairperson through an election by acclamation.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correction.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Replace the word “appointed” with “elected”. I thank you. Once again, I thank the mover of the motion and honourable members for supporting.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Now I put the question that the motion for congratulating His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for successfully hosting the 19th Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement and the Third South Summit of the Group of 77 plus China Heads of State and Government, be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Please, let the resolution be extract -ed, together with the correction that has been identified by the Hon. Dr Baryomunsi, and be transmitted to His Excellency, the President.  Congratulations, the Hon. Dr Nsaba-Buturo, and I wish you the best.  Colleagues, like I told you, I want us to receive the report of the Sugar Bill; we will just receive the report. I will not put the question for the second reading. You know there are two questions on that. One is on the motion, where it is seconded and then we put the question but I will not put the question to that; we shall just receive the report. On receiving the report, we do not need quorum.  It is on putting the question and voting on the question where we need quorum.  11624THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023BILLSSECOND READINGTHE SUGAR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20236.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sugar (Amendment) Bill, 2023” be read a second time.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Mushemeza, Hon Obigah, Hon. Alomu, Hon. Nyeko, Member for Nakawa, Jinja, Kiboga, the Leader of the Opposition, Member for Soroti, Dean of the Independents, Gen. Katumba, Hon. Bahati, Minister of State for Local Government, Hon. Muwuma, the whole House has really seconded this.Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion, briefly?MR BAHATI:  Mr Speaker, this Bill is to amend the Sugar Act of 2020, and it has only two amendments that we are proposing to this House.  One is to move away from the Sugar Board to the Stakeholders’ Council, because after the passing of the Bill into an Act, we realised that it was important that we have a body that has the stakeholders to determine the affairs of the sugar industry.  The second amendment, we had a formula that determines the price of sugarcanes in the current Act. However, there was an error.  Instead of looking at the price of sugarcanes, we put the price of sugar.  Therefore, this amendment is here to do exactly those two things.  One, to put in place a council.  The second one is to correct an error in the formula for determining the price of sugarcanes to facilitate the development of this important industry.  Mr Speaker, I know sugar is sweet and the Sugar Bill is also sweet, I propose that this Bill be considered by the House. THE SUGAR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable chairperson, can you present the report? 6.58THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE, AND INDUSTRY (Mr Mwine Mpaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Sugar (Amendment) Bill, 2023. I do not think I need to read the introduction and the methodology.  Allow me to go straight to the observations of the committee.  Clause 4The Bill under Clause 4 provides for composition of the Council, with the minister having powers to appoint the Chairperson and members of the Council.  The committee observed that the Bill makes specific provisions for the representation of the Government of Uganda on the Council, which is considered a private body or entity. The committee further observed that the Bill grants the minister powers to appoint the Chairperson of the Council and some representatives to the Council, save for the Permanent Secretaries of the ministries responsible for agriculture, finance, industry or their representatives not being below the rank of Commissioner.  This presupposes inherent and positive vested interests the Government of Uganda has in the private sector-led industry.  The committee further observed that given that representatives specified under paragraph (c) are members of known associations like Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association and the Millers Association of Sugarcane (MAS), it was easy and possible for the minister to identify and appoint such representatives to the Council as compared to the sugarcane out-growers who do not have a known umbrella organisation.  11625THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024The committee further observes that the Bill presupposes, under paragraph (b), that all sugarcane out growers in the sugarcane growing regions of Uganda are unionised and are fully registered members of the sugarcane growing cooperative unions, cooperative societies and associations. The committee recommends that the Government should support the initiatives of the out-growers to be organised in the cooperative unions, societies and associations.  Mr Speaker, the Council is going to have four representatives of the farmers who are the out-growers and four representatives of the millers. So, it may be easier to get nominations for the representatives of the millers, but it may be very difficult for the out-growers because they are not unionised or they are not organised.  You have several farmers in Busoga and in Northern Uganda. We therefore, recommend that Government should support the initiatives of the out-growers to be organised in cooperative unions.  The committee also received proposals from Busoga Growers Cooperative Union Limited, that the number of representatives of sugarcane out-growers should be increased from four to seven, with the justification that sugarcane out-growers were more in number than the millers.  The committee was informed that despite farmers’ contributions in sustaining the sugar industry, farmers have not benefited much from the industry, and this is the time farmers were empowered to benefit from the industry.  Recommendations of the committeeThe committee recommends that in appointing the Chairperson and members of the Council, the minister should conduct prior due diligence to ensure that representatives, particularly those with voting rights, are drawn from the legally registered farmer and millers’ cooperative unions, societies and associations, and that such associations are nominated, the said individuals for appointment as representatives to the council. Clause 7The committee observed that the Bill makes no specific provisions relating to the mechanisms or avenues through which the aggrieved party or applicants for grant of license under paragraph (b) can petition or seek redress from the relevant authorities in the event of denial or rejection of her application. Mr Speaker and honourable members, the Council is supposed to recommend, if someone wants a license, the Council is supposed to make a recommendation to the minister who then grants the license. What we are saying is that there will be no avenue for redress in case the Council refuses to give someone a license and therefore there will be no avenue for that person to seek redress before the minister approves this license or otherwise.  The committee recommends that there should be an appeal mechanism in place for the party aggrieved to seek redress in the event of rejection or denial of his or her application for a license.  Clause 12Clause 12, which seeks to amend Section 17 of the Sugar Act, 2020 introduces a sugar levy to be imposed on millers for the purpose of funding the activities of the Council.  The Government is saying the millers now will contribute to the levy that will run the Council.  The committee observed that whereas the Bill under Clause 3 establishes the Council and empowers the same Council under Clause 12 to impose a levy on the millers to finance its activities, the Council is a private entity-body to which Government may have limited control and influence.  The committee further observed that the Bill does not prescribe or detail the manner in which the levy imposed on the miller would be administered and the implications that may arise, particularly on operations of the Council in the event that the miller contests the levy or refuses to adhere to the provisions of Clause 12.  11626THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023The committee was informed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that since the Council was private sector-led, and so, a private entity, the revenue collections arising from the imposition of the sugar levy on the millers would not form part of or be deposited with the Consolidated Fund.  However, in his submission before the committee, the Attorney-General stated that whereas the Council was a private entity, the levy to be imposed on the millers and total collections made would certainly attract interest from the Government of Uganda, particularly on how the collections would be dispensed to facilitate the activities of the Council.  The committee observed that since the Government of Uganda has had interest in the affairs of private entities like Uganda Law Society, the committee further observed that given that the provisions as specified under Clause 12 of the Bill would not entirely be a private matter, Government of Uganda would, at an appropriate time, come in to offer regulatory oversight on the operations of the Council.  So, we are saying that much as they are collecting this money, Government should come in to audit how they are going to spend this money.  In their submissions before the committee, representatives of farmers proposed that in order to ensure involvement of farmers in the decision-making process in the council, promotion and safeguard of interests of the farmers in the council, and to avoid cases of undue influence and control by millers, farmers should as well be subjected to payment of the levy, but in varying proportions. This was in the presence actually of the Members of Parliament. The farmers’ cooperatives want the farmers to also pay this levy. However, the committee was of the considered opinion that this would lead to an extra charge on the income per tonne of cane supplies, and would as well be counterproductive to the development of the sugar industry. For us to impose another tax already on the farmer, much as the farmers want it, in the future they may judge this Parliament the wrong way. This is because when one takes their sugarcane to the factory at Shs 160,000 per tonne, it means they will deduct Shs 20,000 from the money they are supposed to get. The committee is of the considered opinion that this should be an extra charge and therefore, the farmers should not contribute.Matters incidental thereto – these are matters that came up, much as they are not in the Bill or in the Law. The matter of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is issuing licences or certificates or letters of no objection to millers to establish sugar mills contrary to the Sugar Act 2020. When the Sugar Act was passed in the previous Parliament, the mandate of issuing licences went to the Board. However, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives has been illegally - I may say illegally - issuing licences to certain individuals erroneously. Luckily enough, the Minister is here. The committee considered a matter in which the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives issued licences in the disguise of certificate/letters of no objection to millers to establish sugar mills in some parts of the country. The committee noted that this was done in contravention of the Sugar Act, 2020, which mandates the Uganda Sugar Board to issue such licences. During the interactions with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Attorney-General in a meeting held on Thursday, 25 January 2024, the committee received confirmation from both the Minister and Attorney-General that the licences issued after the coming into force of the Sugar Act were null and void, and needed to be revoked. The Attorney-General informed the committee that the line officers in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, who issued the licences should take personal responsibility THE SUGAR (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023 [Mr Mpaka]11627THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATHURSDAY , 1 FEBRUARY 2024for the anomaly and not the Government. We have cited several court cases there. Basically, we are saying you cannot cure something that is illegal. Committee observationsThe committee observed that since the licences, certificates/letters of no objection issued by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives were issued contrary to the Sugar Act 2020, they were null and void. Committee recommendation The committee recommends that the licences issued by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should be regularised through proper and lawful channels. It was brought to the attention of the committee that there are a number of millers that were licensed without proof of a nucleus farm to guarantee sustainable supplies of cane. The committee noted that because of lack of nucleus farms for self-sustenance, the millers end up poaching cane belonging to other established millers. It was also established that some millers have kept their licences without adhering to the Sugar Act 2020. This creates a production gap and stifles the sugar industry. The recommendation of the committee now is that all the new licences that are going to be issued with effect from the establishment of this council, one should show capacity of a nucleus estate of 50 per cent of one’s crushing capacity, regardless of where it is. At least you must have a plantation somewhere of 50 per cent of your crushing capacity. They will issue the licence first, then give you five years to establish, because you cannot establish a plantation before they have given you a licence. You are not sure if they will give you the licence. After you have been given a licence, they give you five years to establish a nucleus estate of at least 50 per cent of your crushing capacity. In conclusion, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry recommends that subject to the proposed amendments, the Bill be passed. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I would have put the debate on Tuesday, but Tuesday is Tarehe Sita  Day and it will take place in Busoga, which is the sugarcane growing area. I would be suffocating the MPs from that area. I am going to consult with the chairperson – tentatively I am looking at Wednesday - because there is an assignment we had given to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I will inform you on Tuesday when we shall have it. Now, prepare. When we make this Law, it is not only for farmers. There are also millers. Otherwise, farmers will not benefit when there are no millers. I remember the other day when we had an incident, the farmers had nowhere to sell sugarcane, and they asked us to allow them to sell it to Kenya. We have to be very cautious because the sugar produced here is for both the local and international markets. We have to be cautious to have a balanced Law that mostly favours our farmers because they are here every day and feed the millers. We should not suffocate the industry, and keep it competitive so that we serve both sugar to both local and international consumers. I hope we shall have no emotions. Last time, when we had the sugar law, we stood by the farmers, especially on the issue of zoning. Hon. Walyomu mobilised me a thousand times. He was always on my neck. Let us read the report, and have a debate next time. I wish you a successful Tarehe Sita . The House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 7.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 6 February 2024 at 2.00 p.m.)  11628THE CIVIL A VIATION AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2023