

Wednesday, 19 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to thank you, for the work you did yesterday. I hope that we shall work expeditiously to ensure the work on our Order Paper is done as quickly as possible. There are a few matters of national concern.

2.54
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have been following your good advice to this country on Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU).

And it has come to our attention that KCCA is making an attempt to procure close to 1,000 buses from India. Sometime last year, the President officially opened a bus assembling industry at Namanve; it is called Metu-Zhong Tong bus-assembling plant. The plant will have capacity to assemble 50 buses per day. They have all the equipment and machinery in the country and it is a Ugandan owned company, not Chinese. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table –(Interjection)– as I illustrated, the company is able to fabricate a thousand or more city buses in Kampala Namanve; they have all the equipment and machinery. It is owned by Ugandans and employs Ugandans.

Therefore, it is my concern that suffocating such local innovations, which are employing Ugandans by making Indians rich in India, where we do not see the value chain of such industries being beneficial to Ugandans, is very wrong for the country.

I have come here to raise this matter and to inform the nation and all Ugandans that this is one of the industries that the President officially opened at Namanve Industrial Park. They are fabricating buses for schools and other public transport entities.
 
I beg to lay this important information on the Table. I am sure it will help us in asking our Ugandan Government parastatals and organisations to support the local industries here in our country. 

It is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker, that you investigate this matter, through a parliamentary committee and ensure Ugandan products are promoted. This culture should be promoted by Parliament by making Ugandan Government parastatals purchase Ugandan products. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ruhunda. As Ugandans, we should promote our country. If we are going to create employment in other countries and we have unemployment here, that is not right. I would like to ask the Committee on Trade and Industry to examine the complaint by hon. Ruhunda and give us a report next week because this is urgent. 

It is important that we support Ugandan industries to grow. If we import from India, we are supporting the Indian economy, employment, industries at the cost of Ugandans. I am, therefore, giving them one week to investigate that matter and report to us next week on Thursday. Thank you.

3.01
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the horrible state in which some markets in Kampala and around Wakiso areas are operating.

It is our responsibility, as Government, to make sure we provide a conducive working environment and conditions for the citizens. Also in the same spirit be able to provide equitable service delivery countrywide.

Madam Speaker, when you look around you realise that some of these markets, and the way they are operating in regard to garbage collection, is not good. A case in point is Kireka Market. That market has garbage that has stayed for many weeks, uncollected yet that is a very big danger to the community. The drainage system is blocked, putting the health of citizens operating there at risk. The poor hygiene in those markets is also very questionable. I believe it is very important for us to provide conducive work conditions for our people.

The safety and location of these markets in places - for example Kireka Market is in between the highway and railway line. Therefore, it is very difficult for people to cross to the other side. We have witnessed a number of deaths from accidents around that market.

It is, therefore, my prayer, Madam Speaker - because these people pay taxes and we have technical people in all these institutions. I am wondering why we do not provide the best services to these market vendors and people who go to purchase food stuff in such markets –(Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, colleague for giving me way. The information I would like to give you is that last week when we had a meeting with the tourism caucus, there emerged an allegation that one of the strong factors affecting tourism is food hygiene after security. And when you look at the markets near the roads and you look at the food, our visitors try to associate it with food in the hotels. Therefore, we have problems.

Ms bigirwa: It is important that as leaders, we ably provide timely disposal and collection of garbage in some of these places. 

Secondly, when do we collect the garbage? It is not about collecting but what time do we collect it? Like in other developed states, there is no need of us collecting garbage during the day and it goes around littering the entire city.

Thirdly, it is very important for Government and the various institutions and departments to learn to desilt these drainages because if they do not, there is a lot of runaway water that collects in the drainages. It causes a lot of collection –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: We do not have a minister for public health because this matter touches both Kampala and Wakiso. I do not know whether we can ask the minister – can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development come and respond to it tomorrow? It deals with markets in the city of Kampala and Wakiso.

3.04
The Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I said that the Minister for Kampala Affairs, working with Minister of Health can prepare a joint statement and bring it to the House because this touches the operations of the city and also the public health.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we also need to involve the Minister for Local Government because Wakiso is a separate Local Government.

Mr fungaroo: Madam Speaker, this is a problem of waste management in urban areas. It is not only here in Wakiso. It is a big problem even to the small centres, which are coming up.
 
Therefore, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development must be put to task. It is their duty as urbanisation goes on to go to the other ministries to ensure health and safety to human beings and environment. I beg that this issue should be taken seriously because it is contaminating even water sources and other areas of human habitation.

THE SPEAKER: Does it go to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development? 

3.06
The Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (LANDS)(Ms Persis Namuganza): Madam Speaker, the ministry is discussing garbage management but I am going to take the information seriously and I deliver to my colleague, hon. Isaac Musumba and the entire ministry. Then, we shall be able to brief Parliament on the steps taken so far. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of State for Urban Development should come and update the House on plans to rid the urban centres of garbage. We need an answer by next Thursday.

3.07
Mr lyandro komakech (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very urgent matter concerning the lives of 2,100 students in Gulu Secondary School where an incident occurred on Monday. An Indian investor went to the school and claimed that three quarters of the school land, which is a Government school, belongs to him. He disorganised the entire day of students and it continued even yesterday.

I pray the Ministry of Education and Sports takes this matter as urgently as possible because these students come from all corners of this country and not only Gulu as such. This school was established in 1976. To date, it has been working and operating very well. We do not know where these Indian investors have emerged from to begin claiming three quarters of the school. 

THE SPEAKER: Does that also go to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to tell us who owns the land? The Minister of Education and Sports is here.

3.08
The Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Education and Sports, I would like to undertake to interact with the honourable member who has raised the issue to get more facts and get in touch with the school. I would humbly request that you give us time, probably next week, to come on the Floor and brief Parliament on what has transpired through our interaction. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports will come to us on Wednesday next week in relation to the school in Gulu town. 

3.09
Mr JAMES waira kyewalabye (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Three days ago, a taxi from Busia crushed into a stationary sugarcane truck and all the passengers perished. Even recently, we have had so many accidents involving sugarcane trucks. In 2017/2018, I lost my voter, Alice Namuganza who died on Kamuli Road. It was still the same accident; a taxi crushed into a stationary sugarcane tractor. 

These trucks are causing a lot of accidents. They are in a dangerous mechanical condition, they over speed and at night they do not have lights. You find a lorry using a torch at night. 

Last year, I raised the same issue here. The then presiding officer, the Deputy Speaker, directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a plan on how he is going to reduce the accidents. We now have a highway, which is Musita-Namayingo. We get accidents whereby taxis crush into stationary trucks.   

Up to now, the Minister of Internal Affairs is comfortably seated. Today, I request that the minister comes up with a clear way on how he is going to reduce these accidents.

We also need a breakdown vehicle to ensure that no truck stays on the highway when it breaks down. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very serious issue. I think you recall that in the Eighth Parliament we lost a colleague who was driven into a stationary truck, the late hon. Balikoowa. There are many Ugandans who have died in these accidents. One time, they nearly knocked me. I threatened that I would patrol in the nights and arrest anybody driving. They stopped for some time. Of course, I cannot patrol every day.

Minister of Internal Affairs, what can we do about these huge trucks, which especially move without lights and reflectors?

3.13
The Minister of State for Internal Affairs (Mr Mario Obiga (Kania): Madam Speaker, our condolences go to all our citizens who have died in these unnecessary traffic accidents, which could have been avoided either by the discipline of the people who drive on the roads or by the lack of enforcement wherever it may have occurred.

The control of traffic involves a number of ministries. First of all, there is Ministry of Internal Affairs, through police, which does the actual day-to-day control, in terms of speed, where the vehicles are moving and so forth. Also, the physical condition of those vehicles and their movement is controlled by the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

I propose a meeting of all the stakeholders involved so that they come out with a plan of how we can remove these vehicles, which are not licensed and the DMCs from the roads. 

Secondly, we shall have a meeting on how to address some of the users of these vehicles, particularly heavy trucks on the roads, leading to the sugar factories and other industries so that they also consider the welfare of other stakeholders. 

I would like to undertake that I will coordinate with my colleagues and make sure that within a month, we are able to come here and give a –(Interjection)– yes, we are talking of month because I have said that we need to have a consultation meeting with the ministries and stakeholders involved. 

However, we also need to move to the ground to some of the areas, like the industries involved in these matters. It may take us two/three weeks but within a month, we should be able to come here with a report. I thank you. 

3.15
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, of recent, Parliament passed the Traffic and Road Safety Act. I hope that the President has assented to it because it has all the provisions for enforcement to make sure that Government gets rid of indiscipline on our roads. 

We cannot hold with kid’s gloves these road killers. As you can see, from hon. Majegere’s testimony, this is not only about the area of Busoga but it cuts across the country. 

Madam Speaker, the situation on the roads is very dangerous for Ugandans and it is causing mayhem. It is causing a lot of losses for this country. One time I told the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we lose close to Shs 4 trillion every year out of the road carnages. When you look at the loss of lives, the goods that are destroyed and the damage on the roads and equate all that, no country can develop a middle class status with such huge losses of Shs 4 trillion every year.

3.17
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The 15 people who perished were all from Busia. I wanted to raise it here yesterday but I did not have the chance.

Honourable minister, since you are going to discuss before you come here with a report, help us talk to the contractors who are working on that road to put for us humps because it has no humps. As you begin driving from Musita, you just cruise up to Busia. 

The Mayuge trucks park on both sides of the road both at night and during day so they make the road very narrow. 

Minister, as you come to present that report, maybe, you will help us talk to Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the Ministry of Works and Transport so that we put things right. Thank you. 

3.18
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am one of the people who got a second chance to live. I was in a coma for close to two weeks because I rammed into a stationary truck. That was in 2013.

I hope the minister is talking about the whole country because on Masaka Road, the trucks that carry sand and do sand mining literally move at night. They also do not have any reflectors at the back so they are completely dark. I hope they are going to do it across the whole country and walk the talk. They should not just end at speaking in the House and then we end up in the same thing. 

We see the policemen at night but they do not get to stop these trucks moving without lights, which are very many on the road. Therefore, we need things to change.
 
3.19
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue seems to be about administration of the police. Are they there on that road or not? Secondly, this is about a particular type of industry, particularly the sugarcane industry, which is the first in this act of wrong doing. It was very painful when we lost our colleague here in the Eighth Parliament. Hon. Henry Balikowa was my personal friend but this thing is still continuing. Over and over again, we raise the same problem. It comes, people forget about it and die and we talk again. 

I propose this; let the sugarcane industry trucks be stopped from using the road. I said one time here that they should build their own roads inside the farms. If they cannot comply with the rules of using public roads, they should build their own roads, where they can misbehave and move without reflectors. 

Otherwise, if they are to move and share the road with the rest of the road users, they should comply with the rules. They should put reflectors, avoid double parking and make sure that people are safe; or else, who will buy their sugar if all the Ugandans die? 

3.21
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to add my voice to the issue that we are discussing.

Madam Speaker, I recall we lost our dear colleague, the late Henry Balikoowa. The first resolution was that we should stop these trucks from moving at night. A directive was given that all these sugar trucks should have a reflector; not only the sugar trucks but all the big trucks, in order for them to be identified and be seen to avoid collision. As we speak, up to now, they are travelling at night with a lot of impunity.

There was a time we tried to engage the Madhvani Group of Companies to find out why their trucks travel at night. They told us that they prefer the truck to travel at night because of the tyre problem, which means they mind more about their business at the expense of the lives of Ugandans. 

In Tanzania, no truck is allowed to travel beyond 6.00 p.m. If by 6.00 p.m., you have not left, then, you cannot go. If by 6.00 p.m., you are still on the road, wherever you are, you are directed to park and spend the night there. I do not know why we cannot enforce such policies in this country. 

In Nwoya, almost every day, we are losing people, more especially people coming from West Nile travelling back, meeting heavy trucks and so forth –(Interruption) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In fact, in Tanzania, it is not that vehicles do not move at night, but wherever you are, you must get off the road. You cannot even park on the side of the road. You have to get off the road and park so that all roads are clear at night.

Secondly, this is work that the police should be doing. That is what they are employed to do. I do not know why the minister is regarding it as something new. Thank you, honourable. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR OYET: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I think we need to be a little more serious, as Parliament, because every day we are losing lives of very important people in this country - not only important but lives. We need to take bold decisions as Parliament and actually give a directive to the Executive to implement the resolution. I beg to submit.

3.24
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I would like to add my voice to the rest on this issue. Nwoya has a specific problem with tractors. In 2015, I lost my cousin - the only boy who had remained in the family - because tractors move at night and without lights.

I remember last month, as I was driving from Anaka to Gulu, I met a tractor without even a single headlamp. I tried to contact the police; I called the traffic police numbers in vain, they never answered until I went to a nearby police post and informed them. But I do not know whether they intercepted it.

Therefore, in Nwoya District, people are getting accidents and dying - just imagine a tractor driving with two lights but with a trailer without lights. That is how my cousin died because he thought it was a motorcycle so he hit the trailer from behind.

The police should do their work. In addition, the road from Ayago to Pakwach is finishing our brothers from West Nile. Unfortunately or fortunately, the minister also uses that road. Please help us on that road otherwise he is going to become a casualty in Anaka Hospital.

3.26
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of road safety and traffic regulation in this country - the minister is well aware that the traffic personnel are not well protected. Even as we speak now, there are very many vehicles apart from sugarcane trucks, lorries and other buses, that do not respect traffic regulations. The reason is very clear; the traffic police are not empowered, any vehicle they stop belongs to someone above - (Interjection) - yes, I used to do it because I am involved in the transport sector.

Whenever they try to stop people - today as I was coming, I was forced to stop at Namanve, to tell the traffic officer to stop two vehicles. One traffic man tried to stop them but they did not stop. I drove ahead and helped him to stop them. When they saw me, they started explaining.

Those traffic officers say they have nothing to do. Whomever they try to stop is above the law. That is why sirens are almost on every car. Right of way has become common to everybody, even taxis. 

The minister should come up with a clear report - even the boda bodas. (Laughter) It is very unfair, Madam Speaker, for the minister to stand here and tell us that those sugarcane trucks - that “we are going to investigate”, investigate what? From today, empower the OC to arrest; you will see if they cannot arrest them. However, the moment they arrest them, you transfer them –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you can see how far reaching this issue is. I think you really need to get your feet firmly on the ground and we find a solution to these trucks moving at night.

Okay big names have died but so many ordinary people have died, people whose names we do not know but they belong somewhere. You must find a solution to these trucks moving at night. We cannot go on like this.

MR OBIGA: That is why, Madam Speaker, in matters of enforcing the law as much as we can, we can start today but -

THE SPEAKER: By the way, can we know why the President has not assented to that law? We finished it long time ago - the Road (Amendment) Act.

MR OBIGA: I am not yet aware but we can find out. Even if he has not, we can still enforce what is available and work with that. That is the easier option.

The other additional action which we need is engaging everybody, which takes a longer time and covering the whole country and all aspects. That is why I was asking for one month.

Now, the case of Tanzania, I want to be specific; I have been to Tanzania several times. The behavioral aspect significantly accounts for the difference in road safety in Tanzania and here. You can do as much as possible but as long as behaviour and discipline are bad and the rules are not obeyed, we will achieve the minimum.

Therefore, I suggest, Madam Speaker, that you give us one month and we shall report whatever action we shall have taken. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister is given one month to handle that issue comprehensively and come back to report to this House.

3.30
MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Kampala City is the capital city of Uganda and Uganda is the Pearl of Africa.

This city represents the national character. Madam Speaker, you are aware that we export power. However, when you move around this city at night, there is no security light in most of these streets. Even where they have installed the solar systems, they are just stands on the road like decoration.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that CCTV cameras were installed but I am not sure whether they work in darkness. I wake up in the morning to jog but also take my children to school. There are ladies who wake up to sweep the streets. You find somebody sweeping in darkness and you get concerned.

My concern is, this city has a new minister. I do not know whether she has slept on the job, I do not whether it is the culture but something should be done because we get embarrassed for our capital city to be in darkness yet it has both power and the solar systems. The minister should explain. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we invite the Minister for Kampala to come to this House next week on Thursday and explain to us the status of lighting in the city of Kampala. It is very important for our security.

3.32
MS ROBINA MUKISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance. I would like to report to this House that Lake Victoria in Lugala, Namayingo District, burst its shoreline last year causing floods that have paralysed the business and transport on the road that connects to Lugala Town Council and the main gateway to Sigula Island. Madam Speaker, we have reported this issue to UNRA several times but all in vain.

Secondly, as we speak right now, that road has also become a death trap for most of the boda boda riders and also as we speak now, students are not in position to go to school because the road is cut off.

I call upon the Minister of Works to swing into action before the situation goes out of control.

Madam Speaker, I am laying my prayers before the House but when I look at the Front Bench, I cannot see the Minister of Works.

Last year, I came here with an issue concerning floods that affected many schools in my district. You directed the Minister of Education and Sports to go and help the situation. Last year, many students did their exams under the sun but nothing has happened to date. Those schools in Buswale sub-county have not been helped. 

Therefore, it is hurting that as I speak, I cannot see the minister. I am not so sure that my prayers, as I put them this afternoon, will –(Member timed out.)   

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of State for Education and Sports. Can you respond to the issue of the schools? I know you were not there then but it is an outstanding matter, which has not been handled. The islands have special problems and I think you know that.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Denis Obua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Just like in the first case, on behalf of the Minister of Education and Sports, I undertake to touch base with the honourable member who has raised the issue and we shall inform Parliament next week.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I don’t see anybody from the Ministry of Works and Transport. If the roads are impassable in Namayingo, I think that it is a very serious issue. Are you dealing with the issue of water in Namayingo? 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising concerns the ministers. Two weeks back, you ordered the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and explain to this Parliament what happened to the money we borrowed in April, 2017. It is becoming a tactic that whenever we come up with serious issues, they refer them to next time. 

The procedural matter I am raising is whether it is not procedurally right that ministers come and explain all outstanding questions. 

Madam Speaker, as I speak, the issue of power for sub-counties -If the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can tell us, we are paying interest that has gone to almost Shs 75 billion as a result of money that we have not used for two and a half years. What happened to that money for power?

When I hear the issue of Namayingo coming up and the minister is saying next Thursday, there are so many issues that are piling up and they do not surface on the Order Paper. Are we proceeding rightly, Madam Speaker?  

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, during Prime Minister’s Question Time, the Prime Minister has tried, as much as possible, to give instant responses. The honourable member should bear with us because most issues of national importance come when we don’t know what the member is going to ask. I think that it is fair that we truthfully say that we are going to come back with the right answers rather than giving something, which is not there.

Therefore, for a member to expect ministers to give instant answers to questions that we have no prior information about, I think that it is too much on the ministers. However, we are doing very well, Madam Speaker, as you can see and you should appreciate us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think that there are a number of outstanding issues in the energy sector. I know the minister is new but I think that they should really come and answer the questions, which are outstanding. 

I do not see the Minister of Works and Transport on the issue of Namayingo. Can we direct the Minister of Works and Transport to examine the situation in Namayingo, as reported by hon. Hope Mukisa and give us an update next week, taking into account that the islands are really special areas and they should be given the necessary attention? 

The honourable member wants to talk about locusts but we have been talking about locusts every day. Hon. Ocen, your issue can be asked as an ordinary question and it will be answered expeditiously.   

3.38
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance touching on the forthcoming general elections at the district, parliamentary and presidential levels. It is now rife in the communities and the public that intending candidates at all these levels are required to go to Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) and get their academic documents certified and directly addressed to the Electoral Commission. 

Yesterday, the Chairman, Electoral Commission, Justice Simon Byamukama, Judge of Court of Appeal also reiterated the same. To the best of my knowledge and recollection, I thought the issue of certification of academic results would only relate to those who either have got equivalents or who studied from outside Uganda. 

As if that is not enough, two weeks ago, somebody went to UNEB in an attempt to find out if it is true that they have received such instructions and the findings were affirmative. For every paper, one is to pay Shs 300,000. This means that if you are to certify your ‘O’ level and ‘A’ level certificates, you have to fork out Shs 600,000 yet last year, for an academic purpose –(Interruption)     

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Wadri, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that this morning, we interacted with the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission as the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We raised this matter of certification; who is supposed to certify and we agreed with them that, that directive of going to UNEB is not in the law.

They undertook to engage with UNEB to clarify that position. We quoted to them all the provisions in our electoral laws and nowhere is written that anybody who has sat S.6 from Uganda or any other qualification beyond S.6 and is from Uganda, is required to go for certification from UNEB or National Council for Higher Education. 

The Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, Justice Byamukama, assured us that he is going to give that position to UNEB so that it is no longer a requirement as it is not in our electoral laws. That is the information I wanted to give to my honourable colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Thursday, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was here and we actually sent him to go and establish who is supposed to get certification. He came back and said that it does not apply to those qualifications from Uganda. He said that those who have qualifications from outside are the ones required. Honourable chair, do you have something different to say?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, hon. Asuman Basalirwa is privileged to be a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. What he is saying is exactly what happened today; we had a very good interaction with the Electoral Commission, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Among other things, this Parliament interacted with them on the road map and they clarified on a number of things. As hon. Basalirwa said, it is a question of law.

Previously, some political parties have asked their intending candidates who want to contest for parliamentary elections to go and do verification with UNEB to avoid litigations. Some of the honourable members here went through that process. The Electoral Commission has distanced itself from such an undertaking and today, the Chairperson, His Lordship Simon Byamukama said he is going to take it up with UNEB, to distance themselves formerly just like they did for a requirement of tax compliance. They also clarified. They did that today; they will make it more formal. 

There are categories of people under that law. If you have qualifications that are not direct, say up to A ‘level but after senior four, you did something else, you fall in that category. (Laughter) If you have a certificate in soap making, it is the same situation. (Laughter) 

The honourable member there has the law that we were given and she could, with your permission, Madam Speaker, read the specific section. I did not know that hon. Rwakoojo would excite members by bringing this. (Laughter)

We want to leave the details of this to the mandated authority to come out with the guidelines. They will meet us on Tuesday next week. After that we shall be able to report on other things about the roadmap, nominations and campaign time. 

You can go to UNEB or National Council of Higher Education, if you are not – 

THE SPEAKER: I think the matter is clear. It was clarified. 

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, just a little more information. There are three words: “verification, equation and certification”. “Equation” like it has been detailed is for the National Council of Higher Education. For those who have papers that are equivalent to senior six or those who studied from out of the country, must have their papers “equated” to Uganda standards by, for example, finding them equal to senior six or above. 

“Verification” is about proving that the paper you have is right. When they prove it, they certify it. 

Madam Speaker, the law maxim that, “He who alleges has to prove” was augmented by the minister the other day. I have my senior six and I present it to the Electoral Commission. Whoever doubts it is free to prove it. It has never been a requirement on the candidates to go and certify their papers except when they are doubted and those who doubt them take them to courts of law. 

Finally – (Interruptions)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, this shows how serious the whole matter is out there in the public. 

How I wish the Electoral Commission came out openly and issued a press statement for everybody to read it. Otherwise, as of now, if you go to UNEB, people are queuing, coughing Shs 300,000 per paper. 

This is quite a lot and yet ordinarily, if you are to get your certificate certified for academic purposes, it is only Shs 42,000. 

People are taking advantage of those who intend to offer themselves, at political levels and therefore, making it near impossible for a poor person to access the platform to campaign and be elected. 

I pray that the Electoral Commission clears out the air through the radios, television and print media. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs said that they are going to have an interaction and after Tuesday, the Electoral Commission should come out with a clear statement for the whole country.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE LAND INFORMATION SYSTEM INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE SCHEDULED FOR 20TH-21ST FEBRUARY 2020.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

I am here to present an information paper on the Land Information System International Conference that will take place at Protea Hotel Entebbe, from tomorrow 20th to 21st February 2020. 

The first time Uganda held such a conference was in February 2013, when our ministry had commenced the computerisation of the land registry. 

This is the second time Uganda is hosting such an international conference on the same in line with the contractual obligations with the World Bank, to share experiences and show case successes of the Land Information System implementation. 

The Government, through the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, with support from the World Bank, under the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDEP), has been implementing the National Land Information System and has so far installed this system in 22 ministry zonal offices. These are: Wakiso – which was divided into Wakiso-Busiro and Kyadondo, Mukono, Masaka, Kampala, Masindi, Kibale, Kabarole, Mbarara, Arua, Gulu, Lira, Mbale, Jinja, Mpigi, Luweero, Mityana, Kabale, Rukungiri, Tororo, Moroto and Soroti. 

The ministry has organised an international conference on Land Information System with the World Bank to share information as far as implementation is concerned. 

The conference will attract experts from the World Bank, Sub Saharan Africa and other parts of the world. 

Our ministry established these zonal offices in order to achieve certain goals. Among these was to bring the ministry services closer to the people who would before move long journeys from different parts of the country to the centre in order to access these services. 

It was also to digitally store and achieve easy access to timely use on land information for different purposes. 

The other was to detect and eliminate any possibilities of fraudulent practices in the land transaction processes such as double titling, overlapping surveys among others. 

It was also intended to improve the internal efficiency of land administration operations.

It aimed at the provision of prompt, efficient, reliable and wide range land services to clients.

Lastly, it aimed to realise efficient and effective dissemination of land information to the public and to increase revenue generation by the lands sector to the Government.

We have so far been able to realise a number of benefits since ministry zonal offices were established. 

The Land Information System International Conference will be held at Protea Hotel Entebbe from 20th to 21st February 2020. The theme of this conference is: “Global Modernisation of Land Administration: Making your Land Information System a Success”. 

Madam Speaker, the chief guest at the conference will be H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda, Yoweri. K. Museveni and he has already confirmed his attendance. We have also extended a special invitation to your office to close the conference but we have not yet received a confirmation.

We humbly invite you, Madam Speaker, to come and participate in this very important conference on land, which is a subject for all of us. We are expecting very many dignitaries. The people who have been invited to this conference are honourable ministers, Members of Parliament, the private sector, the academia and others.

Madam Speaker, we shall be grateful to receive you at the conference. Thank you.

3.54
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement and for hosting the conference on this very important subject. I would like to confirm that Arua has a zonal lands office which, indeed, is a blessing because people used to travel all the way to Entebbe and Kampala here to process land titles but it is now being done in Arua. We thank the Government for that.

Madam Speaker, I would like to raise this issue to the minister as vital information that she should take into account. First of all, these zonal offices need to be closely supervised. In Ayivu County, we have embarked on mass land surveying and registration but we are facing challenges in terms of processing the documents. If you have less than Shs 1 million, you cannot get your title on time, as the minister stated here.  I presume that all these regional land offices are facing the same challenge.

Honourable minister, I invite you to come to Arua and we sit down with these officers whom you have seconded to man –(Interjection)

MR WADRI: Thank you for giving way. Madam Speaker, last Friday we had a meeting in Arua to which we invited officials from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development headquarters. At the meeting, we had political and technical leaders from both the district and municipality. My senior brother, hon. Mario Obiga Kania, was in attendance. 

The issue which came out prominently was the extortion of money from the poor. Even for a file to move from one desk to another you have to part with money and it is not small amount. 

Secondly, the office is understaffed. Arua zonal office does not have a staff surveyor but it borrows a staff surveyor from a neighbouring district. Unfortunately, the character in which this person was being described was unexpected. She is just minting money from the ordinary persons.

Madam minister, as my brother hon. Atiku advances this point, the issues of poor logistical support, understaffing and corruption in those offices need to be addressed. The zonal offices are more of a problem than a solution. It was easier for us to get titles from Entebbe than from those offices. Thank you.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Kassiano, for that information. Madam Speaker, actually, the staff in Arua ask for bribes openly. They tell you that if you do not pay, your file will not move an inch and indeed, it doesn’t move an inch. These are critical logistical issues that the minister should take into account. Much as these offices have been established, we have challenges in terms of staffing and corruption. Corruption is being done openly and we expect you to respond –(Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, we visited Jinja and Masaka zonal offices and we found that Masaka office was able to process the titles for as low as Shs 300,000. When we went to the other zonal offices, we found the exact problems which have been stated by my colleagues. After visiting Masaka, we asked the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come out clearly and state the genuine amount that an individual must pay to process a land title. 

We found that the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) were fixing the prices in Masaka, Jinja, Wakiso and Tororo. Municipal officers were also fixing the price. We demanded that the ministry states an official position in terms of what is required from me – Julius Ochen – to process the land title. How much money should I pay and which offices are required to be paid for the work? We demanded that that information be provided officially so that Ugandans, wherever they are, know how much money they must pay to acquire a land title.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Ochen, for the information. As I wind up, Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear. It states that land belongs to the people. For people to own land, they must have something to show, which is the land title. That is where our people are being held hostage and that is what is culminating into extortions. 

Honourable minister, if you address that particular challenge you will enable Ugandans to become landlords. Thank you.

4.01
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. The computerised land management system has helped a lot to improve the system of land registration. Like my colleagues have said – in fact, in the central, the biggest problem is in Mukono. In Mukono, one piece of land may have five or six land titles and each is available every time you go to crosscheck. At the centre, they may have a different land title from the one that is in Mukono.

There are two issues I would like to raise. First, corporate institutions have what they call the “client charter”. The client charter stipulates the amount of time which the institution takes to respond to a query raised by a client in that institution. Could the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development be innovative and come up with a client charter? What is raising all these issues of corruption in the system is that when you take your papers, they sit on them or they even hide them. Some papers are even pulled out of the files.

Honourable minister, where you sit here is really – I do not want to say it is rotten. However, if it were not unparliamentary, I would have said it. In that place, files change hands and contents. In Mukono it is even worse. Kudos to you because Wakiso has been improved. When you computerised the registry in Wakiso, at least something was done but we are still suffering with these two here.

Lastly, I heard the minister today on the radio – I know that Mbale is still coping with the computerised land system management but I heard hon. Namuganza on the radio talking about - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Agaba, I hope you remember the issue of Basajjabalaba and Bank of Uganda. This gentleman was at the centre of the matter. He knows very well the issues of corruption in the ministry of lands -(Laughter). Therefore, is hon. Agaba in order to talk about Wakiso when we know that the issue of corruption in land is everywhere and he is the lead person - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was not aware that hon. Agaba is the lead person in land grabbing or corruption. Therefore, you are out of order.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The other day, one of the generals was here and he asked hon. Nandala-Mafabi to repeat his words outside Parliament. I was waiting to hear hon. Nandala-Mafabi repeat those words outside Parliament, which he did not do. If I had leeway, I would have asked him to repeat the same words outside Parliament but I am guided by your ruling, Madam Speaker.

The point I was trying to raise about the statement made by the hon. Namuganza in the morning is that she said they have increased tax on transfer of titles because the Lands ministry is busy with regional land offices trying to help people have their titles registered as soon as possible. Therefore, the increase on the tax in the transfers will help to generate more resources.

I did not imagine that the extension of the offices, even when they are not as busy as we see, would cause increase of tax on the people transferring titles. I thought she would clarify on this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad the minister has talked about computerising the land registry. Two or three weeks ago, there was a story in the papers from one of the banks. 

They reported that one of the reasons the interest is high is because people lack collateral to pledge in banks to be able to ask for loans in the banks. They said that from 1956 to date, the ministry has issued less than one million titles. That it takes the ministry a year to produce between 4,000 and 6,000 titles. That we have eight million households in this country, which will take the ministry more than 700 years to avail with titles. 

Honourable minister, since you have said that you have computerised the land registry, would you be able to tell this House and the country how long it will take the ministry to be able to give people land titles to enable them to go to banks and borrow? Thank you very much.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to request the honourable minister to clarify one important issue. In Amuru District, individuals have acquired land titles for 1,000 acres yet on the same piece of land, you find the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has also given land titles within the 1,000 acres of land. In fact, within the same area, you might find five or six people with land titles. This is bringing a lot of confusion in my area.

Secondly, I do not know if the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development takes due diligence to find out where the land is located, when one applies for a land title. In Amuru, people come to Kampala to process land titles, where they are bona fide occupants. When they go to the village, they inform people that from now onwards, you are staying on my land. I would like to, therefore, find out if the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development takes consideration before giving out land titles? Thank you.

4.09
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the presentation and her ministry for supporting Non-Governmental Organisations in my district in issuing a Certificate of Customary Land Ownership, which has given temporary security to land owners.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to explain to us how this computerised land system is going to avoid land grabbing. I would like to also know whether this computerised land registration will not use the normal procedures of land registration that I know, which starts from the village, parish, sub-county up to the district land board and the ministry. 

Most times and like hon. Olanya has stated, people manufacture titles from Kampala or the regional offices and then they go to court to get court orders. Once they have those, they begin to look for the boundaries of the land, which is a total disregard to the procedures that we know within the registration of land titles and procedures of land registration.

Last year, when I was sitting on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we had a scenario where the then Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries came up with a land title on Maruzi land. It was completely above the titles that the regional land offices had. There was actually disparity. The land title from the ministry was covering bigger areas than the land title from the regional office. The minister actually had the audacity to explain that they could even do it from up and go and insert it in on the ground. I am not familiar with this. 

This means that despite the fact that we have a computerised land management system, we need honest people to handle it. Whether computerised or not, if we still have crafty people, it will not solve the problems of Ugandans. Thank you.

4.11
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for the presentation.

My concern is about the delay in issuing land titles. When people start the process, they think it would take a short time. Madam Speaker, there is land that I have been following up in Masaka. I am actually not the only one from the family of the late Ben Kiwanuka but it has taken us a whole year and up to now, we have not received the land titles. They keep telling people that the person in charge has gone on leave. I really cannot imagine that someone can go on leave thrice. That delay makes people suspect that there is corruption in the lands office.

I would like to, therefore, propose that the ministry should quicken the process so that people are not defrauded, which is the case right now. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to thank the honourable minister in his effort to digitise services. It is long overdue and we hope that it is a step in the right direction to combat corruption.

When we see honourable ministers bringing such statements, indeed we know that the President did not walk in vain against corruption. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please take your seats. Order! Honourable members, we have asked the Sergeant-at-Arms to establish what is going on in the environment. In the circumstances, let us remain here until we have been advised on what to do. In the meantime, let me invite hon. Acidri to make his contribution.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we were very rudely interrupted but I was at the stage of presenting my views regarding the minister’s speech. One thing that the minister needs to quickly look at is the fact that apart from having a Land Information System, what kind of information are we going to enter in this information system?

We are all aware that within our lands registry, we have a lot of problems especially in relation to land grabbing and issues of forged titles. Just like anyone who operates a computer, if you put in wrong information, you will get out wrong information –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, a very frightening event has just happened on the Floor of Parliament and it is only a few people that are not in a state of panic but many of us are. Probably we could be safe here in Parliament. However, I think procedurally, it would be good for members of Parliament to know that the premises have been checked and that the people who attempted to invade the House have not left any –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just informed you that the Sergeant-at-Arms and his team are examining the situation outside the Chamber. We should remain here and do some work and they will advise us. That is what I said. (Applause)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To conclude, the emphasis should not mainly be on the information system but on correcting past mistakes in relation to land administration in this country. We are all aware that a lot of Government land has exchanged hands; private grabbers have taken land that belongs to Government. How do you deal with such before you start talking about an information system? 

Otherwise, you will end up entering wrong information without addressing the chronic problem of corruption as far as land is concerned in the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to – Hon. Nandala Mafabi wanted to speak.

4.26
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you much, Madam Speaker. I am looking forward to the minister taking notes and helping us. The map of Uganda is well known. I am sure the minister knows which part of Uganda is titled and which part is not titled. I do not want them to use this information for others to go and get other pieces of land in the process.

I would like to commend the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for this computerisation. It has fast tracked some transactions because right now, if I want to confirm if a land title exists or if it is genuine, you simply go there. The system is fast and you will confirm who the owner is. This system has been of great help and I commend you for that. 

I have been looking for some titles since 2003 and because of that system, recently, the system showed where they were and it could prove that no other transaction has been made on those titles since 2003, when I acquired them. We had tried the manual system in looking for the titles but had failed until recently. When they checked, the files had been there since 2003, including copies of the owners’ titles on the file. 

I would like to ask the minister that having computerised, are you sure that all land owners have their copies of titles or some of them are still being kept by you? What procedure are you taking to ensure that the owners get their duplicate copies? I am simply giving an example of myself who knows about land but for the last 17 years, I had not got copies.

Secondly, nowadays, forgeries are done in such a way that in the morning, transactions are initiated and in the afternoon, they are concluded. How are you helping those who transfer land to ensure that nobody transfers another person’s land? For example, if somebody is selling you property, he will say, “I will not give you my title until you have transacted” because he or she is afraid that if he gives you a copy, you can use it to do anything.

Therefore, how are you helping so that anybody who is transacting - both the buyer and the seller - is safe? It looks like those who are selling are worried of the buyers because they are not so sure of who is the right buyer. That is what I would like to know.

The third issue concerns banks. If I take my title to a bank, they will put a mortgage. When the bank releases it, it releases the document with a mortgage. When you take it to the ministry of lands, in most cases, maybe one of the documents gets lost. When you go to the bank, they will say they gave it to you. When you come here, the lands office says it needs a document. How are you helping a person who does not have the release document from the bank and yet the bank cannot give another copy and yet the ministry of lands, who I want to transact with, has the mandate to confirm with the bank?

The example I am giving you is with the Cooperative Bank, which was closed. It gave so many farmers their titles but they have never transferred them. Some of them have lost the mortgage documents. How are you going to help such people whose titles were released by the Cooperative Bank and yet they cannot transact because even the bank closed?

4.30
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I rise on the issue of the land titles and also improvement in the land registry. Karamoja has been left to land grabbers. Our form of land ownership is mainly customary. You find that because of this customary ownership, land grabbers have taken advantage of titling land here in Kampala, land which has minerals and land which is vacant.

How is the ministry prepared to help the people of Karamoja to own land by giving them customary certificates in order to own the land? Thank you.

4.31
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information she has given us. 

I am concerned about how Uganda Land Commission and Uganda Investment Authority give our land to investors. Usually, they give investors titles from Kampala here and leave the compensation bit in the hands of the investors. In most cases, these investors are business people; they are here to make profit. They connive with land valuers and give people peanuts, which causes suffering.

My prayer to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is that these investors should be given vacant land. The Government of Uganda should be the one to compensate if there is any encroacher on such land so they hand over clean land to the investors to save Ugandans from suffering and being evicted like it is being done in Kiryandongo. People are living on road reserves because they have not been compensated. Thank you.

4.33
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I thank you. We have cases of forged land titles on land that has been lying idle or whose owners have not taken the trouble to transfer the titles from the past owners into their names. 

There is some kind of connivance between those land grabbers and the people in the lands office. I have got several cases in my constituency and the minister is aware of some of them. We have a case of a man who acquired a forged title over 22 hectares and then using those hectares, he grabbed 2,000 acres. I do not know whether this system is going to help us in such cases. 

As I talk, in about five different areas, people claim that they are the owners of that land but they are using forged titles –(Interruption)
 
MR WOBOYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving me this opportunity to provide some information. Madam Speaker, in addition to what hon. Ssengo is raising, there is a tendency in the lands office for some unscrupulous members of the public to put caveats on titles of such land, which the owners have not bothered to develop. 

This is a very serious issue because some of the people are looking for funds to invest. However, in so doing, they find that there is a caveat on the land. That means they cannot develop it. I think this is something that should interest the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Under which circumstances does someone put a caveat on one’s land? It is something that we would like to raise in addition to what you are saying, honourable member? 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Speaker, land grabbing is now a very lucrative business in Uganda. It is almost all over my constituency. People keep emerging with forged titles; they are claiming the land and the bibanja holders are unsettled and some have been evicted.  

It is my hope that this new system is used to trace these people who have grabbed titles so that things are put in order. Otherwise, we are sitting on a time bomb because it is happening everywhere. Only yesterday –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, the question of land is so critical that almost everybody in Parliament would like to give me information.

I request the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to find a way of cleaning up the entire land regime in Uganda. Otherwise, we are in trouble. Thank you, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the minister to respond to the issues raised?  

4.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues for your concerns. I have noted some issues. We shall share them at the ministry before preparing appropriate answers to address them. 

On the issues, which came from many Members about the customary land, most of the land held in Uganda is in the form of customary land. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is responsible for issuing out four types of titles - the Freehold, the Mailo hold, which was already in existence, the customary titles and the Leasehold titles. 

However, this Customary Certificate of Title had become dormant. It was not being issued so much until, as you are aware, His Excellency, the President directed the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to issue them out to those who are holding land customarily. 

Consequently, we have started - it is only that the expenses – as the President directed, the owners of customary land are supposed to make some contribution but they are not making any contributions. They want the Government to give them land and also title it for them. 

As you are aware, Government has no money. That is why, like hon. Lilly Adong said, some NGOs came and paid some money. This money goes to URA. It is some little money of about Shs 70,000 each but if there are so many people whose land is to be titled, the expense somehow becomes big. 

On that point, maybe we shall come here to request Parliament to agree that people who are holding land customarily are mobilised to pay this money. This will ease the work of Government to issue them with certificate of titles other than expecting the ministry to print and just issue out the titles. 

Madam Speaker, another issue was about our workers. I take those concerns in good faith because like I mentioned here before, we need to supervise our staff not only at the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development but all Government sectors to fight corruption. It is because we cannot deny – what I would like to emphasise is that through the Land Information System, just like hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, you can easily detect fraud and forgery. When someone else comes to title some piece of land, it does not allow unlike previously where people could use different surveyors and make multi titles on the same piece of land. 

That is why it has now become impossible for you to title a wetland and a forest reserve because we have anchored in these systems all those and so, the system will show that that is Mabira Forest or a wetland. As a result, it will reject your application. 

There have been concerns that titling of land takes quite long. However, this system has been built on the principle of First In, First Out (FIFO). Once you make an application and you are registered in the system and another person makes an application, unless you stop the transaction, the system keeps pending to show the transaction that came first. It is mainly based on Read Only Memory (ROM) to those who are not supposed to touch it. 

And that was designed to reduce the level of manipulation of records within the system. Like the honourable colleagues said, those who are operating it use computers and can use the same computers to do anything.

Therefore, with this system, if one of our workers is on a certain desk, it is only him or her who can operate that computer. In case of any fraud, he or she cannot say it is someone else who used it. The system records the operator, the time the transaction is taking place, the time the transaction started and probably the time the transaction is to be completed.

Therefore, the system reduced the number of days for registration of titles. Previously, it used to be 52 days but now it is 10 days within which someone will have their title issued unless their land has issues. Of course some delays do not come because of the system but sometimes you are titling and there is a petition.

Madam Speaker, once there is a petition over some land, we are supposed to halt and inquire about the contention on the title. Otherwise if we just go ahead, then we will cause more problems. Therefore, this is –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

A PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO EURO 108,521,152.60 (EURO ONE HUNDRED EIGHT MILLION FIVE HUNDRED TWENTY ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED FIFTY TWO SIXTY CENTS) EQUIVALENT TO USD 119,096,962.91 FROM INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA TO FINANCE THE MASINDI-BIISO, KABAALE-KIZIRANFUMBI AND HOHWA-NYAIRONGO-KYARUSESA-BUTOOLE ROAD UPGRADING PROJECT

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam speaker, I beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to €108.521 million from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China to finance the Masindi-Biiso, Kabaale-Kiziranfumbi and Hohwa-Nyairongo-Kyarusesa-Butoole Road Upgrading Project, which are popularly known as the oil roads. I beg to lay.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, whenever I hear anything to do with a loan, my blood automatically boils. The fact that they are talking about roads is a good thing but before we talk about the Bwiso-Masindi Road, can we first find out the status of the money for working on the Kampala Jinja Express Highway. (Applause)- I would love to know.

As a country, we need to learn to be balanced so that there is equal development. By the way, I would like to remind this House that the eastern part of the country is unfortunate because we do not have oil. Therefore, when will the roads lead to the east? Secondly, we do not have tourists’ sites that will attract the tarmac to the tourism points.

Madam Speaker, I speak right from the depth of my heart; what is the status of the money for Jinja-Kampala Express way? Can we get to know before we talk about approving this loan? Is it procedurally proper for us to continue hearing about this loan before we learn about the status of the money for the Kampala Jinja Express way?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will remember, in either August or September, we discussed at length the need for this Government to rebuild the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. It is the main artery to Uganda. What you are bringing here are just tributaries.

At that time, we said that we are not going to consider the loan which was there then until you have handled the Jinja-Kampala Express Highway. In the circumstances, I am unable to send this to the committee (Applause)

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO STANDING COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157(2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.47
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Madam Speaker, the Member has not yet showed interest in which committee she wants to go to.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any other whip here?

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 66/03/01 TO MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): “According to the Bank of Uganda Act, 75 percent of the profits made by Bank of Uganda form part of the consolidated funds available for government expenditure. Can the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development explain to the House the following:

i. 	How much profits or losses has Bank of Uganda made annually for the last 15 years?
ii. 	When was the last time Bank of Uganda made profits and how much was transferred to the Consolidated Fund?”

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Planning) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, hon. Kenneth Lubogo wanted to know how much profits or losses Bank of Uganda has made annually for the last 15 years and when was the last time Bank of Uganda made profits and how much was transferred to the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Speaker, I will just run through the status of the profits and losses. Bank of Uganda in Financial Year 2004/2005 made a profit of Shs 3.179 billion. In Financial Year 2005/2006, it made a profit of Shs 10 billion, in Financial Year 2006/2007 it made a profit of Shs 5 billion and in Financial Year 2007/2008 a profit of Shs 93 billion was made and transferred Shs 40 billion to the consolidated account. 

In Financial Year 2008/2009, Shs 2.8 billion; in Financial Year 2009/2010 they made losses of Shs 140 billion, in Financial Year 2010/2011 the bank made losses of Shs 240 billion. In Financial Year 2011/2012, it made losses of Shs 98 billion, in Financial Year 2012/2013, losses of 147 billion, 2013/2014 and Shs 114 billion losses in Financial Year 2014/2015. In Financial Year 2015/2016 it made Shs 118 billion in losses, Shs 81.9 billion in losses in Financial Year 2016/2017, Shs 452 billion in losses in Financial Year 2017/2018, Shs 406 billion in losses and Financial Year 2018/2019 made losses of Shs 195 billion.

Therefore, it last transferred to the Consolidated Fund in Financial Year 2007/2008 an amount equivalent to Shs 40 billion. Since then, it has not transferred anything to a consolidated account because it has been making losses. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Is hon. Kenneth Lubogo here? No it is not a clarification; it is a supplementary for the person who asked. Is hon. Othieno sitting in for hon. Lubogo?

4.51
MR OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the response. However, Bank of Uganda trades in securities and the minister is now talking about the bank making losses yet we know that this bank is supposed to trade in securities and not in goods and services. 

Therefore, can the honourable minister brief the country and House the circumstances under which a bank makes a loss when in actual sense it trades in securities? How do you make losses when you are trading in securities? Do you lack competent people? Can the honourable minister give us more information –(Interruption) 

Mr nsereko: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have additional information –

The Speaker:  No, let us not abuse our rules. First of all, it is not your question. It was supposed to be hon. Kenneth Lubogo to ask a supplementary question but now you are causing a debate. Can the minister answer that?

Mr bahati: Madam Speaker, it is true that Bank of Uganda trades in securities. It handles our reserves but at the same time, it invests in the monetary policy, which includes incurring costs that can lead to losses. 

Therefore, any entity that involves itself in trading of any nature is expected to come up with losses or profits. These are facts on the ground and we cannot do much about it. A loss is a loss.

The Speaker: Hon. Acidri, we apologise. The same mistakes that were made last week on this issue have been reflected. Let the Clerk correct the question and it should be answered tomorrow.

Mr ruhunda: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since you made a ruling that you cannot introduce amendments in a Bill at the committee stage, I would like to make an oral request to seek leave to amend the “Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill” and the “Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill”. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, I think our instructions are such that anyone who wants to move an amendment must give notice and also circulate the amendment. He has given notice and I hope he will circulate the amendment then we can deal with it at a later stage.

Mr ruhunda: Much obliged.

The Speaker: Honourable members, before we go to the committee stage, I would like to comment about what happened here. I would like to remind members of the public that under Section 18(f) of the “Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act”, it is an offence for any person to create disturbance, which interrupts or is likely to interrupt the proceedings of Parliament, as it did. Therefore, the people who are here have committed an offence under that Act.

I would like to also remind the public that if you want to demonstrate, there are ways of doing so. If you want to be dramatic and jump like Rambo, the National Theatre is there or you can go to the City Square and demonstrate from there.

I would like to warn the public that we shall deal with you very severely if you continue trying to invade our space. (Applause) 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

Clause 5

4.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, committee ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, the committee recommends that we replace the word “Committee” with the word “Council” wherever it appears in the clause.

The justification will be about clause 4 that we stood over. This is a consequential amendment; 4, 3 and 2 are all deferred so probably at an appropriate time we can be guided to come back. 

Mr mawanda: Madam Chairperson, clauses 4 and 5 are more or less related. If we pronounce ourselves on clause 4, we will be able to handle clause 5. Clause 4 talks about the council or the committee and clause 5 is about the functions. We are not yet at par as far as clause 4 is concerned. 

The Chairperson: Do have an objection to change of the name from “committee” to “council”?

Mr mawanda: I have an objection. 

The Chairperson: To the change of the name?

Mr mawanda: Yes –

Mr ssemujju: I can help him. We have not created this committee under clause 4 so there is no way we can now change clause 5 to say that it will be a “council” and not a “committee”. We still have issues with creation of the council itself. 

The best way is to first deal with clause 4 that creates a council then we can go into the related provisions of how it works.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, the way I see it, unless we deal with clause 4, we may not move far. The reason is that this clause 4 is basically the main part of the law; clauses 4, 5, 6 and 7. The sub-committees come from the –

The chairperson: Honourable members, let us stand over clause 5, 6 and 7. Let us go to clause 8.

Clause 8

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, we propose that clause 8 be deleted. 

The justification is that this should be an administrative arrangement put in place by the Chief Justice pursuant to powers granted to him under Article 133 of the Constitution.
The committee found that it was not necessary.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, I am not good at objecting to what my chairperson says but on this one, we need the inspectorate of courts. The purpose is that if there is no inspector and we put it in the law, we will be generating reports, which will help to tell us if the courts are performing. In the current state, if we leave them as the administrative function, then they will either get reports or not. 

Madam Chairperson, I think that we should maintain this - even add that; “…the chief inspector will be making quarterly reports, which will be part of the reports to be submitted in Parliament on the performance of these courts.” 

The reason is basically that there are some courts there that do nothing. They simply keep quiet and we are really suffering. This will be the best time to find out which court is functioning and which one is not. It will be the basis on which to give them resources to do the work. 

I plead with the chairperson and the members of the committee that we leave the inspectorate of courts. We should even add more functions to it so that they are able to produce reports to determine which judicial officers are working and those that are not. This will also be the process to which they will submit cases that they have been dealt in that court. Every now and then, whenever we come here, we should sign it. This will also be the best criteria to allow court to even put a method of checking attendance of those judicial officers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I do not know why you want to delete that because I know there is an inspector of courts. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, with that guidance, I stand on my two feet and concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Since he has conceded, I would like to make an amendment. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to add to sub-clause (5) that, “the chief inspector shall make quarterly reports on the functions of the courts and how they have performed.” 
The justification I am trying to put up is that –(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, aren’t you comfortable with clause 9? It sets out the functions. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I was of the view that what hon. Nandala Mafabi is trying to bring out is in clause 9. It is about the functions of the inspectorate; so we do not need to provide for it under clause 8. However, we can look at clause 9 and see whether we can improve it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On sub-clause (4), I propose that it reads, “The chief inspector of courts shall make quarterly reports to the Chief Justice, who shall make annual reports to Parliament.” I do not want us to make a mistake. The reports of every institution come to Parliament. Even the IGG is an independent organisation but when it makes its report, it must come to Parliament. 

The problem we are trying to cure here is that as much as they have done the job of inspection, we need reports to confirm that – 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, soon, you are going to ask for the Cabinet report, at this rate. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to bring to the attention of my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, that there is a constitutional office in the Judiciary - of the Chief Registrar, under Article 145 of the Constitution. That is actually the person who heads the Judiciary and ordinarily reports to Parliament. 

Therefore, if you equate the inspector of courts to the same level as a chief registrar, you are going to cause confusion in the administration of justice. 

I pray that since the chairman has conceded that this particular office remains, let us retain the provisions, as in the Bill, instead of expounding and expanding them. It will create a crisis. 

MS AMODING: Madam Chair, I just wanted to add on to clause 8 that in terms of the period that the committee proposes, I would propose that we extend it to five years because of clause 8(3). It states that “The chief inspector of courts shall hold office for a renewable period of three years.” Three years is quite very short for such a task. If it would be extended to about four or five years – (Interjection) – three is not okay, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, because it is an independent function and it is very critical. Therefore, it should be given some more time and independence to deliver on this important task. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What I see here is that it is renewable and there is no limit to the renewals; they can come seven times or two times. It is renewable without – 

MS OGWAL: Chairperson, it should only be renewable once.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members. Let us not stifle the Judiciary. 

MR OBOTH: When I conceded to the proposal to retain clause 8, as it is, I actually conceded to it as is in the Bill. Renewable and we again attach term limits? – These are judicial officers; civil servants. Where we have done that has been to political appointees and nominees to Commissions but this is work. 
When somebody is appointed a chief registrar, the issue of renewing is purely to put them at the edge about performance - so that if they do not perform, they can be removed. I plead with Members that we retain it as it is. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson, for yielding the Floor. You see, this office is a professional office; it is not an ad hoc office. You are getting a professional there. As he gains experience, you sack him and then recruit another. 

Alternatively, when you recruit, you must ask for experience and yet you have sacked the one that has experience. It makes little sense. These are civil servants. Give them the job and this renewal of contract is for purposes of the employers getting satisfied that he is actually doing the job. In case he is not doing the job, then, there is an opportunity for you not to renew the contract without paying dismissal or damages for laying off. 

I think it is better we retain the clause as it is in the Bill. I thank you, Chairperson. That is the information to the chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 do stand -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, when somebody does an inspection, he must produce a report. When you read through, there is no report. I wanted to add sub-clause (3) to read, “The Chief Inspector of Court shall produce quarterly reports in addition to other reports of his or her inspection work.”

The justification is to ensure that a person who has been assigned an additional duty of inspecting courts does the work. He can easily sit down in one quarter and do nothing, yet, his function is really to inspect courts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Quarterly reports are not a problem. Honourable chair, what do you say about that?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, when I look at (9), it appears there are two functions, which are attached to this inspectorate; investigation and inspection. (b) and (c) deal with investigation while (d) deals with inspection. However, whereas in (d) it is clear that the inspector is authorised to take action, when it comes to (b); investigation of cases, it appears that the inspector is not authorised to take action. It is just blank.

I would suggest that just as we have put it in (d) we also empower the inspector under (b) to investigate and take certain action –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: We are talking about a specialised cadre of workforce called the Judiciary. When it comes to enforcement of disciplinary action, it is the work of the Judicial Service Commission under Article 148 of the Constitution.

The chairperson has conceded under a lot of pain. Let us not touch any of these clauses because if we do, we may end up going into an area that will violate either the Constitution or some other existing laws.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chairperson, already under (d), the inspector is authorised to take remedial action. That argument falls short or contradicts what is already provided for under (d). According to that submission, this already interferes and conflicts with what my honourable colleague is saying.

MS OGWAL: On this item, I think it is wrong for us to expect the same inspectorate to take remedial - Rather, he should recommend. They are investigating and after investigation, they must recommend remedial actions to be taken.

Therefore, I beg to amend (d) to read, “To recommend remedial action.” They cannot take remedial action but they can recommend.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the Chairperson because he conceded to leave the office of the inspectorate. However, some inspectors may only be in Kampala and yet, in the regions - You find people in Kamuli and Butaleja suffering and nobody is inspecting. Can we put a provision that inspectors be situated at regional levels?

Madam Chairperson, the chief person will be here and there is nothing. When our voters go to court, you cannot ask a judge, why haven’t you come? They say the judge is not there and you just go. Therefore, we need a regional inspectorate office that will be feeding – Because it is not there. (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. What we are establishing is the Inspectorate of Courts. This is not an inspector but a whole inspectorate like you would say Inspectorate of Government. It is an office with officers who can be posted upcountry. It will not be this inspector running from court to court as an individual but there will be officers within this inspectorate to do the sort of work you are envisaging.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 10

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, clauses 10 and 11 - Since we conceded, we would not have further amendments because we were proposing amendments as a result of consequential amendments related to (8). Therefore, we do not have any amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we propose to replace sub-clause (3) as follows:

“All staff of the Judiciary, other than those appointed by the President, shall be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission in accordance with the approved structure of the Judiciary.”

The justification is to remove the restriction imposed in sub-clause (3) since in its current form, it limits the appointment of staff of the Judiciary to only those persons enumerated in the First Schedule, contrary to Article 148(a) of the Constitution.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I seek some clarification. In Public Service, there are cadres who are moved from ministry to ministry, like assistant secretaries. Those are appointed under Public Service. How are you going to tell us that even that person who is going to work in the Judiciary should be from the Judicial Service Commission? The reason is that they are allowed to move. For example, recently, the Permanent Secretary to IGG was moved from IGG to another Government Department. How do we reconcile those two?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this has been a concern. Actually, we have the Judicial Service Commission supervising people in the Judiciary whom they do not have powers to discipline and they do not recruit them. Therefore, this particular provision is actually to give them - Judicial Service Commission is a service commission, which could do the same thing as Public Service Commission.

Therefore, they have specialised interests. This would now empower them to appoint and discipline. You cannot just give them staff as if - It is a Judicial Service Commission –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The information I would like to give you is that the staff mentioned are in the Schedule to the Bill and they are clearly identified: court administrators, court attendants, court clerks and court interpreters, court drivers, court legal officers and research assistants, court librarians, court transcribers, court training officers, process servers, public relation officers. Those are the only ones envisaged that would be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission. Other than those prescribed, the rest will be appointed by the Public Service Commission. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I hope this sorts you out.

MR KATUNTU: When you look at Article 148 on the appointment of staff of Judiciary, you realise it reads: “Notwithstanding Article 172(1)(d), the Judicial Service Commission shall be responsible for the appointment, discipline and removal of such staff of the Judiciary as it may be prescribed by Parliament and by law.” It is exactly what we are trying to do. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I am sure you have the experience. You have been a Member of the Parliamentary Commission and it also does that.

MR AOGON: I was trying to say that now that Parliament is independent and the Judiciary is also getting independent, I think the chairperson of the committee and its members thought it wise that that commission of the Judiciary appoints the entire staff. I wanted to make that point strong. In Parliament, do we get anybody from Public Service? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, I feel that clause 14(3) is redundant because what we are saying is that the standard of service will be to promote honesty, integrity and transparency, which are covered already under the Judicial Code of Conduct and other codes applicable. Therefore, would that sub-clause serve any purpose? I think that it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MS AMODING: That is already covered under the Judicial Code of Conduct and other professional codes of conduct.

MS OGWAL: Chairperson, I think clause 14 is for emphasis. It is important that we reinforce this because what is in the Constitution does not give us power to operationalise it. This will now give us the power to put it to effect. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR OBOTH: In clause 15, we propose that sub-clauses 1(b) and (2) be deleted. 

The justification is that sub-clauses (1)(b) and (2) infringe on the discretion of the Judicial Service Commission to exercise the powers envisaged in Article 147(1)(a) and (2) as well as Article 145 of the Constitution. 

Sub-clause (2) infringes on Articles 145, 147(1)(a). The provision also creates an office unknown to the Constitution, being the office of Deputy Chief Registrar. The post of Chief Registrar is a constitutional office. To create the post of Deputy Chief Registrar, you need to first amend the Constitution. You cannot hold a post of deputy to a post created by the Constitution when your post is just created by Act of Parliament. That was the justification, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we propose that we replace sub-clause (1) with the following:

(1) There shall be a Secretary to the Judiciary who shall be appointed by the President, acting on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission; 
2. 	In sub-clause (2), we propose that we insert, between the words “be” and “responsible,” the following: “The accounting officer of the Judiciary and shall be…” 
3. 	In sub-clause (3), we propose to substitute the words “the Chief Justice” with the word “Parliament.”

The justification is that the proposal to have the Secretary to the Judiciary appointed under Article 174 would be challenged for being unconstitutional and for expanding that provision to include other agencies of Government other than government, ministries and departments. 
In compliance with Article 164 of the Constitution to require the Secretary to the Judiciary, being an accounting officer, to be accountable to Parliament and not to the Chief Justice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it because he would be appointed also by the Secretary to the Treasury like the other accounting officers. 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I just want some clarification from the Chairperson of the committee. By implication, I think this would mean that the Secretary to the Judiciary cannot be transferred to another institution because I do not know whether, in the opinion of the committee, somebody with judicial knowledge would be the only person to be the Secretary to the Judicial Office. If that is not the case, then we could as well have permanent secretaries appointed in other Government agencies also transferred to the Judiciary. 

However, I do not see this happening because the provision we have in the Bill requires an appointment of the Secretary to the Judiciary to be done on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission. This would imply that such a person cannot now be transferred to work elsewhere. If he has to, then he or she has to first be dropped. This means that such a person has to again undergo the same process. I do not know whether the Chairperson can help me to understand this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know what the duties of the Secretary to the Judiciary are?

MR OBOTH: The first and noble constitutional duty of the Secretary to the Judiciary will be to act as the accounting officer. You know the situation before when the former Chief Justice, Wako Wambuzi was - the situation would be what we are now anticipating that the Judiciary will have a Secretary to the Judiciary. The Judiciary is not a ministry or a government department. 

The current situation is that Government sends, either through Public Service, a Permanent Secretary to the Judiciary. Even in Parliament, which is not a ministry or a department but an arm of Government, also receives an accounting officer.

Therefore, the accounting officer in this regard may not necessarily be a lawyer. However, as we said for the Public Service, we have the Public Service Commission; they process the appointment of permanent secretaries who are appointed by the President in consultation with the Public Service Commission. 

The proposal here is to customise this to Judicial Service Commission. Their role would be to make recommendations. They can conduct the interview but there are no restrictions that they would be for the Judiciary. Like Clerk to Parliament is a Permanent Secretary but here, we call her Clerk. For the Judiciary, there would be a Secretary. Not the secretary in your office but the secretary according to this law; meaning, a Permanent Secretary. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Chairperson. Permanent Secretaries are appointed under Article 174 and they are appointed by the President in accordance with the advice of the Public Service Commission. 

They are not appointed as the permanent secretary of a particular ministry. They are appointed permanent secretary but can be transferred to any ministry. 

The Bill is proposing that that particular secretary is appointed, not under Article 174. He is going to be appointed under Article 148(a) because that is the one that gives the Judicial Service Commission powers of appointment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is this person a judicial officer? The secretary to the Judiciary is not a judicial officer. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek a clarification. I have no objection to having a Secretary to the Judiciary but what are the functions of the Judiciary Service Commission? If I can extrapolate, what are the functions of Health Service Commission? 

I think the secretary to the Judiciary shall be appointed by the President on recommendation of Public Service. 

The justification is that this Secretary to Judiciary can be transferred anywhere because he is an accounting officer. 

If you want us to go the extra mile, may be, it should be somebody who has some little knowledge like the Solicitor-General. 

My proposal is that we should not offload Judicial Service Commission because this is not a judicial officer. This one is like an administrator or an accounting officer. 

MR BYARUHANGA: The question that you just asked a few moments ago, about the judicial officer - that is what hon. Nandala is asking. 

Under Article 151 of the Constitution, which is the interpretation section, “In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “judicial officer” means –

    a) a judge or any person who presides over a court or tribunal howsoever described
    b) the Chief Registrar or a registrar of a court
    c) Such other person holding any office connected with the court as may be prescribed by law.”

Madam Chairperson, our submission is that this secretary to the Judiciary would fall under this definition of a person connected with the court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The accounting officer is not connected to any court. 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to refer the Attorney-General to Article 148 of the Constitution, which refers to Article 147(3) of the Constitution. 

Under 148, Judicial Service Commission only appoints persons to hold offices under 147(3). And under 147(3), the judicial officers referred to are Chief Justice, Deputy Chief Justice, Principal Judge, Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice of Appeal and the Judge of High Court, then the office of the chief Registrar and Registrar. 

So, extending the office of Secretary to the Judiciary as part of the judicial officer – I believe if you read the article, Attorney-General, you will agree with me that this should be outside. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, for the first time, I would like to agree with Mr Niwagaba. (Laughter) Now, our accounting officer here is not transferred. 

(Text expunged on the directive of the Chairperson.)

MR ANGURA: The Secretary should be a transferable officer like other accounting officers. In the interest of the Judiciary, we now have all people who have additional qualifications in line with interest of judiciary. Among those who are there, we can – but for now, let us leave the secretary as a transferable officer as an accounting officer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we are looking for is a permanent secretary. (Applause) You do not even have to be a lawyer to be a Secretary to the Judiciary. 

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, the submission of the Attorney-General has made it very clear that the Secretary is not one of the persons that are supposed to perform the services within the court and, therefore, he should not necessarily be a judicial officer. 

On the basis of that, he may be appointed without the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we leave this person with the President to be appointed like other accounting officers? 

Honourable members, we leave it as it is. Honourable Chairperson, would you substitute Public Service Commission for Judicial Service Commission? 

MR OBOTH: I am sure that the concession I am about to make very painfully – I think we have not had enough time for Members to look at the articles. Article 164 covers permanent secretaries for ministries and departments. We should be taking the Judiciary as a whole to be either a ministry or a department, which is not true. That is the background I wanted to give - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable committee chairperson, is Parliament a department or ministry?

MR OBOTH-OBOTH: Parliament is neither a department nor a ministry and that is why the Clerk to Parliament – we know that the Clerk to Parliament is the Permanent Secretary but nobody addresses her as such and that is why we needed here “Secretary to the Judiciary”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to help. First of all, I would like to make it clear that the Clerk to Parliament is accountable to Parliament because the Parliamentary Commission’s accounts are audited by the Auditor-General and the report submitted to Parliament. Even for what we are saying, whatever name you give that gentleman or lady, he or she shall be accountable to Parliament, under Article 164. Even the Clerk to Parliament can be transferred by the way. 


Let me give an example. The Secretary to the Inspectorate of Government, Mr Bageya Waiswa, was transferred and is now called the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Works and Transport.  Even your Solicitor-General can be transferred and he becomes the Secretary to the Judiciary or Secretary to the IGG.

I would like to plead with the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that there is nothing you are trying to create here, which is new. One of the things you are saying is that the accounting officer –(Interjections)- you listen. 

Madam Chairperson, we want to give the name “Secretary to the Judiciary” and this person shall be the accounting officer who will be appointed by the President, on the advice of the Public Service Commission. The functions are those, which are outlined for accounting officers and he or she will be answerable to Parliament.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Chairperson, there is a proposition that we concede to retain clause 17 as it is – there shall be a Secretary to the Judiciary who shall be appointed by the President under Article 174 of the Constitution.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under clause 17(3), we amended that he or she should report to Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move that clause 17(3) be deleted because he should be answerable to –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, delete “Chief Justice” and substitute it with “Parliament”.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, I have been reflecting on the submission by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the Secretary to the Judicial Service Commission should be expressly appointed by –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not Judiciary Service Commission.

MR WADRI: I am sorry. The submission was that the Secretary to the Judiciary should be appointed as accounting officer. Madam Chairperson, the prerogative to appoint accounting officers rests in the hands of the Secretary to the Treasury. That is why you can be a permanent secretary and not necessarily an accounting officer.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already agreed on that. I do not know what you are submitting. (Laughter) I put the question that sub-clause (3) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 18

MR OBOTH-OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete sub-clause (2) of clause 18. The justification is that it restricts the Chief Justice to establish only computer-based performance systems, yet, there are many other performance systems that the Chief Justice may put in place. 

This sub-clause says that the performance management system shall consist of computer-based means of enhancing the performance of the Judiciary. We are saying that cannot be the only way.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we had earlier on created the council, which shall carry out the management and administration, according to the functions. Therefore, to come back with the provision that the Chief Justice will be the one to establish performance management system means that we have now disregarded the council –[Member: “We haven’t created the council.”]- We have not yet but we should put that at the back of our minds because the moment we put that role on the Chief Justice, we will be creating complications as far as management is concerned. We have created a stepping point to have the council to manage some of those things and only advise the Chief Justice on how the management process goes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we want to emasculate the Chief Justice to just remain in the court and do nothing else. This is not right.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the Chief Justice is the head of this institution. He must have authority. He must have functions and duties. We cannot afford to undress this Chief Justice to remain in a wig only. (Laughter) What Chief Justice will this be? He would be an impotent Chief Justice. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we recently created an institute here in Parliament and we said that even councillors, who want can come and train. Supposing some Members want to go and know how justice works or learn some legal processes, will they be able to attend this Judicial Training Institute? Is it just for judicial officers or other people can go there and train?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The answer is in clause 19(3): “The Institute may provide training to any other person or institution approved by the director.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if that is the case, would it also have to be accredited by the national –(Interjections)  They should award. There are people who are putting “certificates of attendance”. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When we amended our law here, we said we shall not go that far. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, in clause 20, we seek to replace sub-clause (1) as follows:

“(1) where a judicial officer or a person in the Judiciary Service is appointed, seconded or assigned to an institution outside the Judiciary, the appointing authority shall appoint another judicial officer or person in the Judiciary Service to replace the person appointed, seconded or assigned.”

We also propose to delete sub-clause (2) and (4). The justification is for clarity to require a person who appoints to make arrangements to replace a judicial officer appointed, seconded or assigned to an office outside the judiciary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, we have Justice Byamukama at the East African Community Court of Justice. Would you say that we should get another judge to replace him? Would that mean he has lost the Judiciary? When he finishes there, where shall he go?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason we have backlog in courts is because we are reserving places for others. It should be clear that if a judicial officer agrees to take another appointment, he or she should vacate that office so that the position can be replaced for another person. Otherwise, this would be the only place, where such a thing happens. In Civil Service, if someone goes away, immediately, he or she is replaced. 

Madam Chairperson, we train many lawyers every day. In fact, this is among those issues that create unemployment. People go and sit somewhere knowing that they will come back. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This proposal offends Article 93. You are creating new positions for additional judges who have to be paid. You are running in danger of Article 93 here.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this is a very difficult situation. First of all, is it constitutional for a holder of a constitutional officer to abandon duty for four or five years, when he or she still holds the constitutional office but acting in another constitutional office, yet, he or she is a sitting office of that constitutional officer? I think we need to interrogate that.

You have, for instance - and this has nothing to do with Justice Byamukama because he is a very descent judge. He has left the Court of Appeal. He was with the Electoral Commission for the first seven years and another additional seven years, if his contract is renewed but the other office is vacant. Could the law have envisaged that kind of situation?

Secondly –(Interjections)– this is different, if for instance, you were a sitting judge and you have been appointed to head some of investigation or Judicial Commission for about two or three months. Then after that, you revert back to your office. However, some of these judicial officers are holding officers for 10 years yet we lack officers to dispense justice in the offices.
Madam Chairperson, I think that is what the chairperson thinks is a mischief to be cured. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I am trying to put across is that –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the fears that the Chairperson and colleagues have is already taken care of in the original Bill under sub-clause (4).

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does it say?

MR OTHIENO: That the Chief Justice may request the appointing authority to appoint another person to serve in the capacity of the officer, who has been granted leave of absence on such terms and conditions as the commission may determine. So, it already takes care of the fears.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Othieno, this happens if the judge in the Court of Appeal has taken three months leave, yet, he or she has work.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what we are trying to put across - My brother, hon. Othieno, even what you are saying is wrong. There are administrative things that need to be done.

I would like to say that where a judicial officer leaves officer and goes to another office since he or she will be paid a salary, where he or she will be working – Yet, there is a salary planned for them here. In fact, you cannot earn salary from different sources. So, someone should come and earn a salary to perform the function, which you have left.

This will bring discipline. You must make a decision. Do you want to remain on the bench or you want to go somewhere? If you go somewhere, it would be a noble thing that you resign so that others can take on.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The point of clarification I would like to raise is that I have been reflecting on Lady Justice Solomy Bossa, who is a sitting judge here but she has been seconded or assigned to the International Court of Justice, which has a term. So, what happens to that particular situation?

I understand the case of Justice Byamukama and others but what happens to our judges, who have been assigned to the East African Court of Justice? What happens? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think what you are raising is that we never foresaw this. We should, therefore, say that one can choose to go to East Africa Court of Justice or the African Union. However, in order for justice to be dispensed in this country, we need judges to be present.

This would be the ideal because they are free to come and reapply. In fact, in Civil Service, you are free to come and reapply –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, we need to appreciate this clause very well. In respect to the two courts, for instance, the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal, the number of justices of those courts is passed by Parliament when amending the Judicature Act. 

The current position of the Court of Appeal is that it should be constituted of 14 justices as per the last Judicature Act, we amended in 2008. However, a situation can happen when that court is depleted of four justices by assigning them other offices. In terms of work load, those justices do not work in court yet, they have not been replaced. So, how do we resolve that kind of issue?

You find judges who have been assigned duties for 14 or 15 years in some other institutions. Yet, in terms of the work force and the establishment of the constitutional provision, they still claim to belong to the Judiciary. We, therefore, need to see how we balance the two; leaving for a short period. However, those going for longer period must make a decision either to remain justices or judges or leave for people to occupy these officers.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I asked whether this provision is not offending Article 93. If you say that this person has gone and the appointing authority says we shall have 30 judges, of which four are sent somewhere and then you bring some more, the number of judges could go to 28. 

When you go to the Supreme Court, others have left and again, you say let us add some four –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is why we are not seeking to offend. We are saying, when you leave and come back, you apply. If we have space, you come back.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, there should be no more assignments?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, the day you are going to do the assignment means that you are not fit to be in the court. Go and do that special assignment. One year or three months is okay.  

Madam Chairperson, I would like you to go to a court where there are no judges. That is when you will know the pain. Somebody was appointed and when we approved him in Parliament, he was not meant to go for assignments but to go to the bench.

When he receives another assignment, he should make a decision whether he is taking it up or he is going to remain on the bench. It is illegal for us to allow people to go and earn two salaries.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, honesty and transparency would help. We interacted with the Judiciary, Judicial Service Commission and other stakeholders and found out that there was discomfort in the way things are being done.

Is it shortage of human resource in the Judiciary? Is it that nobody can do some assignments that are assigned to judges? We could not stop it but this law intends to discourage and close the gap of having serving judges -

Somebody else could go and become a chairman of the Electoral Commission. Why do you have to disturb a judge? There are many people, including in this House or outside.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the position of the committee. When you look at the numbers in court, they are depleted. I am a litigant in the Court of Appeal but I have not had a date fixed in the last three years.

Whenever I go there, they say, we are short of judges because many have been deployed in different areas. I would wish to support the position of the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What you are saying is, once you are assigned, we say “goodbye” to you?

MR MWIRU: More so for long periods but for these short assignments - For instance, the judge of the High Court is in the East African Court of Justice but she is still a serving judge here. When they are not sitting in Arusha, she comes and she is allocated work and proceeds like any other judge.

However, those who go for long periods, for instance, the IGG - You serve for 10 years as IGG and yet, you are seated and are being paid in a different office.

The question of Article 93 that you are raising - You are invited to go to an office like the Office of the IGG, which has a budget. If you do not go and stay in the Judiciary, another person will occupy that office because it has a budget.

The situation would have been different if we are trying to say that they recruit someone else and you still hold on to the same office. We are saying you must weigh where you want to go. Thank you.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. My first submission is to seek clarification from the chairperson. From your statement, you said, “appointment, assignment or secondment.” I do not know whether all those will be treated in the same way.

However, the concerns that Members are expressing are as a result of a problem experienced and if that is what you want to cure, I would think that we define a timeframe within which you can say, beyond this period, someone else should be appointed.

Like it has been said here, at least, for the time I have known the Electoral Commission, the chairpersons have served their two terms without interruption. Therefore, if someone is being appointed as Chairperson of the Electoral Commission, be sure that the person will be there for 14 years.

How would you hold that as a judge when the person is fully involved and is being paid under the Electoral Commission? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, can we then create a new clause that this sub-clause will apply to persons who spend more than one year? We can improve on it but in principle.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for giving me space to talk. We paralegals also want to benefit from this. I agree with most of the Members that if a judge is given another office to serve in, he should think about the opportunity cost.

I seek clarification from the chairperson, in case someone is appointed to go and work in the East African Court of Justice, should we consider how often they normally sit or is it the same? You need to help me. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The East African Court of Justice has sessions. Honourable chairperson, what do you say?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, there is a compromise position that was suggested by hon. Opolot. In the original Bill, they are seeking the Chief Justice to know. Most of these appointments are not done with the knowledge of the Chief Justice. He would also like to know. If we put a timeframe of maybe three years - I would leave it to the Members to suggest the months.

MS OGWAL: The chairman is being unreasonable as we have already agreed. The Chairperson has suggested - and once the chairperson has suggested, she has actually ruled - that at least, one year can be considered. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for the active guidance. When hon. Jacob Opolot was talking about the descriptiveness of the type of appointment, it says, “where this person is either appointed, seconded or assigned.”

It makes a difference because “appointed” would give it a longer scenario. A person who is “seconded” would imply a much shorter period and for a person who is “assigned”, similarly we would be talking about a much lesser period.

In order to designate the time period, I would have been comfortable with “not exceeding two years” in the context of an appointment or secondment. I would propose two years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not see the Minister of Public Service here today. It will benefit from better understanding of appointed, secondment and assignment so that when we are taking a decision – I want the Minister of Public Service to come and assist us.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, we need to agree no matter whether it is assignment or appointment, as long as it is not more than one year. If it is more than one year, then that will be too much; they will have to go. Otherwise, if it is less than one year, it can be accommodated within the description that the Attorney-General has given. Let it be not more than one year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think you are forgetting that this disruption would actually terminate the benefits of the judge. If you say that you are going for one year, gendela ddala, simply go. It affects the terminal benefits. That is why I want the Minister of Public Service to come and we benefit from their expertise in this area.

MR ABBAS AGABA: Madam Chairperson, I thought when the Attorney-General clarified on appointment, secondment and assignment, he would relate it to salary. The judicial officer may be appointed outside the Judiciary. That has a direct reflection on the attainment of a new salary but a secondment and assignment may not directly reflect into his new salary.

I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, that it affects the terminal benefits of the judicial officer. We may propose one year only; how about if the person is simply assigned? He or she does not get a salary where they have gone because it is an assignment. They are getting a basic salary as judicial officers – (Interjections) – yes, they get allowances from where they are going.

If the assignment takes more than one year, we cut them off from the salary payroll. It means they will rely on the allowances they get for the assignment.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this is quite critical.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was very happy when hon. Jacob Opolot raised this matter because that is what I was itching to contribute. Clause 20 talks about being appointed, seconded and assigned to an office outside the Judiciary. You have to read this with the definition of a judicial officer, which states thus: “A judicial officer means the following:

    1) the Chief Justice; 
    2) the Deputy Chief Justice; 
    3) the Principal Judge;
    4) A Justice of the Supreme Court;
    5) A Justice of the Court of Appeal;
    6) A Judge of a High Court;
    7) Chief Registrar;
    8) Registrar of Court;
    9) A Magistrate; and
    10) Such other person holding any office connected with the court or may be prescribed by.

The definition talks about a judicial officer being either being appointed, assented or assigned. For example, if a magistrate is assigned or seconded to another institution to work there, we are then giving that person only six months. If we give him or her only six months yet, the assignment, which he or she seconded, is taking one year, then what happens?

Therefore, I go with the Attorney-General’s proposal to give two years so that we cure these other problems of some other people going and leaving us with a very huge backlog. I support the Attorney-General on this, Madam Chairperson.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is unfortunate we have not got clarity on the appointment, secondment and assignment. Gaps have been left in the Judiciary. Members themselves have witnessed a situation where they go to the Court of Appeal or High Court and they are not attended to because the justices and judges are not there.

I would like to take the case of Justice Bamugemereire. I am sorry but allow me mention this. I do not know how to pronounce it; Bamugemereire, I think. (Laughter) I do not know whether that was an assignment, an appointment or maybe secondment. However, she has done this for more than three years. This has created a gap where she was working. She is earning an allowance much more than the salary.
We are simply debating their retirement benefits. You are maybe saying it will distort the salary structure and that is why we want to limit it. If it is an assignment, let it be within one year. They should accomplish it and go back to their offices.

In a situation where they are adding, because it may go even for seven years, what happens to their positions? That is why we should make it only one year maximum. That will help us. Thank you. (Applause)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to put this conversation into context. Our primary concern is that as we talk, the Judiciary is understaffed from the Supreme Court to the High Court. It is even worse at the lower levels.

The practice of the Executive to get a judicial officer from these understaffed courts should be discouraged. I think that is our primary concern. Our primary concern is not about earnings. They can earn as much as they want but what we are concerned about is dispensing justice. There is a lot of backlog. 

The Judiciary appeals to this House almost every other day about the lack of justices and judges. The only reason we give for not appointing these judges is because the purse is limited; that is the only reason.

We are saying stop disenfranchising the Judiciary by appointing their judges to other constitutional offices without replacement because that has created a gap. This is our primary concern; creating gaps within the Judiciary.

However, if necessity arises, then let us say it should not exceed one year. (Applause) That does not affect inquiries that run for six, eight months and so on. For that, you can borrow a judge. However, for those substantive constitutional offices, we have a big basket of retired judges. Let us pick those retired judges and appoint them to those offices, other than getting an active judge. You still have that office vacant for years.

As I conclude, Madam Chairperson, by the time they sometimes cease being holders of these offices, they have been assigned to maybe they are even retired here. So, why were they even holding that office?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR KATUNTU: The proposal is here, Madam Chairperson: 
“Where a judicial officer or a person in the Judiciary is appointed, seconded or assigned to an institution outside the Judiciary for a period exceeding one year, the appointing authority shall appoint another judicial officer or person in the Judiciary Service to replace the person appointed, seconded or assigned.” I beg to move.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I would like to raise this matter, which could be constitutional. I understand this, but there is a process of removing a judicial officer. Once a person is appointed a judge, there is a procedure for him to be removed from being a judge. 

Therefore, while we bring this proposal, that constitutional provision should be; you just do not remove a judge from being a judge. There is a procedure –(Interjections)– I am raising a matter for the House to consider because there are procedures where you terminate somebody’s service as a judge. What we are proposing here means that, unilaterally –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had proposed earlier that we do not take a decision on this matter. It is getting more complicated. Let us get advice from the Ministry of Public Service on this issue. So, we will stand it over and the Ministry of Public Service will come – General, are you burning to say something? 

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make an observation that actually, when you look at the three, we cannot treat them the same way - the assignment, secondment and appointment. Therefore, I think we should go with what you have said that we take it to the Ministry of Public Service. 

Where I come from, secondment does not exceed six months. When you are seconded, if it goes beyond six months, then it is something different. So, my proposal is that we do not treat them as the same thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have taken the decision. Let us get advice from the Ministry of Public Service. It is a critical area. Let us go to clause 21.

Clause 21

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I must appreciate your soberness and clarity of mind – (Interjections) – That is why I am appreciating. Madam Chairperson, protect me from the General and others, please. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are protected. 

MR OBOTH: We propose to delete the words, “in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution” in clause in 21. 

Justification 

    1. To expand the provision to take into account other instances where the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice may retire from office before attaining the mandatory age of retirement;
    2. For uniformity and consistency.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, where the chairperson of the committee is quoting the constitutional provision, I think we need a stronger justification. This is because the Constitution normally prescribes specifically what is to be applied in those circumstances. Now, when you decide to evade the constitutional provision, you must provide adequate explanation.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Chairperson, the clarification I am seeking is whether it is possible for us to see the benefits they have now so that we can compare them, because you may find that where they are today is not so bad. So, can we see the benefits they have today so that we are able to reflect on them, compare and see how we can do the amendment?

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are in Schedule 2. 

MS KARUNGI: I am sorry, I wanted to - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the schedules are handled after the main Bill. 

MS KARUNGI: Maybe I am not getting you. I am asking if we can get to know how they are benefiting today and then we compare with what they have brought to us. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the Attorney-General can –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this is about the retirement benefits. We want to create retirement benefits for our judicial officers, which is a good thing. If we are taking the first one of the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice, - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, hon. Cecilia Ogwal asked for clarification. She said that we need to give broader justification for – (Interjections) – It is not evading – Actually, honourable members, you should appreciate that we did a lot of justice to this matter. If you have a copy of your Bill, clause 21 reads as follows: “A Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice shall, on retirement from office in accordance with Article 144 of the Constitution, be granted the retirement benefits prescribed respectively in relation to their offices in Schedule 2 of this Act.” 

Our case is not yet into the details of the schedule. If you have to understand, I refer all of you to Article 144 because the Constitution is your Quran and Bible here. The Article says, “A judicial officer may retire at any time after attaining the age of sixty years, and shall vacate his or her office.” 

The argument of the committee is that there are several other ways – somebody could be in poor health and could exit. Here when we say “in accordance with Article 144”, we are restricting it to only one kind of retirement. So, you will find that if you retire before the retirement age, you miss the benefits and that is what –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I need clarification from you, honourable chairperson. If someone leaves office as a result of ill health or otherwise, is that also retirement? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think what we should be addressing is the proposal to delete the words, “in accordance with Article 144”.  That is what you should be discussing. Do we agree to delete that or we leave it?

MR OBOTH: That is the justification I wanted to give. Members, before you say “no” or “yes”, look at the reasoning in the report. Look at what is in the Bill and the Constitution. You actually will not be doing justice to these judges. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is your Bill. What do you say about the removal of this part, honourable minister?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We are in agreement with the chairperson of the committee, that we would like to delete the words, “in accordance with Article 144” for the justification that he has given, which is to expand the provision to take into account other - I could have even added “other legitimate instances where a person may retire from office before attaining the mandatory age”.

To answer hon. Okupa, yes if you retire because of bad health, it is a retirement. It is just that it is because of bad health. You cannot predict upon whom bad health shall befall. Therefore, that is the justification that we have.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the Constitution in that Article 144 is directing us on what we should be able to do. It is giving us the principle direction. What we are doing here is to amplify the requirements of the Constitution. There is no way we can bend the Constitution using a subsidiary law when it is already clear on what is supposed to be done. We can only amplify and activate it.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, the chairperson and the ministers have tried their best. However, the Constitution is very clear. If you are retiring because of bad health - These are public servants, and the Public Service Standing Orders are very clear. Let them be applicable; why only the judges?

Therefore, I would like to request Members that we get strict with the Constitution since the judges understand the Constitution very well. Let us go by the Constitution and not delete that. I beg to propose.

MR AGABA: Colleagues, I thought that we can make further clarification. There is nothing new the committee is introducing in as far as benefits of the judicial officers are concerned. Under clause 21 – (Interjections) - Madam Chairperson, I beg for your protection. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the committee has made a proposal. We are objecting and they are trying to explain the justification. Yes, he is a member, therefore he knows their position; he is defending it.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There is nothing new we are introducing to the benefits of judicial officers in this clause 21. In clause 21, we are only being aware that there are other ways of retiring from office other than the mandatory retirement age. 

A person may seek early retirement; it is part of public service procedures that a person seeks early retirement from office. A person may get out of office due to ill health, like we have said. Therefore, under such circumstances, that person may not be entitled to the benefits if we keep the phrase “in accordance to Article 144 of the Constitution”. There are two things -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, it is very unfortunate that we are actually giving a bad image to the Judiciary. The Judiciary has no intention whatsoever to bend the rules in order to achieve the objective of getting benefits.

It is very clear that when we talk about the subject of retirement of a judge, it must be done in accordance with the Constitution, Article 144. We cannot bend the rules just for the purpose of benefits. 

Madam Chairperson, you may have to guide us. I think we are wasting our time and your time in trying to get you to review what we did in the Constituent Assembly, with very sober minds. We had lawyers as well as other sorts of people. Although hon. Oboth, the holy man, was not there, there were others who were there. I beg to propose-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, supposing we have a judge who is 53 years old and he or she develops some incapacity; are you going to say that they wait until they are 60 years old because they cannot go? Is that what you want to say?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in addition to that, our standing orders under the public service right now say that if you are 45 years and you have served for 10 years, you can also retire. That is provided for. You will appreciate that as a committee, we did our work.

What we are aware of in clause 27, which is ahead of us, is that this Bill is misapplying the Pensions Act. When it misapplies the Pensions Act, it means the Pensions Act will not apply to this. What we are doing here is because we know what is ahead.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us agree that the Constitution provides for the process of retirement under Article 144. However, we should not close the door. Therefore, let us delete these words.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I thank you, and today we shall get on your nerves. The Pensions Act is very clear. In civil service, when you retire at 45 you will access pension but you will not access pension like the man who has worked up to the full time. Any day you work, you are contributing towards pension; I want to make it clear that way. 

If you say that a judge comes in - I hope that many of you have had people calling you saying that they have their NSSF and they want to get it. The law says until you are 55 years, you cannot access it. You have to go and seek medical attention before get it. I hope you have seen that.

Madam Chairperson, we are not saying that a judge should not get his pension. He may have been a judicial officer or magistrate and he has his pension there. What we are saying is that for a person to get full pension, they must have reached the retirement age. The one who will be between there, will be accessing between there. 

Nobody calls sickness; you can fall sick anytime. One thing is that we should make a provision on how to treat our judges because they have fallen sick because of a lot of work. We must make provision on how to treat other civil servants as well.

Madam Chairperson, the Constitution is very clear; a judge will get retirement pension after attaining 60 years. It has been stated. For the other one, you cannot decide. 

I would like to give an even worse scenario. A man may have worked for only one year and says that he is sick, and because the law says as soon as you are sick, you are entitled to pension, the man gets the whole benefit and tomorrow you see him opening up a chamber to do other things. We must cure these things from here.

Madam Chairperson, the Bill is right but maybe we look at the Pensions Act and see what is not favouring the judges and we deal with it, so that they are not able to try to amend the law for their own benefit.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I have heard the Constitution variously referred to here, and we are saying that it is the supreme law. From what you were proposing, it is like the Constitution could have rightly or wrongly closed the window. However, we are opening a window using this lower law - an Act. I think it would be very unconstitutional for us to do that. 

Since we have already made reference to the Public Service Standing Orders, I want to think that this is again another area where the Minister of Public Service should guide us, and it will not be fair that other Ugandans are asked to wait. It will not be fair that those who retire earlier are asked to wait until they are of age before they can access their pension and others who should be custodians of the law are being given the open opportunity.

I am not saying that someone cannot fall sick; I think all these are catered for. However, to use this subsidiary law to open up a window, which the Constitution closed, would be very wrong of us. (Applause)

The chairperson: Honourable members, we therefore defer clauses 21, 23 and 24 and ask the Minister of Public Service to come and make us understand this situation. 

Clause 22
The chairperson: We are talking about a funeral here. Do you want someone to wait until he is 60 before he dies? Clause 22 is about what will happen when the Chief Justice dies. 

Mr othieno: Why it would be necessary to wait for the guidance is that the kind of amendment the committee wants to bring is to the effect that the moment somebody feels he is sick, he retires.

The chairperson: No. we are on clause 22. We have deferred that matter. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 25

The chairperson: Honourable chairperson, is there anything on clause 25? 

Mr oboth: No.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, clause 25 says that the pension will be a charge on the Consolidated Fund. There is no problem with that because all pensions –

The Chairperson: is that under clause 25?

Mr nandala-mafabi: Yes, so there is no need for it. Clause 25 talks about a charge on the Consolidated Fund. There is no problem because all pensions are a direct charge –

The chairperson: What are you reading? We are looking at clause 25. We have deferred clauses 21, 23 and 24; so we are looking at clause 25. Is there any issue with this clause?

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, it is all about pensions. This other paper, apart from the upper one - These are other judges, judicial officers -

The chairperson: Is clause 25 okay? 

Mr jonathan odur: Madam Chairperson, clause 25 is not okay because when we go to the schedules, there are proposals and amendments that I would intend to move that would propose a different pension scheme for the judicial officers. 

In fact, I am maintaining that given the circumstances, the Pensions Act should apply to deal with the issue that we discussed yesterday about “salary for life” for retiring officers.

The chairperson: Would they be in a different schedule? Wouldn’t they be under Schedule 6? 

Mr jonathan odur: Madam Chairperson, there is Schedule 2A, 2B, 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B and Schedule 6. They are spread across.

The Chairperson: I am looking at clause 25. What does it say? It is talking about Schedule 6.

Mr jonathan odur: Schedule 6 proposes salaries for life for the retiring judicial officers.

The Chairperson: We shall get there. They will still be under Schedule 6. The schedule will be there and we are going to work out the details when we get there.

Mr jonathan odur: What is proposed in the schedule is not a pension scheme in its strict sense.

The Chairperson: Now you are anticipating.

Mr jonathan odur: I concede; I will come to it.

The Chairperson: They will be under Schedule 6 but we are going to work on it, item by item. I hope you have circulated your amendments. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, by the way, this clause 25 is just referring us to a schedule. It says that a judicial officer who retires from office shall receive the benefits specified in Schedule 6 to this Act. 

The chairperson: That is what I am saying; those issues will be contained in Schedule 6. 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing insertion of a new clause. Immediately after clause 25, insert the following new clause: 

“Benefits of a spouse or spouses and dependent children of a deceased retired judicial officer

The monthly allowance specified in paragraphs (1) of Schedule 2,4,5 and 6 of this Act shall be enjoyed together by the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of a judicial officer who dies in retirement on the earliest of-

(a) 	a period of 15 years from the death of the retired judicial officer;
(b) 	until the death of the spouse or the dependent child; or
(c) 	in the case of dependent children, until they attain the age of 18 years.” – (Interjections)

The chairperson: Order, honourable members! Do not intimidate the chairperson.

Mr oboth: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am being intimidated.

The justification is: to provide for the continuation of retirement benefits to a spouse or spouses and dependent children upon the death of a retired judicial officer.

For the record, this is not only limited to this. If you look at the retirement benefits for the President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and others, it is already part of –(Interjections)– okay, I beg to – (Interruption)

Mr katuntu: Colleagues, let us look at the principle. Even when you talk about a person who has been earning pension, what happens when he passes on? Let us not get excited. 

The principle is that when you die, your estate benefits from that pension. The basis of what the chairperson is saying is that in case the judicial officer passes on, then these entitlements should be paid to the surviving spouse and children.

First of all, let us agree with the principle. After that, you can debate for how long. Let me ask you, for those of you who have been public servants, when you die, your pension goes to your spouse – (Interjections) - For how many years? 

Madam Chairperson – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please, this is a very important point. I think you should appreciate what is happening in the Public Service. If it is completely different, we will know, but do not discriminate against the Judiciary. 

MR KATUNTU: You cannot; it is the principle. Widows and orphans are suffering. Colleagues, it will be this House to raise the same thing. You will say things like, “this judicial officer was in my constituency; he died and the children and the widow are suffering.” You will be the ones raising these very issues. The principle is there and we need to respect it. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Colleagues, there is one thing I would like to remind this House about, as we amend clauses 21 to 27. I think it is the Constitution that talks about the issue of judicial officers not paying taxes. That is what I wanted to remind this House about. If the Attorney-General can stand up and say that they pay taxes, then I think I will be lying to this House. 

As we are going on with the amendments, Madam Chairperson, I wanted us to reflect on what the Pension Act says. These colleagues of ours, the judges, sincerely speaking, deserve what we are about to give them. However, why don’t we consider what the Pensions Act says before we move on? We should not do it the way we are rushing to do it at the moment. Let us try to go back a little bit to what the Pensions Act says before we pass clauses 21 to 27. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are dealing with clauses 25 and 26. Do not take us back. We have deferred the others. What does the Pensions Act say? You tell us what it says.

MR BAGOOLE: Madam Chairperson, it is true I am a very bright man, just like hon. Majegere said. Since we are in –(Interruption – I can take information from the honourable member. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to provide to the House, which comes from the Pensions Act, is that the Pensions Act has a particular formula of calculating these benefits. What you get as a lump sum and what you get subsequently, which we call pension and is paid monthly, is embedded in the Pensions Act. 

When we go to clause 27 - I do not want to speculate - they want to repeal and make the Pensions Act inapplicable to judicial officers. That is why I agree with my colleague that we have to review it.

MR BAGOOLE: Madam Chairperson, I request this House to abide by my request that we stay clause 26, which talks about a lump sum. We should get some time off and look at the Pensions Act and get the formula. My worry is that it may end up being baptised as a bonanza for the judges.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, no. We have not yet gone to clause 26. We are looking at a new clause proposed by the committee. That is where we were. 

Honourable members, stop jumping back and forth. We had finished clause 25. We had gone to a new clause presented by the chairperson. That is what we are dealing with and we have not taken a decision. We have not concluded the addition after clause 25. 

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification. We are agreeing on the principle in terms of retirement benefits. I just wanted to find out what the Public Service provides for other public servants when they retire. What we should look for is uniformity. There is no way we are going to treat this as a special case. If it is 10 years for other public servants then it should – (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. We have got different pension regimes; for example, we have the Pensions Act that governs the pension of public servants and the Parliamentary Commission has a different pension scheme from that of the Public Service; we have our own pension law. The rule that governs our pension scheme is not necessarily the one that falls under the Pensions Act. 

Therefore, it is not about uniformity throughout because if it were so, our pension scheme would have been under the Pensions Act. We are different arms of Government. 

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the proposal. I only have an issue with the beneficiaries of the pension when the judicial officer dies. From the proposal, it is assumed that the judicial officer will have left a spouse or spouses and dependent children. This assumption may not apply to everybody. We may have a judicial officer die and he has no spouse or dependent children –(Interjections)- Yes, it is possible. 

By distributing this, are we assuming that the judicial officer is dying intestate? The judicial officer could have a will and maybe give this benefit to different people, other than a spouse or dependent children. Therefore, my proposal is that we do not limit this to spouses and dependent children. There could be other people that the judicial officer is looking after and would want this benefit to go to them by way of a will. I thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If he has a will, it will be clear. If he has a will, that is okay. It is even better. If there are no spouses or children, nobody will make a claim because when you enter the service, you must indicate your wife and children. Incidentally, some people here have refused to sign those forms. They have not told us who their next of kin are but you are required to indicate the next of kin, your spouse, dependents; it is not just guessing. What do we say, other than the objection? What do others say?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, in the new clause, my objection is on (b). I do not know what the effect would be if we deleted it. You are proposing benefits to either the spouse or dependent children until they die. I do not know whether you have benchmarked this in any part of this world. My proposal is that we could retain (a) and (c) but have (b) deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under the law, dependent children are those below 18. They have told you that in the case of dependent children, it is until they attain the age of 18.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing that we stand over this so that the Minister of Public Service can guide us based on the expertise and experience they have. Right now, we are just guessing. It would be better for us to be guided properly before we take a decision.

I personally believe that accommodating spouses is important. We would not like a situation where a Chief Justice or Deputy Chief Justice, who are currently men, die and leave their women in dire poverty. That would be wrong, more so if they are women.

Therefore, I think it is important that we look at it and see the state at which we shall be leaving the spouses. We need the Minister of Public Service to clarify this to us. So, can we stand it over, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, maybe we stand over this for other reasons. In the Public Service, the spouses are catered for; why should it be different for the Judiciary? Maybe you have other reasons for wanting to defer it but on that one, as matter of principle we cannot discriminate.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I must appreciate hon. Okello Anthony because he is has been keen from yesterday. He is reading the report and following. Anyhow, I just want to give some clarification on this. 

The proposal, which has been made, is that the monthly allowance specified in paragraphs (1) of Schedule 2, 4, 5 and 6 of this Act shall be enjoyed together by the surviving spouse or spouses and dependent children of a judicial officer, who dies in retirement on the earliest of either 15 years until the death of that spouse - the spouse may die after two years - or in the case of dependent children, until they attain the age of 18 years. It is any of the three - the earliest that comes.

Madam Chairperson, I do not know about whether the interference with this temple of legislation by those two people could have had an impact. However, as you have been guiding, we understand this when we sometimes stay over it. We can appreciate it better in the schedule we are going to. This was just a new clause we are proposing, and it is the law in other areas. In Parliament here – (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Members, we are not discriminating against the Judiciary but what we are saying is that the Constitution clearly states how dependents and other people are handled -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which Article of the Constitution?

MR WALUSWAKA: Article 144. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Article 144 is about the tenure of judicial officers. (Laughter)

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, you know we are not lawyers. You talked about Justice Wambuzi and the minister said he would bring a statement. We had even forgotten. The minister said that he would bring a statement about those people who retired. Now, they have forgotten them and we are on the new ones. Why are they bringing it now? It is because some are going? 

Yesterday, that was the ruling and we had forgotten. Can the minister bring the statement on the former Chief Justices, because we are now considering the ones who are retiring just next month? That is why they are rushing. Madam Chairperson, people are waiting; let the minister bring that statement too.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us defer the decision on the new clause. Let us go to clause 26.

Clause 26

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since you have stood over clauses that relate to the Pensions Act, I would like to inform the House that even these relate to the same. I think it would be better for us to stand over clauses 27 and 28 because we do not know how we shall frame them. Maybe we can create a provision in the Pensions Act to cater for the judges in a special manner.

Clause 28

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I put the question that clause 28 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 28 is the same -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is repealing an Act a problem? No. I put the question that clause 28 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we renumber this and have subclause (1) and then in subclause (2), I suggest that it reads thus: “The management of Judiciary funds shall be…”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you submit that amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I have done so, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it? I do not have it with me.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But Madam Chairperson, it is very good, if you listen to me first.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I want it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you can have a look at it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, that is not how we work. I gave notice and it is a standard practice now that if you want to amend from the Floor, you give notice before you bring your amendment. In fact, you should have sent it earlier. No smuggling.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not smuggling. Just give me an opportunity. This is about expenses. I am not deleting anything. The only thing I am trying to do is to have a second item here, which should say that the Judiciary funds should be managed according to the Public Finance Management Act –(Interjection)– It is obvious; that is why I am raising it.

We are saying the reason is obvious, and that is why we have deleted the Pensions Act. 

Madam Chairperson, having seen that I am not going to smuggle in a sentence, I wanted to create here, after (1) and (2), a provision that says that the management of the Judiciary funds shall be according to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The justification is: Given the independence we are giving to the Judiciary, this is to them from creating their own ways of managing public resources.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the Judiciary, we have a Permanent Secretary whose work will be to ensure that it is done under the Public Finance Management Act. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, here you are saying, “shall produce as soon as practicable”. I thought that all reports are given deadlines. I would like to propose that we say, “the Chief Justice shall publish” and we delete “as soon as practicable”. So, it should instead say “…shall publish a detailed annual performance report concerning all activities of the Judiciary during the financial year.”

The justification is: to avoid the word “practicable” because the Chief Justice can say that he sees it as not practicable. Therefore, I wanted us to delete the word “as soon as practicable”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you removing one word?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am saying, “The Chief Justice shall publish…” I want us to delete “as soon as practicable”. So, it should read “The Chief Justice shall publish a detailed annual performance report by…” I think that we need to put the date.

MR BYARUHANGA: I would concede to the removal of “as soon as practicable”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 35 is saying – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have finished clause 35. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to add that there must be a deadline.

Clause 36

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in clause 36(2), we seek to replace paragraph (a) as follows:
“(a) the structure, staff and management of the institute”

Justification: To empower the Chief Justice to make regulations for the structure, staff and management of the Judiciary Training Institute.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the practice in this House has always been that such regulations are made by the minister in consultation - the opposite of what we have here. 

Here we are saying “the Chief Justice may, after consultation”. I feel it should be the other way round, that the minister may issue those regulations in consultation with the Chief Justice, so that the minister is the one – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the Chief Justice issue instruments? Does the law say that it is only the minister to issue instruments?  

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, it says, “The Chief Justice may, after consultation with the minister, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.” We are empowering the Chief Justice and the minister already has a lot on his plate. 

The day-to-day management –(Interjection)– It cannot be the other way round because we are not legislating for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but we are legislating for the Chief Justice and the Judiciary.
   
MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, we need to be consistent in this House. We have made laws before and when it comes to regulations, we have been giving the minister the power to make regulations by other laws. This House needs to be consistent and it is the minister. 

MS NANTABA: Madam Chairperson, my proposal is that the Chief Justice makes the regulations and the minister tables them before Cabinet.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I disagree with my neighbour. You cannot regulate yourself. The minister should be the one to regulate what happens on the other side in consultation with the Chief Justice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have objections to consulting with the Chief Justice on this issue? It is the minister who administers this law but does the minister have objections to consulting with the Chief Justice before making these instruments?

MR KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, given the fact that the Chief Justice consults the minister and therefore it is a harmonised position; given that the Judiciary is an independent arm of the state, I would concede to the proposal that the Chief Justice can, in consultation with the minister. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this is about the training institute. Really, as the staff of the training institute, do you want the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to issue regulations on management and training of the Judicial Training Institute? You really want so many things. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, regulations are made by the ministers. Therefore, the minister, in consultation with the Chief Justice, can issue the regulations. I think that would be the right way. You cannot ask the Chief Justice to regulate himself; I think that would not be proper.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the regulations are for the better carrying out of this Act; isn’t it? Who is the manager of this Act? It is the minister. Therefore, I think that the minister, in consultation with the Chief Justice, should do this. The minister is the administrator of this law.  

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the regulations are not for giving effect to the law. This is purely in relation to the management, structure – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you read.

MR OBOTH: I beg your pardon. This, among other things, together with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, who is also here, we have made several laws. Unless the minister concedes here on record, the minister has never, including under the Electoral Commission Act - This was on the basis that the ministers take forever to make these regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, the person who will be required to come here to lay is the minister. The Chief Justice cannot come here.

We can say, “The minister may, after consultation with the Chief Justice, by statutory instrument, make regulations for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.” We switch the offices. There is nothing wrong with (2). There was an amendment from the chair to add the word “management”. 

MR NIWAGABA: If we make the minister responsible for making regulations, I would then propose that we delete (2) entirely so that we do not restrict the minister on which part of the Act he will make regulations. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we delete (2).

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister to move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.22
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.22
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” and passed the following clauses: 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 passed with amendments, 14, 15 passed with amendments, 17 passed with amendments, 18 passed with amendments, 19, 22, 25 and 26, 28,29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35 passed with amendments, 36 passed with amendments; stood over clauses 20 and 27; and deferred clauses 21, 23 and 24. The rest were stood over. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.25
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: What do you want to recommit, honourable member? You cannot recommit at this stage but you can give notice. You can only recommit at the third reading. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give notice that I intend to recommit clauses 29 and 30. 

THE SPEAKER: What are the reasons for your recommitment?

MR OTHIENO: Clause 30 subjects all the expenses of the Judiciary to a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. I think that is not proper. Whereas some expenses could be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund, I contest the charge on all expenses of the Judiciary, including the recurrent ones, directly on the Consolidated Fund. In other words, other charges could be appropriated by Parliament whereas others could be just supplied. 

Madam Speaker, those are the grounds upon which I intend to recommit those clauses. (Applause)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you cited a case by the Constitutional Court - Constitutional Petition No. 30 of 2017, Ayena Odong vs the Attorney-General and Parliamentary Commission. The gist of that judgment is precisely what my honourable colleague is talking about. 

The Constitutional Court was saying that to anchor the principle of their independence, they must –(Interjection)- I am just giving information on what the Constitutional Court said so that as you prepare to recommit that provision, you could have the opportunity to read that case and see how it has a bearing. Precisely, the Constitutional Court was saying that their expenses must be directly charged on the Consolidated Fund and should not go through the appropriation processes. That is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to draw the attention of hon. Othieno to Article 128(5) of the Constitution. This is what it says: “The administrative expenses of the Judiciary, including all salaries, allowances, gratuities and pensions payable to or in respect of persons serving in the Judiciary, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund”. It is in the Constitution. 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I agree with that but we are saying that let those ones be charged on the Consolidated Fund but not all the expenses. The others should be appropriated by Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give is that the salary of a Member of Parliament is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. Even the salary of a teacher is a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund. What hon. Othieno is raising is important. Assuming someone goes to Case Clinic and incurs a medical bill, according to this provision it will be a direct charge. What we have to be careful about is that there are those expenses which are allowed to be a direct charge but there are those which we must come here and appropriate.

Madam Speaker, when I was rising – you never wanted to listen to me today for the first time –

THE SPEAKER: It is because you were being tedious. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, there are those charges that we cannot allow. They can say that for the Mbale court, they have spent half a billion shillings and want it to be a direct charge on the Consolidated Fund.

THE SPEAKER: We shall discuss it on merit when we go to the Third Reading.

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, you directed the minister to come and tell the country the fate of the retired judges, the Chief Justices and others. The minister promised to come and give us a statement. Now that we started and the other people came – (Interjection) - the people who invaded Parliament - can the minister now tell the country about the fate of the retired judges? Their relatives are listening.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, he is speculating because there is a provision in this Bill that all the officers, who retired before, are automatically brought into the new system.

THE SPEAKER: Which part of the law is it?

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is in clause 27(3): “A judicial officer to whom this Act applies, and who on the commencement of this Act was receiving a pension, shall on the commencement of this Act, cease to receive the pension and shall receive the retirement benefits granted to him or her under this part.” It is the one that caters for that.

THE SPEAKER: Are they receiving pension? – [Mr Majegere: “Procedure, Madam Speaker.”] - You people, do you want us to stay here the whole night? 

Honourable members, we shall conclude this Bill tomorrow and I want the Ministry of Public Service to handle the issues which we stood over. They are very important.

I had also undertaken to inform you about the investigations by the Sergeant-at-Arms about the people who dramatically entered our Chambers. One of them is called Dafala Senjako and the second one was Charles Kafeero Mutasa from Kawempe South. Their Member of Parliament is hon. Mubarak Munyagwa. One of them said he is actually a doctor – I do not know whether he is a doctor. 

They said the reason for their attendance was to watch the Parliament debate to be able to follow up on national issues. They arrived here at 15.33 hours. That is what I had to report. We have copies of their national IDs here.

Again, I urge Members to encourage their constituents to either come by appointment or if they want to protest, they should also inform us so that they are advised on how to protest but not to invade this Chamber. I hope the police will proceed with prosecution because they committed an offence in this Chamber. Thank you.

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.33 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
