    				Wednesday, 1 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will amend the Order Paper to permit laying of papers from the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

Secondly, I would like to inform you that we shall have the Parliamentary Week from 5 to 11 February 2017 under the theme, “Engaging the Public in a People-Centred Parliament”. For one of the sessions, we shall have a “Meet your Member of Parliament” segment, where members of the public will have an opportunity to dialogue with their MPs. Therefore, we request that you invite a few groups of your constituents to take part in this activity. If you are going to bring in some groups, register with the Public Relations Office; they are in the lobby.

We shall also have exhibitions by the departments of Parliament. We shall have a workshop that will bring together civil society, legislators, academicians and the public. We shall start with a walk on Sunday, 5 February 2017, starting from the Parliamentary Building. The walk is to raise funds for the construction of a rehabilitation centre for the albino community in Uganda. There will also be a Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) drive to raise funds to buy reusable sanitary towels for young girls in selected remote schools in northern Uganda. Honourable members, I invite you to come for that walk on Sunday so that we can support this cause.

We chose northern Uganda as a start because of its history of war, displacement and poverty prevalence in some communities. We know that where poverty is prevalent, the young girls and women during their menstrual periods improvise with banana fibre, clothes or rags. Some even use toilet paper. All these cause risks to the health system. Many times girls stay away from school because they are not able to manage themselves during that time and sometimes during examination time. Therefore, Parliament is spearheading this drive. Please, donate at least Shs 50,000 each to keep a girl in school for one year. Thank you very much, honourable members.

2.38
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. About two weeks – 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we should wait; the people who should listen are not here. I think let us do other work while the Government organises itself.

MR OKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on what you ruled on yesterday when you adjourned this House because of the absence of Members of the Front Bench. Today, Parliament is sitting and everyone knows this but it is even worse; instead of having at least one of the ministers - I think these people are conniving.

Madam Speaker, whether there is a Cabinet meeting or anything else, the Speaker is in the House and business must go on. We are the ones who give them funds. Actually, we even vet them after their appointment. Now, how are we going to move, Madam Speaker, when these ministers are not here? (Interjections) Are they carrying out a defiance campaign? What is really happening? The same happens in the committees. 

My procedural matter, Madam Speaker, is: How do we proceed now? The Government Chief Whip is not here neither is her deputy but we have you here, our Speaker. How do we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: We shall proceed with our business by permitting hon. Nandala to lay his papers on the Table and permitting the chair of the Public Accounts Committee to present her report. I think that is how we shall proceed.  Hon. Fungaroo, there is no one to listen to your issues. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.40
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (NRM, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will recall yesterday, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that I should lay evidence on the Table. I have the evidence and I am ready. So, at an appropriate time when the minister comes – 

THE SPEAKER: No, you lay the papers of the World Bank.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is what I am saying; at an appropriate time when they are here – 

THE SPEAKER: That is premature for now.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am going to lay on the Table the papers and reports of the Parliamentary Network on World Bank and IMF. I know there are many new Members of Parliament who may need a brief background about this parliamentary network.

This parliamentary network was founded in the year 2000. It is present in over 160 countries and its job is basically to advocate for accountability and transparency in development cooperation. This network has its secretariat in Paris and it has regional and country chapters. It reaches over 10,000 parliamentarians in Africa, Asia, Europe and America. It strives to increase transparency and accountability in the development cooperation process by fostering the oversight role of parliaments and civil societies.

Madam Speaker, the network has a specific focus on multilateral aid –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Nandala-Mafabi, you are supposed to lay papers on the Table, not to -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am reading this because I would like Members to understand what I am presenting. It focuses on multilateral aid and the work and operations of the World Bank as a group and IMF, which are the largest multinationals. 

Madam Speaker, the papers I am going to lay on the Table consist of the network review, field visit reports, Parliament and development series, International Development Association (IDA) and aid effectiveness, the parliamentary network newspaper, so many briefs and research. 

Madam Speaker, as you may be aware, there are nine board members in the whole world and I am one of them. I will start by laying on the Table reports from 2013. We always have two meetings in Washington - spring and annual meetings - and annual conferences. The first spring meeting was in 2013; the second was an annual conference which took place in Baku in Azerbaijan in 2013; and the annual meeting which was in 2013. I beg to lay these reports on the Table.

Madam Speaker, the reports on the spring and annual meetings of 2014 are all here. I beg to lay them on the Table. There are reports on the annual and spring meetings of 2015. The field reports include those from field exercises we did in Tanzania, Peru, Sri Lanka, Rwanda and Indonesia. The next one will be in Kenya within three weeks from now and I call upon Members to join us. I would like to lay these reports on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also lay on the Table the parliamentary network reviews and news from 2013 to 2016; they are here. I will also send soft copies to all Members of Parliament so that they can read and understand. I, therefore, urge Members to join this network because it is the best in the whole world. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, time will be appointed to debate those reports. They will be circulated to all Members of Parliament at the right time.

2.46
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table the Draft Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. 

As you may know, the African continent enacted a continental law called the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights. From that protocol, we have been getting protocols on women, on children, that is, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child, and on elderly persons. This time round, the continent is developing the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.

As one of the consultants on the continent on disability, the African Union and African Disability Alliance invited me to facilitate in a validation workshop on this protocol. I am happy to lay the document on the Table today. From 24 February to 28 April 2017, the Specialised Technical Committee on Social Development, Labour and Employment will sit in Algiers to consider this draft protocol. The participants will be member states experts, ministers, relevant ministries, NGOs and others who will be invited. Thereafter, the draft protocol will be adopted by the ministers during this specialised technical committee meeting and for onward submission to justice and legal affairs.

The reason I am laying this protocol on the Table today is to request the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to hold regional consultative meetings of persons with disability so that they can be educated on this protocol and their views are taken to Algiers and Addis Ababa before the draft protocol is passed. 

I would like to also interest Members of Parliament to contact the disabled persons in their respective communities and consult them on this protocol so that we can take a total picture to the finalisation of this protocol. (Applause) I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nalule. The protocol is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to assist in the preparations for the ultimate approval several months from now. As you are all aware, Uganda is in the lead on issues concerning PWDs. So, I want to urge the committee to make an input so that we can continue to shine in that international meeting. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

2.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the pleasure this afternoon to present before the House a report of the Public Accounts Committee on the health sector, which comprises about 15 entities. 

I will say here, without a shadow of doubt or fear of contradiction, that we have taken the approach of handling the Auditor-General’s reports by sector because we think that this will give Parliament an opportunity to look at the sectors critically and we will do this for all the sectors. We will be done with the Auditor-General’s report for the FY 2014/2015 by end of February. We are not going to read the report verbatim but we will just look at the salient issues in the report. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the minutes of the committee as we carried on the interaction with the entities that are mentioned in this report. I beg to lay.

As the Public Accounts Committee, we want to thank the Speaker for the time that she accorded us to be able to work, even during recess. That is why we have been able to produce this report at such a time as this, knowing that we started our work as a committee almost three to four months after getting into office. We start this report with the glaring salient features on page 6 –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, I have checked my records on my iPad and I do not see a copy of the report uploaded. Therefore, I cannot follow what is being read on the Floor of the House. Are we proceeding right? We do not have copies of the report being presented to us, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been on the Order Paper for almost a month. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Sincerely, Madam Speaker, I always thank you and I will continue thanking you; you gave us these iPads and indeed, they save a lot of time. However, their inefficiency must be worked on. I do not know, honourable members, whether you are following this. Even if I got a report at night, I would be able to read it but there is no internet connection at night and yet we are paying for it. 

I suggest that we be given some allowance so that someone can load some Mbps for himself to access reports. However, if it was loaded and we cannot access it, how did it disappear? It must be there; anything uploaded on my iPad has service providers. When we meet the IT personnel, they are always willing to help us and they perform well, but something must be done. Probably, uploading the reports is a problem because even today the Order Paper was uploaded late. This report is on health and it is required on this iPad. Some people should work towards promoting this; otherwise, they are frustrating your good deeds towards us. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: If the report is not there, let me ask the Clerk to look for it and upload it. We shall address the issue of the internet because we cannot address it by a resolution here. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, my iPad has not been functioning for two months now and that is why I do not come with it here. How shall we be able to monitor the Members’ iPads and also make sure that we follow the proceedings here rightly? We are not getting the best out of them and yet we proposed the use of iPads. I think we need to balance this and probably go back to using hard copies alongside the iPads. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we left hard copies because of the costs. Let me ask the Clerk to give me a report by 10 O’clock tomorrow morning about the functionality of the internet. 

In view of the fact that we are still waiting to finish the Budget Framework Paper, let us go to item No. 8.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PROPOSED RATIFICATION OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY PROTOCOL ON COOPERATION IN DEFENCE AFFAIRS

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good that the chairperson is coming to present a report on Defence. However, when we had a tragedy in Kasese on 26 and 27 November 2016, your Chair directed that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs should go to Kasese and investigate what exactly the problem was. You also added some Members to the committee to supplement their effort and you gave them a timeline and when they should report. However, that time has expired. 

Are we proceeding right when the people of Kasese are eagerly waiting for the outcome and contents of the report and they see another report being presented and yet it is not and was not as urgent as what you directed on? Would it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee does not only deal with Kasese. I also gave them other work from this House. So, I am waiting for that report but for now, we proceed. 

3.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I would like to thank you for the opportunity given to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to present a report on the ratification of the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs. 

On 10 May 2016, the Minister of Defence moved a motion in Parliament under rules 30 and 31 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda; Article 123 (1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; and section 2 of the Ratification of Treaties’ Act, Cap 204 of the laws of Uganda seeking a resolution of Parliament- (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, we are receiving a very serious report on a very important matter of national importance. Yesterday, you made a very wise ruling to the effect that we cannot continue discussing serious issues in the absence of a serious Government.

As we talk now, the only member of Cabinet present has just come. In fact, she is even up and down; she goes out and comes back. Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well without Government when we are receiving a very serious report touching a very important matter of national importance?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had not realised that the Minister of Internal Affairs is also not here.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker and Members, first of all, hon. Kasibante, I hold you responsible; I have not gone in and out at all. I think you are myopic. (Interjections) Myopic is not a negative word; it is a positive term –(Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I have always been a very serious honourable member of this august House and I am not myopic. I raised a very serious issue; in fact, if you make a serious observation, it is touching everybody in this House. The Government is not present and anybody can easily observe that. Is the only minister available in order to say that a person that has raised a very serious issue is myopic? Is she in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are not myopic. Honourable members, I now suspend the House for 30 minutes.

(The House was suspended at 3.03 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.48 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.50
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the Prime Minister to the problem we have in Lake Kyoga. 

On Sunday, a boat carrying five people capsized on Lake Kyoga; two people died in Serere and three in Kaberamaido in my subcounty. On the same Sunday in the evening, we travelled with commissioners of this Parliament and three other Members of Parliament. The safety of Lake Kyoga is not guaranteed; the water hyacinth has clogged the lake and the ferry could hardly take us through. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please provide for safe travel on Lake Kyoga because the rudimentary means of transport that our people use is no longer safe. Secondly, the issue of the Bukungu-Kaberamaido-Kagwara ferry is long overdue. All we are asking for is that you consider that side of the lake and give our people safe means of transport. Thank you very much.

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, our condolences go to the families of the bereaved. The honourable member is raising a very serious point. It is true that our waters are still dangerous because we go on them without life jackets and sometimes without viable boats and vehicles. Therefore, Government will tighten the regulatory mechanisms and regulations to ensure that there is more use of life jackets and boats are inspected. 

I will also take this opportunity to ask the honourable members to sensitise the population, especially those living around lakes and rivers, to take more safety precautions so that this loss of life can be brought to almost zero.

3.53
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The question I have for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in line with the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. When shall we have a policy in place so that the trust fund becomes operational? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the trust fund should be operational; the regulations were worked on and they should have already been in this House. The honourable Minister of Health is directed to ensure that in the course of this month, they are presented to this august House. 

3.54
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you may be aware that the country is experiencing drought and the effects are already being felt everywhere. What is the policy of Government as far as charcoal burning is concerned? As I speak now, even River Ayago where you are planning to construct a hydro power dam has dried up. What is the policy direction we should tell our people? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of drought is known. Fortunately, the skies have over the last few days opened up and hopefully, the showers will continue.

As far as charcoal burning is concerned, we should ensure that we plant more trees in order to meet the demands for firewood and charcoal. Meanwhile, the country will have more and more power with Karuma, Isimba and other hydro units underway. That will be the definitive cure for reducing charcoal burning and environmental destruction.

3.56
MR CUTHBERT ABIGABA (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have one question for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to know Uganda’s national plans in relation to upper airspace management. I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether Uganda has any airspace policy in place to help it exploit the benefits of upper airspace activities. If it is in place, who is the implementing authority in Uganda? Specifically, I am referring to the stratosphere and other higher layers of the atmosphere. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I am asking this because I have a very good background in telecommunications engineering and I am sure of some of the benefits we can tap as a country if we utilise our airspace especially the upper airspace. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I was listening to the question quite attentively and jotting down some new information on issues of outer space. I request that after Parliament closes, he continues the lecture.

However, if your reference is really on the outer space, Government of Uganda for a number of years has been deeply interested in this area especially in as far as satellite communication is concerned and satellite use in order to monitor weather and other conditions. Uganda Communications Commission and the Ministry of ICT have been representing Uganda well. Only a few months ago, Ndugu Patrick Masambu was elected the global leader of the International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation, based in Washington. This is a clear recognition of the individual concerned and also the country, where he was the head of Uganda Posts and Telecommunications and Uganda Communications Commission. Therefore, in a nutshell, we have a lot of interest. 

The Ministry of Information, ICT and Communications represents the country and indeed there are more investments that the country will be making, especially in the area of communications, weather and related matters.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have a list of those who asked questions to the Prime Minister last time; they will not speak today. Therefore, if you spoke, just sit.

3.59
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The people of Ntenjeru North sent me to ask the Rt Hon Prime Minister this question. Two years ago, a loan was approved for the rehabilitation of Kayunga Hospital but up to now, there is nothing on the ground. 

I understand that all loan agreements were signed. I tried to find out from the Minister of State for Health, hon. Opendi, what happened but I did not get an answer. However, they sent me to specifically ask the Prime Minister, and I am putting this question to you so that you give me a response that I should deliver to them. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, hon. Lugoloobi, I have some hot information for you from the honourable minister in charge of health. She says it has taken a bit of time but the reconstruction of Kayunga Hospital is due to begin in April this year.

4.01
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the scourge of resistant ticks and tick-borne diseases that has affected the cattle corridor, especially Kiruhura District. The President, on 1st January this year, promised that acaricides would reach the country in two weeks. It is coming to two months now and our cows are perishing. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you give me an answer that I will take to the people of Kiruhura as to when the acaricides will be in the country. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I share the concerns of the honourable member that we have got resistance of ticks against various forms of acaricides; secondly, we have had counterfeit acaricides coming in; and thirdly, we have had a rather fragmented regulation of the acaricides. 

We have had discussions with the ministry responsible for animals and livestock. We have also had discussions with the Ministry of Health and the National Drugs Authority on the new measures of tightening the use of acaricides and monitoring the quality of acaricides. The zonal rotation of the use of acaricides is also going to be implemented soon. I expect the ministry responsible for livestock to come out soon with the programme to inform the wanainchi so that this wastage of our valuable livestock can come to an end.

4.03
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister about projects which were listed down to be funded by the World Bank and one of them is on tap water and rural electrification. However, sometimes the stories that we see in the newspapers discourage us a lot. 

May I get to know from you, Prime Minister, whether there is some hope that these programmes shall be funded by the World Bank soon? This is because some of them were supposed to kick-start this month and next month.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, there have been some delays with some projects, especially on road infrastructure and rural electrification. There are reasons why these delays have come about; some of them relate to procurements as well as counterpart funding and other administrative issues. The Government has addressed those issues and we expect that projects that had delayed are going to kick off.

4.05
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, District Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Government provided road equipment to all districts in Uganda to maintain our roads. However, the equipment was of poor quality; it breaks down now and then. The cost of repair is even more than the money given for maintaining roads. The Government promised to buy for us better Japan-made road equipment. May I know when this equipment will come to Uganda and when we shall have it? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is true that the equipment we imported earlier was relatively weak. However, when it reached some districts, they thought that they had solved all their road construction problems and used it for very heavy work and it gave way. However, I am happy to say that powerful equipment has arrived in the country. It is now with the Ministry of Works and Transport and by April, we expect this equipment to be constructing roads.

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Mbogo comes up, Mr Prime Minister, I hope you remember that when debating the request on that loan, the Members of this House raised issues about the quality of those machines and Government did not listen. That is where we are.

4.06
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (NRM, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been faced with long drought but we have started receiving some rains. What plans does the Government have to provide some planting materials to the farmers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government is urging the wanainchi to get ready to plant. We are aware that in some areas, the planting materials are not readily available. However, through the Operation Wealth Creation programme, some areas are being reached. Let us, as leaders, again mobilise the wanainchi to use whatever is available to take advantage of the rains. 

In addition, as we said yesterday, the minister responsible for agriculture will be advising the House and the nation on how to handle issues related with taking maximum advantage of these rains.

4.08
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last year, I asked the Prime Minister about my tea farmers that Government had failed to pay for many good years. The Prime Minister then promised me that very soon they were going to be paid and that was last year in September. However, to the disappointment of my voters, they have not been paid. 

Secondly, our children are going back to school and this is where the farmers are looking to get school fees for this term. Some of these farmers have even been imprisoned because of the loans they were given when planting the tea seedlings. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know what the Prime Minister is going to tell me. However, I would like him to take me seriously and commit to his promise. There should not be a big delay because our people are suffering. Madam Speaker, I wish you could go there. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I kindly beg you together with your team to do something. The people of Kanungu are finished. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, when will you pay the Kanungu farmers?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am sure you are considering hon. Karungi’s invitation to go and see what is happening in Kanungu. Suffice it to say that since I made the statement in this House, more than 90 per cent of the farmers affected in the region have been paid.

We are also aware that a small percentage has not been paid and the reason is because the NAADS group responsible for auditing is still going through the papers. I would like to commend hon. Kasirivu, the Minister of State for Economic Monitoring in the Office of the President, who has been in charge of these programmes to ensure that these payments are made, for very good work done in that respect.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry for this but I would like to inform the House that Kigezi region has been planting tea and some of the farmers who were paid are from other districts but Kanungu is not inclusive. 

Madam Speaker, it was Kanungu that started this project and other districts joined later. In Kanungu, there are arrears of the previous years and they have accrued in this year. It is really too much. When I say we are finished, I know what I am talking about.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before hon. Ssemuli comes up, yesterday I received a delegation from Kanungu and they told me that a number of them have not been paid since the season of 2012, 2013  up to date. I think that is the context in which hon. Karungi is not able to settle in this House. Hon. Prime Minister, it is since 2012 and this is 2017.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the point is well taken. The matter will be pursued by hon. Karungi and I and we are going to reinforce hon. Kasirivu and his team.

4.12
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is to do with electronic banking in reference to mobile money.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that the telecom companies are obligated to provide this service and as far as the law is concerned, the telecom companies are regulated under the Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). Further, there is no law that mandates the Bank of Uganda to regulate telecom companies and at the same time provide electronic financial services.

I am aware that the Bank of Uganda came up with guidelines but the guidelines are not a substantive law and they do not provide remedies to do with consumer protection. We have got very many situations whereby if someone dies and someone is granted letters of administration for his estate, that person is unable to access that money. There also issues to do with money laundering. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know about this because Ugandans are losing a lot of money and this is also affecting the tax base of this country. I would like to know when we shall come up with a policy that harmonises the mandate of the Bank of Uganda and the mandate of UCC, and also come up with a substantive law. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, all banking is regulated by law and the Bank of Uganda is in charge of the sector. I am also fully aware that this is a rapidly developing area where new innovations and new practices come on the market every day. This is also where you have a law and within a month or so, you find that the law which you thought was very modern and up-to-date has suddenly become obsolete. 

However, there is need for broad legislation and I know that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has been asked to examine this matter and bring up a legal framework. Therefore, I will remind the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to live up to the expectations of the House and of the country.

4.16
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The visa fee that is paid by foreigners at every point of entry, including Entebbe International Airport, is US$ 50. I would like to know whether the Prime Minister is aware that when visitors pay the US$50, they are not given any receipt; they just stamp the visa but without any receipt. However, we have seen that at various entry points, even in Dubai, you go to the nearest bank within, pay and you are given a receipt.

Is the Prime Minister aware that every year we have over 500,000 visitors at Entebbe International Airport paying US$ 50, which is US$ 25 million a year, without any receipt? Is that money safe? Is the Prime Minister aware that we are losing a lot of money and there is nothing to show for it because the money is not accounted for?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to salute the honourable Members of Parliament who have advised me on the answer. Government is fully aware of the situation and Government is also aware that we are not losing the money because that stamp represents the receipt - (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, every penny that we pay to Uganda Revenue Authority goes to straight to our national coffers. Even if you are paying US$ 1,200 for stamp duty, you pay through the bank. However, we are getting US$ 25 million a year through Entebbe International Airport without any receipt or documentation – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to give information to the House. Yesterday at 8.00 a.m., I received a visitor from Dubai. I was out with him and he complained to me; he showed me a stamp which he had paid US$ 50 for, but he was not given any receipt. He said when he paid, the cashier kept it. So, if he goes to demand for that money, they will not give him the money because he has no evidence that he has paid. Therefore, it is very important that we get interested in this. 

I went ahead and did some research. At Entebbe International Airport, I asked the immigration officers and they told me the least number of visitors who pass through annually are more than 600,000. If you multiply that by US $50, it comes to about US $30 million. That is a serious leakage that Government must get interested in. We know for other countries, before you even get a visa, you pay first in the bank. Why don’t we apply that method so that we control the leakage?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the matter is grave. If we have a haemorrhage of US $30 million casually, what else are we losing? Can you direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle the matter?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I take the concerns of colleagues. It appears there may be some perforations in the systems that are working. I, therefore, ask the Ministry of internal Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to quickly look into this matter and within a month, inform this House –(Interjections)– They need some time to look into it so that they present a meaningful report here and then this matter will be settled. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Ojara comes up, Mr Prime Minister, in connection with that, when some Ugandans are going to Dubai or Turkey, especially when the immigration officers believe they are going for kyeyo, they are also taxed US$ 100 to be able to leave - (Interjections)- Yes! I have met them and they told me. Therefore, take some interest in this, Mr Prime Minister.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister has said he is going to investigate. That means he has been seeing these things happen and he did nothing - 

THE SPEAKER: No, the Prime Minister is not the immigration officer.

MR NANDALA: No, he is a very intelligent man.

THE SPEAKER: That is not his work.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising is on immigration. When somebody comes to work in Uganda and he or she is given a permit; they are supposed to deposit money so that in case their visa expires, or if they make a mistake, they will be asked to leave the country. That is the money they are supposed to use to take them back. Many of them have deposited money in this country and when they leave, the money is not accounted for.

Madam Speaker, as the Prime Minister goes to investigate, he should look at the money of the non-residents deposit with the Ministry of Internal Affairs as they come into Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have made question time a debate. I know the subject was important and I am sure the Prime Minister has noted it.

4.22
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is also a very serious question. (Laughter) Recently, I was in my constituency but the situation of the children affected by nodding disease is pathetic.

We asked the Minister of Health recently about the condition of the children affected by nodding disease and we were told there is already medicine which has been discovered to treat these patients. However, when I went to the constituency recently, I found these sick children almost dying. They have been left to God’s mercy. I remember very well that Government used to supply food items and medicine to manage the condition of these children. However, as we speak, they have taken almost two years without taking care of these kids. 

Mr Prime Minister, what is happening? Are we really sympathetic to these kids? Are they true Ugandans? Moreover the Prime Minister is a medical doctor. If these kids are just left like that, what are we supposed to do?

THE SPEAKER: Is the Prime Minister aware that for the last two years, the children have not been given food or medicine? That is the question. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question of nodding syndrome has been discussed in this House for quite some time. Quite often, it was brought in this House by hon. Anywar. It is true that some of us have had time to go to the affected areas mainly in Kitgum and we have seen the plight of these young people. The management of children with nodding syndrome is multipronged. The family plays very critical roles of tender loving care and nutrition.

Secondly, it is true Government has been supplying the drugs and the Ministry of Health, in particular, set up a team to look after these children. In a nutshell, Government has been doing everything possible. However, it requires the families to play their roles especially in the field of nutrition and tender loving care. That combination, quite often, produces good results. If there are some gaps, then all of us, as leaders, should address them.

4.27
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, I have a very serious question that needs a very serious answer from you. (Laughter). Yesterday, we looked at the National Budget Framework Paper and under the health sector, there were concerns about the money budgeted for constructing health centres III and IV; we are talking about Shs 2.3 billion and Shs 5.5 billion respectively. It is a very big chunk of money.

Mr Prime Minister, I had the privilege of reading a report to Parliament provided by the Inspectorate of Government from the period of January to June 2016. I thought this report should have been laid in the House before we talked about this National Budget Framework Paper  because it brings up so many issues. 

Honourable Prime Minister, one of the issues is the cost of a sub county administration block at Wor in Zombo. These are national matters -

THE SPEAKER: What is the question?

MR OAGON: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is this person in Government who has failed to do their job such that we have completed projects but which are not being put to use? For instance, we have one in Aperekila Health Centre in Kaberamaido. A lot of money was used to construct a house which now stands in the bush and nothing is being done in it. Who is this person who has failed to do their part so that we follow the person to account to Government? What has Government done to rectify such a situation?

THE SPEAKER: Is the Prime Minister aware that there are resources to construct facilities which are not being used? That is the question. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am not aware of that gross or lack of use of a facility that is ready. Nevertheless, I would like to get details so that we investigate and indeed take the necessary corrective measures and if necessary, disciplinary measures.

4.30
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Makerere University main campus and Makerere University Business School have had numerous wrangles; I would like the Prime Minister to explain to this House the efforts that Government has put in to address those anomalies of autonomy in Makerere main campus and Makerere University Business School.

DR RUHAKANA-RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Nzoghu is right. There has been some misunderstanding; the Ministry of Education and Sports is addressing this matter and I will ask the Minister of Education and Sports to give us a report at an appropriate time on how the matter has been concluded.

4.31
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Mr Prime Minister. Around 2009, animals wrecked a lot of havoc among our farming communities in Kasese and they petitioned Parliament through the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. The committee recommended graciously that the farmers should be compensated and brought the same to the attention of the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

The farmers went to court and court ruled in their favour that they should be compensated. To date, they have never received any payment and there is a lot of anguish and pain because they are grappling with loans. Mr Prime Minister, can you assure the House and my people back home in my community of when these farmers will be able to receive their compensation? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You could have said that in one minute. (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the concern is well taken since courts of law decided that the farmers should be compensated. It is a question of enforcing the court decision and the normal mechanism of enforcing court decisions should be followed.

4.34
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Recently in my constituency, two crime preventers died while on duty under the command of uniformed police officers. What are the work place safety practices for the crime preventers and in the event that they die in the line of duty while executing arrest, what is the position of Government on how they should be compensated? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker that is a fair question. We have had some discussions over this matter and have asked the minister responsible for Internal Affairs to bring the proposals for considerations by Cabinet and subsequently Parliament to regulate the conduct of these Wanaichi who are performing their patriotic duties. 

Therefore, let me remind the minister responsible to expedite the process of bringing the necessary legal framework for consideration.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exhausted the time for Prime Minister’s Question Time.  Now Members, I do not know how many times I have said this. In the House of Commons, the Prime Minister answers 100 questions in one hour. However, here you start by preamble, reason, then you answer yourself and then you finally ask. Please just go straight to the issue so that other members can get the opportunity to ask.

4.36
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, just a few issues to note. As a House, we have been coming here for the Prime Minister’s Question Time and passed resolutions, asked questions with a view that ministers will take them up. 

I would like to make a quick reminder of some of the few issues we have been raising and we have been given assurances that statements will be made on the Floor of the House.

One, Madam Speaker, is the implementation of the affirmative action on Busoga sub region. This was an issue of a motion. It was debated here. Prime Minister, when do we get that assurance? The other is the issue on the clarification on the criteria for the selection of national candidates for international posts. This was a statement which was promised to us. We would like to know.

The third one is a statement on the performance of AGOA and the strategic goals for Uganda with regard to AGOA. We would like to get that statement, as a matter of fact. 

The other is a clarification on the controversies surrounding allowances for hard-to-reach areas. The arrears of our workers working in hard-to-reach areas; can we get these clarifications as promised by the Prime Minister when we broke off for festivities?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. The other one which was promised and which is very critical is in regard to our second national language, Kiswahili. Two weeks ago, we raised the issue to the Prime Minister and he directed the Minister of Education and Sports. 

I am happy the Prime Minister wrote a letter to the Minister of Education and Sports and was supposed to make a statement but we have not seen it. The schools are opening next week and the heads of schools are concerned; they have been calling us about the fate of Kiswahili language in our curriculum.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, we mean what we say to this august House. We mean business and what we have said Government will do, Government indeed will do.

There may have been some delays in responding to some of these issues and I ask my colleagues on the front bench to ensure that we live up to the expectations of the Wanainchi of Uganda and ensure that we respond to all the issues that we are expected to respond to. We will endeavour to ensure that these issues are effectively responded to. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, item No. 4.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018 – FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were a few Members who wanted to speak. These are honourables Lubogo, Balyeku, Mwijukye and Anthony Akol.

4.39
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me thank the committee chairman for the report.

THE SPEAKER: You have three minutes.

MR LUBOGO: I wish to equally thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for moving the minority report. 

Madam Speaker, before I can move on to the debate on the National Budget Framework Paper, I would like the Prime Minister – I think he should seriously be tickled by the statement laid by the Leader of the Opposition, in which she was inquiring about the Busoga special development programme. 

She is the Leader of the Opposition and you also know that Busoga, where the Prime Minister also studied from, has been voting NRM. However, the Leader of the Opposition is reminding you about an obligation that Government committed to implement.

With that said, I now wish to move to the National Budget Framework Paper. The report states that the unemployment rate of Uganda especially among the youths is at a rate of 67.5 per cent. Mr Prime Minister, I wonder when Government will consider the issue of unemployment in this country, which has reached crisis levels. I do not know whether Government is really taking the issue of unemployment in this country as a very serious matter that can become a source of insecurity to the country.

The crime rate in this country, Mr Prime Minister, in case you are not aware, has gone up. Most of the crimes committed today are by the young people aged between 15 and 20. They are committing these crimes because they are not employed. The Government has not come out with a specific clear policy – leave alone the gambles of Operation Wealth Creation, the Venture Capital Fund and so forth. 

We have not come out with systematic and well-planned programmes to create employment for the people. We are not addressing the issue of population explosion in this country, which I think the Government has to consider very seriously.

Madam Speaker, there is a recommendation in the report on the revival of the national carrier. I would like the House to take this very seriously because I would think that this particular recommendation should not be in the report: that Parliament recommends that Government should buy her own fleet of aircraft. 

I do not think that we have sufficient information as the House to recommend that way. This is an investment that is going to cost about Shs1.5 to Shs 2 trillion. When Parliament proposed that Government should buy her own fleet, had we explored other alternatives? 

I support the revival of the national carrier but I think that we need to tread carefully on this because if we pass this particular recommendation in this report, it means that Parliament would have bound itself – (Member timed out.)

4.44
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBEHSE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): I thank you, Madam Speaker.

The report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper expressed concerns on the sky rocketing electricity tariffs. For this, I would like to thank them. 

The committee attributed the high cost of electricity to the Bujagali $11 cents. However, there are other factors responsible for the sky rocketing electricity tariffs. Outstanding among them is the dollarisation of the transactions by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. 

I understand they pay for the generation of power in dollars; they buy transformers, oil, cables and all those other items in US dollars and, therefore, for that reason, they attribute the recent increase in electricity tariffs to the depreciation of the shilling against the dollar.

The African Development Bank requires Uganda to pay in full a loan that was given to us before they can intervene in the re-negotiations between the Bujagali constructors and Government. These are all issues. Therefore, we should work, during this budgeting time, towards ensuring affordable electricity tariffs to our wanainchi. I have been championing the campaign against illegal connections in my constituency; however, with this increase in tariffs, you are tempting the wanainchi to go for illegal connections.

Secondly, I will talk about cooperatives – the only surviving cooperative union in Uganda is, and I must say proudly, Bugisu Cooperative Union. However, if we should realise as a country our potential in increased production and productivity, organised farmers are the ones that can actually redeem Uganda from the current state that is deplorable where we are importing more than exporting. 

In the past, because cooperatives were active, in schools the question would be – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, hon. Nambeshe’s question has reminded me of the inquiry I made on 10th January about why we have not joined the International Solar Alliance because the Government of Abu Dhabi has set aside a grant of $50 million for Uganda but the grant is idle because we have not joined the International Solar Alliance. I asked this here but no one answered me. 

The money is there and they have written to me to ask what they can do with the money. All we have to do is simply join for this money to become available to help the rural poor.

4.47
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As we appropriate during this budget process, we need to appreciate that when service delivery is ineffective, you, Members of Parliament, do not just become departments but also governments of sorts in our constituencies.

As a Member of Parliament, you become a ‘government’ because there is ineffectiveness in service delivery. For example, when the health sector budget is reduced, this means that a Member of Parliament is going to have more challenges. 

I am concerned about this and I would like to request that the budget of the health sector be increased. Just the other day, Madam Speaker, you were in Dokolo because a Member of Parliament had bought an ambulance. May be next week, you will be in Buhweju because I am also going to buy an ambulance, but that is not our job, Madam Speaker. We do it because there is a gap to cover. So I think we need to increase the budget so that the pressure on Members of Parliament can reduce. 

Secondly is the challenge of the hard-to-reach areas. I come from an area which is not only hard-to=reach, but is also hard- to-stay. (Laughter) So the staff, whether in the health sector or teachers, find it very hard to stay there because there is no electricity; there are no roads – such government workers expect a top-up because they operate in hard-to-reach areas. 

Madam Speaker, I am concerned that the budget is not catering for hard-to-reach areas like Buhwuju. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak County North, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, especially for adjourning the debate yesterday so that we can speak into the ears of the relevant people, who are now listening. 

The Budget Framework Paper, to me, is not speaking the normal song of a middle income economy because when you look at it, you realise that more than 50 per cent of the money in it is going towards loan repayment, interests, arrears and domestic financing. That means there will be a big problem in service delivery. 

The administrative units in Uganda have increased in terms of districts, municipalities and sub counties. This is an issue that needs to be considered seriously as we move forward. 

Chairperson of the committee, you said that emphasis has been placed on agriculture as the sector going to boost the development of the country. But in real sense, there has been no increase in the agricultural budget because if it is only 4.8 per cent allocated to agriculture - in real sense, considering NDP II, there are three sectors that are key to our development as a country - agriculture, tourism and the oil and gas sector. 
You are all aware that in agriculture, we have the multiplier factor of solving unemployment is solved and also boost our manufacturing industry. 

Madam Speaker, education has not been properly catered for. I am surprised to note that no one in Government, including the MPs, is taking their children to the UPE schools, yet we call it a Government programme. 

Surprisingly, we were informed yesterday that even State House Scholarships go towards primary education. Now, it would have been important – one of the Members said yesterday that Shs 10,000 has been allocated to education, but that is not correct; actually it is Shs 7,000 per child in UPE, which I think is not good for the country. 

Madam Speaker, the problem of loan absorption has been a continuing one in the country and I think the committee should have made a recommendation – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, as Shadow Finance Minister, I give an extra half a minute.

MR AKOL: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A feasibility study should be done first before any loan is approved by a committee and before Parliamentary approval. When you look at the data of loan absorption in the country, it is about 26 per cent and that is a problem for the country. 

When you look at the SDGs, the indicators show that only 15 per cent compliance has been met by this Budget Framework Paper, which I think is also a problem that needs to be looked into. Thank you very much.

4.54
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee and the Member who presented a minority report. I stand to support the recommendations although I would like to comment on a few areas. 

First, I want to speak about the SAGE programme. We are all aware that this programme is very important and it touches our people especially the elderly. We believe, when you assist the elderly, you are blessed. 

We know that we passed a resolution in this House that the SAGE programme should be rolled out – in the programme that the ministry gave us; it was to be rolled out to 40 districts. However, in this budget, we are told there is a shortfall of Shs 11.6 billion for only the roll out to five more districts. If they are now starting to make such shortfalls, will they ever roll out to the whole country? 

Therefore, I want to call upon all the honourable members of the House to stand firm – in fact, we should not even pass this budget without this money being included. If they cannot fulfil this additional five to make the number 40, how will they ever roll out to the whole country?

Madam Speaker, in the report, we read about the Uganda Women’s Empowerment Fund – they are saying there are no funds in the budget to roll this out to the whole country. I am wondering because these are programmes that touch our people. We know that women are very instrumental in bringing up families. If we are not going to roll out this programme to the whole country, how are our women – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you so much, my colleague, for giving way. First, on the issue of SAGE, the information I want to give is that yesterday, a member of my community called me and said, the elderly people in my place had gathered in the Lukiiko Hall that they had been told to go for their payment yesterday and so he wanted to know whether I was aware of it. What I want to say is that there is so much anxiety created among the population and specially the elderly people. This is a very serious issue and we need to attend to it

MS CHEKWEL: That is the reason I am asking you to stand firm on this matter. Madam Speaker, let me also make a comment on education. Honourable members, you know – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I thank the committee for the report presented. However, I have a few concerns. 
On the issue of agriculture, we have a target of transforming 68 per cent of the farmers into commercial farmers by 2020, but we can only do that when we conduct farmers’ training. 

When you look at the budget, there are supposed to be extension workers, but the money is not sufficient. The committee proposed to reallocate some money for seeds to the recruitment of extension workers; I support that. 

Madam Speaker, we have the food security and cash crop components. When you look at the seeds they distribute under the food component, you realise that most of the seeds are not sufficient. Let me give an example of my sub county. 
Last planting season, they gave 2,000 kilogrammes of beans to a whole sub-county – those are two tonnes. But we have over 5,000 households. Is that sufficient if we divided the 2,000 kilogrammes amongst them? It is not sufficient because in each acre, one can plant 20 kilogrammes. That means we have only 100 households planting one acre. 

So I think farmers can afford the seeds - we can continue with the cash crop seedlings but for the food crops, we can transfer that money to the recruitment of extension workers and facilitate them.

Secondly, on the health sector, I commend Government; they are talking about constructing new health centres where they do not exist and upgrading health centres III to IV. But when we visited most of the communities, there are new structures with new equipment but the staff are not there; so they should think of recruiting staff. But when you look at the Budget Framework Paper, the staffing issue has remained as an unfunded priority. 

So, I would request Government that if you want to achieve the targets of the health sector, we should look at the staffing levels. We cannot succeed in agriculture without having a healthy population.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to know – because it has been talked about since yesterday and Members have been referring to resolutions of Parliament thus: “It was resolved in the Ninth Parliament that we should do this…” and specifically the SAGE programme, which my sister has been talking about. It was resolved that it be rolled out but surprisingly, instead of even continuing in the other districts, we have a budget shortfall, meaning that even where it is currently existing, it will not continue and – (Member timed out.)

5.00
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first comment is on the budget assumption. I think the assumption is that the resource envelope will be growing by over 21 per cent. And this is based on the assumption that the GDP will be growing by five per cent and there will be stable interest rates and no inflation and that even the exchange rate will remain stable because we will be exporting more and having NGO in-flows and more foreign investments. 

Unfortunately we know and all projections are indicating that we are likely to have a slow growth in the next financial year because of a number of factors. One of them that is bound to affect the economy profoundly, is the current climatic change. Now, my anxiety on this – and very specifically – how is the Government proposing to finance the deficit just in case we do not realise the projected growth in the resource envelope?

The second point is about a concern that whereas we are having significant climate change – which at the moment is actually putting at risk almost nine million people and where Government will probably at one point or another may have to contribute food – the budget for water, especially water and environment is projected to decline from 3.4, the previous year to 3.1, which I find very unfortunate. That is because at this point in time, we should be thinking about investing more in that sector in order to forestall the anticipated water pressure and all the other associated services that go with it.

The last point is about the recommendation that because of low absorption, agencies with less than 50 per cent absorption should not be considered for loans. I very much support that but the significant point around that is that there is no money in the main budget for counterpart funding. And that is why these projects have not taken off. In the energy sector – yes there is a provision of Shs 36 million – (Member timed out.)

5.03
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will be brief and precise. At the beginning of the financial year 2016/17, a new Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was created. This ministry has existed without funds for the whole of this financial year – of course the reason is understandable because the budget process had already gone ahead. 

However, when I look through the sector allocations for the financial year 2017/18, the same Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation has not been catered for. I am aware of the innovation fund of close to Shs 50 billion which is supposed to be shared between the ICT ministry and the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation.  But there are no operational funds for the STI ministry. 

Maybe through you, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister on how this ministry is going to continue running without funds. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Abala comes, the Prime Minister could explain to us as to why we have a Ministry of Information, Communications and Technology and that of Science, Technology and Innovation. What is the difference?

5.05
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have very many concerns but I will mention three about the Budget Framework Paper. I thank the committee for the job well done and my colleague on the other side, who presented a minority report.

Madam Speaker, I will begin with the SAGE programme for the elderly. I am very worried that this Parliament may not take long before all the districts will come here to ask why they have not been included in this programme. For example, in Ngora, they are even willing to hire buses to come here to ask what the problem is that is causing them not to be included in this programme. That is my worry and that is why I am requesting, Madam Speaker, that Ngora should be included immediately.

Secondly, I am concerned about the veterans. If you look at the Budget Framework Paper, adequate money has not been put for them yet they are everywhere. 

Last week, when I was in the constituency for four days, they were asking me when they would be paid. I asked them to go to the Ministry of Defence because they have come this way many times but up to today nothing has materialised. That is why this is a big problem. It is the same case with the retired civil servants; up to now, they are still yawning. Some of them had their names on the pension payroll but later on the names disappeared. And now if we looked at our Budget Framework Paper here, all these people are not taken care of. That is why I am suggesting that we should put the money here as we address these issues; we can handle other things later on.

Finally, you see that this House is now small and I thank the committee for having raised this matter. We need a better place to be constructed the other side so that we do not need to cross the road. 
Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that as we talk about this - these are critical issues because if we do not sort them out, they will become big problems. I know that in 2021 elections, the number will be bigger than this – I am sure of that. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at the Budget Framework Paper, the biggest challenge is the – (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee Members that have presented both the main and minority reports on the Budget Framework Paper to the Floor of the House. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is on the roads. While at one time we allocated Shs 1 trillion to the road sector and they failed to absorb it - if you travel along Tirinyi Road and on the road from Sironko to Kapchorwa today, you find that the contractors who were put there won the contract and they only left equipment on the road. When you consider the kind of work being done, you just see it is shoddy work. 

Therefore, even when we allocate this money, how sure are we that the money that we are allocating to the roads and other areas will do the work properly and in time? 

Further, the work on these roads has taken long and the contractors are not working - you find only two vehicles on the road working; it is absurd.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to know the fate of roads like Kapchorwa-Suam Road which has been featuring in the budget, year in and out since 2006. 

My question is: is this road being included in every year’s budget just to please people?  This is important because last time, Government said this road would be worked on by the East African Community bordering roads.

When you look at the side from Kenya, the constructors are working on the road and are about to finish their side. However, on Uganda’s side, the road is so terrible that people cannot market their produce yet this is a food basket district. Therefore, what can we do about that?

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, we have been raising the issue of failure to absorb money. Sometimes we may blame the ministries, but you may find that the procedures taken also delay the work. For example, the PPDA - if the procedure of PPDA has not changed, it means even when we give them the money, they will delay the process and the money will not be absorbed in the ministry. So, can something be done about that? 

Let me also talk about operation wealth creation programme. It is a very good programme, but, Madam Speaker, I have observed it in my district and other areas nearby - the people who manage it bring the planting materials at the wrong time, wrong choices of such materials and people are tired of –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this item. I would like to thank the committee so much for coming out with this report. 

However, I would like to be educated about Shs 30 billion under agriculture that will be used for buying the animals to be slaughtered for the beef - where will they buy them from? Will they buy them from local farmers or they will buy and again take to the beef factories which are already owned?

Why could they not think of maybe improving the agriculture sector, especially our ranches in Uganda like Achwa Ranch among others so that people can choose to buy beef from their different ranches? 

Another issue which I would like to be educated on is about the roads. Time and again, the budget is about roads, but all these roads are not finished. For example, Kitgum-Musingo Road and other roads – there are a lot of complaints because people are not compensated yet every day Government requests for loans to build roads. What will we do about these roads? Are we not supposed to transport the agricultural products from wherever they are harvested?

Lastly, as we look at the development of Uganda - in 2014, the Government of Uganda, under the Ministry of Trade came out with border markets. Among those was Ilego, in Amuru District and Okuti Border market, which up to now has not received any budget line although the locals have given their land freely to the –(Member timed out.)   

5.15
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the Budget Framework Paper presented. 

However, in the interest of time, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the sector of road, transport and communication in general. There are roads, which have been listed called oil roads. In my understanding, development means adding on top; it is about increasing and making it better. 

So, why are we leaving the areas where we had started well in terms of development? We are not improving on it. By this I refer to Nile Steamer Transport System, which used to be the fast means of transport in Uganda. People used to travel from Europe to Africa through Alexandria in Egypt, move southwards along the Nile up to Juba. From 1874 we had a steam ship in Moyo from the north; people would travel from Nimule to Namasagali by steam ships. 

When the railway line was brought in, it improved transport and when the roads came in, it was all better. But now the water transport is no more, the railway is not there. What are we doing? Are we developing or moving in circus?

Madam Speaker, if they do not put anything to revive the steamer services on the Nile from Namasagali to Obongi, we should not pass this budget. (Laughter)

Secondly, we people in the Nile valley, particularly in the areas of West Nile are neglected. When we talk about development in the islands, you leave out the people in the Nile Valley. What do you want us to do? 

We discussed with His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda on the 13 October at the State House in Entebbe. We went to the ministry a number of times. We also met the Minister of Finance on the issue of Kiyakiya Bridge, to open up a road from Panyimur, via Pakwach, to Obongi and the Nimule at the Uganda-South Sudan boarder. This road is not there because the bridge has been left out. It was one time put in the budget to be funded by Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA), but it is not in this budget. 

What is the use of people of Obongi talking to the President, the Prime Minister and ministers about the same things over and over again – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before, hon. Stephen Mukitale comes in, I have been advised that the issue of the border markets is important. Can you elucidate, hon. Lamwaka, about the border markets which you were talking about? You have one minute just to elucidate on that one. 

MS LAMWAKA: Madam Speaker, the border markets, like the one in Orom Sub County in Kitgum District, were created to enhance business in Uganda, Sudan, Ethiopia and Kenya. However, it is so unfortunate that the local people gave their land out to the Government but up to now, there is no implementation. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, in Nebbi, we identified land between Parombo and Akworo sub counties. However, reliable information is that while the Japanese Government funded the construction of all border markets, there has been no operationalization of this programme.  So, where is that money?

5.19
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done.
 
On 5 October, I had put the Leader of Government Business on alert that I would oppose the budget as it was, if Government had not shown seriousness, in as far as fast tracking the first oil is concerned.  
However, that still confirms that there is a problem in planning. There is a disconnection between the reality in the country and what is required in the economy, and those who have powers over the budget. How can Government bring a Budget Framework Paper when they expect oil by 2020, without the financing of what it takes to get the oil out? 

Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, you must put those responsible to book for that embarrassment because what you brought on the Floor, as a budget cap of 10 per cent, confirms that there is a disconnection in the country’s economy. 

Much as I come from the region but as we bring money into early oil and gas, we should be mindful of putting it in long lasting areas like tourism. We must be mindful that this is a finance resource and hence invest in the infrastructure for us to get a diversified economy.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that four and a half years ago this Parliament approved a loan of making Uganda re-invest for the first time in tourism. Under the Ministry of Tourism and Industry, we agreed to invest in the centre of tourism excellence at Jinja. 

However, Rt hon. Prime Minister, as we speak, this project is not moving. You have even cut the money. I was the chairman then and what we passed in Parliament was different from what you are presenting. Even the development partner is not cooperating. 

Therefore, Rt hon. Prime Minister, and this is through you, Madam Speaker, we would want an assurance on some of these things before we pass this budget. If I am going to be given time – (Interjections) - let me get to the point. 

Currently, the tourism sector, which citizens of this country, including some Members here are investing in, is being managed by Kenyans. We are getting people from Ethiopia and you can see them in some of our hotels yet the centre of excellence in Jinja is supposed to be equivalent of the Kenya Utalii College in Nairobi. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it would be unfortunate for us –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, we approved a total of $12 million for some of those projects for the tourism training institute, but now it is $6 million. 

5.23
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Allow me to also thank both the committee chairman and the minority report presenter. 

My biggest question is on the budget cut to the health sector and my biggest issue is due to the fact that out of the cut in the budget sector, 51 per cent affects the HIV component. I want to draw our attention to the fact that we are getting 80,000 new infections and also 28,000 people are still dying of HIV related infections. But I also want us to remind ourselves that our HIV prevalence rate is still very high. 

Let me take an example of a country like Thailand. We went for a conference in Bangkok recently and we were informed that Thailand has 0.9 per cent prevalence rate but the effort they put in to prevent, do research and into the medicine on HIV is actually very high. 

As a country, we have been champions in fighting HIV but the fact that we are cutting more money off HIV funding brings a lot of fear to me. 

We also have a 90-90-90 UNAID strategy. How are we going to achieve this when operating under budget cuts? We have the policy and tests and treats but how are we going to achieve this when we cut the money on HIV? 

Madam Speaker, my recommendation is that this money be put back to help our people. It would not only help people infected by HIV but also those who are negative stay negative because the more people we have on ARVs, the more we shall prevent infections to others.

Secondly, my recommendation is on the increase on domestic funding to make the HIV/AIDS Fund operational. We have been relying on our friends from abroad for long - my request is that as a country, we must put deliberate effort to have domestic funding for HIV. 
We have had policies and actually our biggest funder has been USAID but with the coming in of President Donald Trump, we are not very sure. 

In my opinion, Madam Speaker, my biggest request really is that we should put up - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 48 members have contributed to this debate. I know that we shall have an opportunity to speak when the details and adjustments of the budget come, hopefully after our debate. 
I had wanted hon. Nandala-Mafabi to substantiate an issue raised, but I do not see him here. Let me invite the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond.

5.27 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to -   

THE SPEAKER: Can we allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to respond? He might probably answer some of these things. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, there were some issues which we raised and he didn’t respond. He actually said: “I cannot be a secretary to write everything. If there are issues, the Clerk can write to us to respond.” That is why I wanted to speak on these issues now since the Prime Minister is here - 

THE SPEAKER: What issues? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if I am allowed, let me just bring this to the attention of the Prime Minister. There are three things - one very important issue is that of the State House Scholarships. 

Previously, we have resolved and even the President accepted, but we were surprised to find out today again there are 7,500 students benefiting from the State House Scholarships.

Madam Speaker, if allowed, I can give the House the breakdown as follows:

    i) Primary schools have 198;
    ii) Secondary schools have 1,852;
    iii) Higher institutions of learning have 697; and
    iv) Universities have 4,563. 

Madam Speaker, this is even higher than the number of students sponsored nationally to the universities, in this country. How can that be possible? State House alone forwards 4,563, a number higher than what the Government and the national budget caters for, which is only 4,000 students. Where do they come from? Who are they? Who are these?

Yesterday we even heard that these are children of ministers, permanent secretaries and MDs; people who are able to pay for their children. This must be clarified. The Legislature needs to know and the country too needs to know where these people come from. Why are the children of the rich the ones that are benefitting from this scheme, when there are very poor people in Koboko, Zombo and Kisoro that do not benefit? We need to know - these are the issues we need clarification on before we pass this money. And it is the Prime Minister to answer those issues. I know our colleagues on the other side but who are members of the committee could not bring out the nitty-gritty but we need to bring out these issues to help the country.

Another issue was raised here - the issue of more than Shs 30 billion for the cows. Uganda as a Government does not have a beef factory or any abattoir. We only know of the one owned by the Egyptians established at Bombo. However, it is not a PPP; unless we are told that it is a PPP arrangement. How do we start budgeting to buy animals for a private firm? They say that they want improved and fattened animals. Where are they going to come from? Who is going to supply the animals? The country needs to know. 

We are also told – because this also affects the budget - that Uganda has started printing money and the companies that are going to print this money are busy fighting because they belong to the royal family of this country. The Prime Minister should clarify to this country, who is now responsible for printing money in Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: What are you laying?

5.31
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I am here to lay on the Table the document that I promised and I am available now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you come this side and substantiate on that issue.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise for being away; I stepped out to take some water. That is why I was not available. 

However, I have a document from the Attorney-General’s Chambers to the Minister of Finance, dated 29 September 2016. It is titled, “proposed financing by the Export Import Bank of China, of the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR).”

The purpose of this is to show that, the Minister of Finance is borrowing money without Parliamentary approval. The letter further reads thus: “Reference is made to you as under ref; ARD, term references is 179, dated 5 September 2016, concerning the above subject. This is to advise as follows:

    1) Article 159(1) of the Constitution and Section 36(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, authorises the Government to raise loans from any source. In addition, those sections 58(a) and 59(3) of the Act, authorise the Government to withdraw funds from the Petroleum Fund established under Section 36 to support the annual budget in form of financing, for infrastructure and development projects…” 

Madam Speaker, it further states thus:
    a) “Both the Constitution and the Act authorises the Government to raise loans but do not prescribe the terms of borrowing;
    b) The Government through the minister responsible for finance determines the terms under which a loan may be raised subject to approval of Government as per clauses 2 and 3 of Article 159 of the Constitution…” 

He recognises that but then says thus: “Accordingly, nothing prohibits the Government from using oil revenues directly as a guarantee…” – guarantee means borrowing, “…for the repayment of the loan for the Standard Gauge Railway project.”
    2) “Notwithstanding the above, noting that as advised by the PS, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, in his letter dated 26 September 2016, addressed to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the treasury and copied to you: 
    a) The availability of the oil revenue shall be dependent on the commencement of petroleum production;
    b) The commencement of production shall be dependent on the completion of the export pipeline and refinery project; and
    c) The completion schedule for the pipeline and refinery projects shall be largely outside the control of Government and the hands of the international oil company and other private sector players as well.

Accordingly, it should be prudent to ensure that the loan agreement, the commencement of pre-payment period is explicitly tied to the commencement of production in order to mitigate the risk of the Government being found in fault, in the event the production does not start within the project period. Signed: William Byaruhanga, Attorney-General.”

Madam Speaker, what this shows here is that the oil money is now being used without Parliamentary approval yet it is said that, to use the money for oil, one must seek approval of Parliament. It is clearly stated that it is Parliament to give the approval before the money is transferred to the Consolidated Fund from where appropriation is done in order to use it. However, here we are with Government guaranteeing a loan using the oil money without Parliamentary approval. 

Madam Speaker, that is one. I have more which I will deliver tomorrow. I had to come running and brought only one, which was very important – (Hon. Nzoghu rose_)

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were very knowledgeable about – please hon. Nandala lay the document and conclude.

MR NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From around 2012 to 2014, Government has been dilly-dallying on the issue of the Standard Gauge Railway. 

The House will recall that the first money that was allocated to the Standard Gauge Railway was Shs 113 billion. Then in the 2016/2017 budget, Government allocated Shs 118 billion to this Standard Gauge Railway.

But also from August to October 2016, we also got information that Shs 1.8 trillion had been diverted from UNRA to specifically go to fund the Standard Gauge Railway. 
I would like to bring it to your attention that Kenya, which actually launched the Standard Gauge Railway at the same time with Uganda, has already constructed 470 kilometres from Mombasa up to Nairobi. We are supposed to construct only 273 kilometres from Malaba to Kampala; but what is more painful is that the cost per track kilometre: Kenya is doing it at only US$5 million only – (Interjections) - Uganda is doing it at US$8 million.

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTEESA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a discrepancy about things. When you compare Uganda’s one kilometre of roads you are speaking from a discrepancy. 

In Kenya, the land belongs to the state but in Uganda, for every inch of the road you make, you must pay four times to the “wanainchi”. So, how can you compare the two costs?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I had very high respect for this army General, but for now I am going to lose it. We have two budgets; there is one for working on roads and another for compensation for the land owners. Meaning the budget for compensation is different from the one for construction.

Is the General in order to come and mislead us that even the cost of compensation is part of the construction and yet he is lying? 

THE SPEAKER: I think he had forgotten about the compensations and the tracks; please conclude. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, hon. Pecos is even misleading this House by talking about kilometres as if we are talking about roads; we are talking about the railway and it is taken as track kilometre. 

Madam Speaker, since we launched this in 2013 as a country, we have been asking ourselves; why is it that we are delaying as a country and yet the more we delay the more cost we incur on roads? 
The kind of infrastructure that railway transport provides is more comfortable and longer lasting -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we agreed that we want the Standard Gauge Railway but you are giving information about money allotted and not used. Hon. Nandala please wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you, very much. I am laying on the Table this document in respect of financing using oil revenue and others without parliamentary approval. 

Madam Speaker, the other document I am trying to get is where we transferred Shs 200 billion to capitalise Crane Bank without the authority of Parliament I will bring it tomorrow. 

Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time, it would be very important that you allow us to move a motion to investigate the Bank of Uganda and Crane Bank saga, because this is where we have got issues to deal with. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me now invite the minister to respond. Please we would like to know about this abattoir-honourable minister sorry there is something about State House scholarships - please come and lay from here not there. 

5.43
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In relation to what we said yesterday and about State House scholarships, I lay on the Table a report from Initiative for Social and Economic Rights which deals specifically with public private partnerships in education in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I summarised this report and I am going to lay both of them. They will show you that districts like Kween, Kapchorwa have never got a secondary school since 2007 when USE started. The money we are putting in this State House sponsorship would be the same money that would serve these particular districts that are faced with these problems. 

This report deals with the quality of education which has been exposed by UNEB after the O’Level exams. I lay on the Table the report and my summary so that the honourable Prime Minister, ministry of finance and the ministry concerned with education see what they talk about performance in USE, how we are spending money on individuals other than pushing money-

Madam Speaker, Kalungu my constituency is blessed because of the missionary work that took place there. I have good schools but when you look at other districts here; Kween, Kapchorwa and Kaabong you will shed tears; we must ask the ministry of finance to stop funding State House sponsorship. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the document is available for the use of this House. 

5.46
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the minority report presenter. My issue is about the development bank.

They have allocated Shs 50 billion to it, but we are talking about industrialisation, helping local investors to borrow from that bank. Shs 50 billion is $15 million. Five borrowers or even one will finish that money. 

What kind of capitalisation are we doing in this bank; I would like to call upon Government to get serious in the issue of the development bank. Only $15 million is a drop in an ocean. We cannot afford to have a development bank which has a capital of only $15 million in this era.

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter that Government has to consider as far as recapitalisation of this bank is concerned. We need serious money in this bank to promote industrialization. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot speak twice on the same issue; that is against our rules. Honourable minister, we shall need serious answers: on the abattoir where is it, where are the animals which you are going to buy?

We shall also want to know the cost of the health centre III, the Shs 2.9 billion for one health centre III, Shs 5.4 billion for a health centre IV, we shall also want to know about the Treasury operations. There is some Shs 2.7 trillion floating somewhere and then the 15 roads which cannot be constructed.

5.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank each one of you who has contributed to this Budget Framework Paper. 

As you know, in a few months from now, we will bring the detailed budget, where Members will have an opportunity to look at the policy statements of different sectors and continue to improve on the process. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Standard Gauge Railway, I would like to assure the House and the people of Uganda that negotiations for funding of the Standard Gauge Railway are still going on and as soon as we are ready we shall bring a loan request for approval by this House as required by law. 

Therefore, the opinion of the Attorney-General on this issue is an opinion as part of the negotiations – (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and the Shadow Minister for Works and Transport. Therefore, I understand and know what he is talking about. The honourable minister is misleading the House. The negations that he is talking about are not negotiations. This is because the condition for the loan is that Government should first compensate the land owners where the Standard Gauge Railway is going to be constructed. It is after the compensation that the Government will qualify to get the loan. Why don’t you put the reasons clearly to this House why the loan is not secured as of today? Is he in order to mislead the country and this House and not to tell the truth?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you substantiate in view of that challenge from the Shadow Minister of Works?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I was responding to the issue raised by hon. Nandala that this Government has secured a loan without the approval of Parliament. That was the issue on Table and that is what I was responding to. I am saying we have not secured the loan amounting to US$2.2 billion for the Standard Gauge Railway without the approval of Parliament. As long as we are in this Government we can’t do that. 

On the issue of conditions, I know that the condition to secure this loan is compensation of right of way and the Minister of Works and Transport – if you would like – could make clarification on this issue. However, the issue which is on the table is –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, we serve in that committee and know that we already have a contractor. How can we have a contractor if the loan is not approved? Clarify how we ended up having a contractor, yet you are saying the money is not there and the loan is not yet approved.

THE SPEAKER: Which road is that?

MR OKUPA: There is a contractor for the Standard Gauge Railway.

MR ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure has a report that should come to this House and it is very extensive on the issue being discussed here. I think it is Item No. 7 on the Order Paper. 

As a Member of the committee, I know that the report has answers to some of the issues being raised here. I am, therefore, seeking your guidance as to whether it would be proper to wait for that report to be tabled so that we can discuss it extensively.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have an opportunity to review this budget when they bring the final figures. Therefore, I think let us finish the Budget Framework Paper. We shall also receive that other report. It can inform our decision for the next stage.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond only to a few cross-cutting issues and I think the Prime Minister will be able to respond on a number of other issues.

Firstly, Madam Speaker, the budget for the next financial year is going to be close to Shs 30 trillion. I appreciate what Members have been raising in different sectors. However, if you are to address problems in even one sector, Shs 30 trillion cannot comprehensively do it. That is the reason we come here for budget allocation, making priorities among priorities.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, for this financial year, our target is to ensure that the roads for producing oil in the oil region are constructed. We are also going to construct the Kabale International Airport and that infrastructure will support us in production of oil, from which we will be earning US$2 billion. Madam Speaker, imagine an additional $2 billion on our budget – it is close to Shs 7 trillion. Imagine what we can do with that money! 

That is why all our efforts are geared towards the target of oil production by 2020 and the work must start in the Financial Year 2017/2018. That is where our focus is. I would like Members to understand that for once in our lifetime, we might see Uganda balancing its budget without going anywhere to borrow. That will be a great day for Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, among the crosscutting issues – I would like to appreciate both the majority and minority reports – one was the issue to do with gender and equity certificate. The committee notes that the country lacks baseline compliance indicators upon which gender and equity compliance can be premised. We have requested the ministry in charge of gender to guide us on this issue and we hope that in the next financial year or before we start a new financial year, it will be done. They appreciated the programme-based budgeting and requested us to sensitise different sectors. We will do that.

Madam Speaker, we have gone through what Members are recommending as additional pressures in terms of what Government should take on. So far, we have compiled an additional Shs 1 trillion. However, we have limited resources of Shs 30 trillion. Therefore, what we are going to do is to write to different sectors what you have recommended so that they can look though their priorities and see how best they can be accommodated.

Madam Speaker, I have already mentioned the oil roads and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is doing whatever it can to ensure that we start the construction in July 2017 so that we are ready to produce the oil by 2020_

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the question was whether all the 15 roads will commence simultaneously or not. That is what we want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, UNRA has requested for Shs 7 billion to start the studies in the next three or four months. It is our wish that these roads start by July so that they are ready by 2019 in preparation for the production of oil. What I know for sure is that for Kabale International Airport, once we pass through Parliament – because we are securing a loan – it will start around May or June. Hopefully, by 2019, the airport will be ready to facilitate the transport and logistics of oil.

Madam Speaker, there was an issue to do with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Honourable minister, about the issue of airports, there is an airfield in Soroti that also needs to come on board so that when we are talking about oil, the beneficiaries have very many avenues of travelling. What is the status of the Soroti Airfield? I think Soroti and Kabale are within the same level of growth. Let us get some information about it; I will consult so that we see what to do. Otherwise, if it were possible, that airfield should be named “Kaguta International Airport” so that at a later time, we shall see. Many of our past presidents have got properties named after them but our President has not got any. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you made your submissions and the minister listened. Let him now answer. But as he answers, I would like you to join me in welcoming students of Islamic University in Uganda. They are here. You are welcome.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I am reliably informed by the Minister of Works and Transport that Soroti, Gulu, Kasese and Arua are part of the master plan to be rehabilitated and worked on – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What about the regional airport in Kimaka? It is part of the National Development Plan (NDP). We passed it here.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, with your permission, I will request the Minister of Works and Transport to come at another time to make a statement over that particular issue so that we debate it well.

Madam Speaker, there is another issue which was raised in both the majority and minority reports regarding the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukitale, you are part of the oil.

MR MUKITALE: Yes and I am happy to give a procedure in a positive manner.

Madam Speaker, most of the oil and gas equipment – the cheapest mode of transport in the world is water transport. I am now speaking as a logistics expert. The next is rail and the third is the road and the most expensive is air. So far, what is being presented is that we are opting for the most expensive. We are drilling this oil under a production sharing agreement which means there is profit sharing. If the cost of production is very high by air and only road, this country will get piecemeal. 

The procedural point I am raising is that I would like to request the ministries concerned including works and transport to bring a more comprehensive multimodal transport. I know a lot of logistics will come by then through Pakwach and that should be fast-tracked and there should be budges on Lake Albert as it were when my father was born on an oil wealth in 1929. There were Steamers– hon. Fungaroo was talking about the ones in Namasagali and Masindi Port among others. That is the cheapest means of transport worldwide. The rail is the next. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker and Leader of the Government Business, I note that the story is being told from the most expensive angle, but we would be happy to hear the cheapest. I know if we are to start drilling by 2020, there are some equipment which we will not airlift, there are some which cannot come by our narrow roads. Therefore, the rail should be pushed to Pakwach and steamers from around Pakwach to all that stretch. I thought I should raise that as a procedural matter since I did not get it as information.

THE SPEAKER: I did not see the procedural point there. You are just asking for a master plan. There is nothing procedural about that. Stop abusing the privileges of this House. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much and indeed there is a feasibility study on what we should do before we produce oil and we can share it with you, hon. Mukitale.

The issue of Charter for Fiscal Responsibility; the two reports raised the issue that this House approved it and it has not been published. Madam Speaker, we would like to inform the House that we received an official copy from the Clerk to Parliament yesterday and we have forwarded it for gazetting and printing.

THE SPEAKER: You received a copy yesterday? 

MR BAHATI: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: But you are the one who brought the document. Why do you receive it from us?

MR BAHATI: Usually, when an issue is discussed here, we get official copies after Members’ comments have been edited and then the Clerk writes to us that this is the final version of what we have approved as Parliament. The same applies to Bills, among others. A record of Parliament is got from Parliament officers –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He says the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility – the final take was sent to him yesterday.
 
MR BAHATI: Yes. The other issue is of domestic arrears. Madam Speaker, can I be protected - (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the issue he is alleging that the delay is caused by Parliament has a legal implication on the officials of Parliament because the act is very clear. As to the officials, I quoted a section here and if it is found that officials of Parliament delayed the laying of the fiscal charter –

THE SPEAKER: Not the laying, it is the publication. We finished the laying a long time ago.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The publication of the fiscal charter, they are responsible and there is punishment for that; it cannot just be washed away like that. He needs to elucidate on that issue clearly so that we know where the problem is. If it is with finance, then finance will be held responsible and if it is Parliament, then we shall be responsible. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural point I am raising concerns the national airports. There is an airfield in Kanungu and I know you are well aware. That airfield has been neglected.  How do you get resources to open up another airport when there is an airfield which can be expanded and do the needful? I think it is misallocation of resources –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is Kanungu in the oil base?

MS KARUNGI: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you part of the Albertine? 

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, we have gas and the other upper part has some little oil – (Laughter) - I think it is best that we look at that one of Kanungu.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you bring it when they come with the final budget? We can then look at what has not come including Kimaka because it is part of the National Development Plan.

MR BAHATI: Thank you. The other issue was the clearance of domestic arrears. Madam Speaker, we agree and concur with both the minority and the majority reports that this is a problem with us. We are taking the following steps to address this issue. One of the steps we are taking is ensuring that Government institutions are on prepaid systems for utilities because a big part of the domestic arrears is in payment of utilities. So, we would like every Government institution to be on prepaid.

The second step we are taking is that we are allocating now for the arrears that are there, Shs 110 billion, to cater for domestic arrears. We hope that in the next five years, probably we will cover something substantial.

We are also ensuring that the agencies do not commit Government beyond their budget as Public Finance Management Act speculates. Actually, we are now making it clear that anybody – the Public Finance Management Act is very clear. Anyone who commits Government without money should be liable for the actions that he/she has taken. We have also now –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: On the issue you raised of the money kept in the suspense account which is supposed to be under Treasury operations, we are seeing them providing only Shs 110 billion as stated by the minister. Can you tell us why you are keeping that money separately instead of putting it in the Treasury operation? It appears you are dodging the issue of Shs 2.73 trillion because it is connected to what you are providing in Vote 130. Why are you keeping outside the other part of the money which should be in the account? That is where the issue is.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will come to that one in a minute. We had an issue of pensions as part of the arrears, but we have now decentralised it. Ministry of Education and Sports handles pension for education and Ministry of Health handles health’s pension. We hope by doing this, instead of leaving it in a pool, it can help handle the situation. 

However, at the end of the day, Madam Speaker, the issue of domestic arrears centres on discipline amongst the accounting officers. We are going to take actions on those who have been accumulating those domestic arrears. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, excessive –(Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the minister. Honourable minister, these domestic arrears are really touching. The private suppliers to Government are struggling with the economy today and they have reached Government for bailout. When you look at the total arrears in this budget, it is coming to Shs 2.2 trillion. However, you are only providing Shs 110 billion. The question is: for how long will these people wait? You will probably have to wait for another 20 years. 

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The plan to handle the domestic arrears is quite good. It is to prevent future occurrences and also the provisions they are making. However, the private sector is collapsing. Whereas they have a plan to clear these arrears, the banks are closing on the private sector; interest is accumulating and yet Government does not pay interest on their debts. What is Government doing to ensure that these people who provided services and goods are not penalised by banks?

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of domestic arrears, I know the people in the business sector have had the privilege of what my colleague is talking about. I speak as the Shadow Minister for Public Service and Presidency.

Madam Speaker, there is Shs 597.9 billion in domestic arrears for pension and death gratuity. There is no clear timeline stated as to when domestic arrears, in particular, death and pension gratuity will be cleared. This is money that Ugandans toiled for. This is money for which people went through the hardest part of this country to serve. This is money for which people sit in the Ministry of Public Service from morning to sunset and some of them probably collapse because of hunger. However, this Government they served throughout their lifetime does not come to Parliament to talk about clear timeline on how close to Shs 1 trillion will be paid.

Honourable minister, now that you are talking about the plan of ten years for the overall domestic arrears, what about the Shs 96.6 billion salary arrears? How do you pay salary arrears over a plan of ten years? Is that reasonable?

Madam Speaker, you heard the other day when we were discussing the matter of the “golden handshake”; a matter was raised in this House that even some staff within State House have not been paid salaries over the last three years. We have the figures and another day, the figures will come. As the Shadow Minister for Public Service, can 15 people serving the most sensitive institution of this country also go over three years without salaries? What are we thinking in terms of domestic arrears, particularly pension and death gratuity?

Madam Speaker, the last touchy one over this - there is a case, for instance, in Soroti, where a former secondary head teacher died in 2005. His death gratuity was applied for and Shs 76 million was processed. The poor widow has been running up and down until she came to me. Sadly, if you would like the House to know, the file is still intact in the Ministry of Public Service, but the money was paid to a different account. Ariko does not know how to tell her that her husband’s Shs 76 million was paid out and eaten. However, this is a matter we shall deal with another day.

I would like to request the honourable minister to tell us how the public servants we always demand to be motivated, exemplary and perform beyond our expectations will work for a Government insensitive to their payments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on salary arrears, we are going to speak to different sectors to ensure those arrears are cleared as the first call of their budget. 

We have also been having problems of ghost workers as all of you know and we have tried our level best to fight this cancer. We hope that with time and the reforms we have put in place to decentralise the payment systems, we will be able to clear this problem.

On the issue of the declining allocation to the health sector raised by a number of people, Madam Speaker, the decline in the sector’s overall allocation was due to the expiring projects under the Ministry of Health. For example, Mulago Hospital’s renovation is ending by June this year hopefully. Therefore, the money that was put in the allocation for health could not be retained there because the project is expiring. That is why you see some reductions. However, the good news is that the Global Fund has accepted again to fund us. We will include the figures as we move in the budgeting process in a few months to come. 

Obviously, we continue to be challenged and also members you will see. All these sectors, the other day we had a meeting with the Minister of Health at our office. He came with a number of priorities: Hepatitis B, HIV/AIDS and Malaria were a priority-(Interruption)- 

MS NAKAWUNDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable minister that in 2015/2016, there was some PHC funds that were allocated to local Governments. The ministry released only 20 per cent of that money throughout the country and the local Governments were told that 80 per cent was going to be used to buy mattresses, bed sheets, blankets and thing of the kind.

No health unit received that. Those items were not delivered to health units. In 2016/2017, they never got that money. Even in this budget, there is no allocation for such and some districts had started on some projects like in Mpigi. They had constructed a maternity ward, it was left incomplete yet it was remaining with items like fixing shutters. 

However, since the ministry did not release the money in that year, that project remained there incomplete, in the bush and even now it is not there. That is what I wanted to inform the minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I have just remembered, we are about to go for the LCI elections; where are the bicycles for the leaders who are leaving office in the 59 districts?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- I am about to conclude-(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Thank you my old-time friend. This is friendly fire. Madam Speaker, I would like to request my good friend, with whom we have been in this battle for long, to give this House as we pass this budget the confidence that ministry of finance and government understand the state of the economy.

The Chairperson of National Economy has just told us the economy is under stress. Are you giving us an easing, are you suppressing or you want to take us into stagflation? Why I am giving this information, Madam Speaker, is that the budget figures we give is different from budget performance. If you do not release domestic arrears, you are starving the taxpayers and job creators and they will not have the collection and there will be no performance.

However, what the minister has not told us, I have read, government also intends to get some money through domestic borrowing. That is a double killer, double jeopardy crowding out this private sector. If you have not paid those who serve the Government, the taxpayers and the employers and you are going to commercial banks to compete with them to borrow, I can see a situation of stagflation coming at the end of the financial year with poor performance of URA. Again, we want to send, I would like some sincere talk and that is why I support the budget cut 100 per cent.

What is not coming out from National Planning Authority, and it is good the minister presenting heads that docket, is the bigger picture of macroeconomic stability. The budget is planned; it is a policy implementation of one year. Can you give us confidence that as we dispense this budget that you have a stimulus, for the private sector to get cheaper money and that Government is not going to borrow locally and compete with them? 

Madam Speaker, I am not comfortable with this because I know where this is going to lead us. We do not like to come here in the next financial year suffering a bigger problem.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request my good friend hon. Bahati to be more open on this matter so that we know the challenge we have.

And very finally, as we say we want to be ready for 2020, the budget cuts you have done - what exactly do you want in the year ending 2018/2019 and 2020? What percentage are you giving this budget and how  shall we know that the plan you have is a reality? Otherwise, you are giving us very little information about the whole story and you should give confidence to the private sector because I have been interacting with the private sector, the bailout requests are largely because of the high cost of borrowing and government competing with them and not paying its obligations.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of pension arrears, I have got conformation that the verified pension arrears for this year is Shs 120 billion and this year we are paying Shs 50 billion. The balance of Shs 70 billion  will be paid next year so that we clear the arrears.

On the hanging figure of interest payment, according to the records I have, this figure is under treasury operations 130 on annex (ii) page 403. If it is hanging somewhere on another page, that is erroneous; it will be put under treasury operations vote 130 as we conclude the budget.

Madam Speaker, there was the issue to do with excessive allocation to defence. We have taken note of this and the funding arose out of external financing from the UPDF mission in Somalia, which was not well reconciled with the African Union and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran’s Affairs. This will be reconciled before the budget is concluded.

Lastly, the issue of financing the deficit; in deficit, we have only three sources of financing: The first one is raising money through tax measures; the second is non-tax revenue; and the third through borrowing. Therefore, if we have any deficit, we normally go for borrowing. I would like to assure Members that our debt sustainability strategy - we are not yet in a very dangerous situation and we do not intend to go that way. We are still at 38.6 per cent against the threshold we set ourselves of 50 per cent; that is how we do it.

The issue of bicycles, Madam Speaker, I have consulted with the Ministry of Local Government; it is true the Ministry of Local Government does not have the resources to purchase the bicycles before the elections. However, we are going to sit with them and see within our resources what can be done and we will inform this House appropriately.

On Uganda Development Bank (UDB), Madam Speaker, we will be coming here next week to borrow money to fund UDB. You remember the last time I was here, you said I should come with a strategy on how we are going to fund UDB. Currently, we are planning to put in Shs 50 billion next financial year; we hope that in the next four years, we shall have reached a capitalization level of Shs 500 billion.

However, the bottom line, Madam Speaker, is that we have a limited resource envelope but we have unlimited challenges and problems. Therefore, as a country and as leaders, we must sit down and plan on how to utilise these resources well. 

Regarding the investment of our resources in the next financial year, we are targeting the production of oil by 2020. Madam Speaker, I am very optimistic that better days for our country are ahead of us and we should all be optimistic to that effect.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I do not know whether you expect this House to approve the Budget Framework Paper when there are areas that do not satisfy us. Where is the abattoir where you are going to buy cattle to slaughter? You have not answered that.

You have also not answered the cost of health centres III amounting to Shs 2.9 billion per unit. The same applies to Shs 5 billion for one health centre IV. You have also not answered the issue of State House scholarships, which we directed that the money all goes to the Higher Education Financing Scheme. Do you really expect that we shall support you and approve this paper?

6.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mine is also an addition to what the State Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not answered.

We are all aware that the Public Finance Management Act envisages a situation where by the time the minister lays the Budget Framework Paper, he should be declaring to the House the Petroleum Fund resources that will be used to fund the budget. 

However, in this financial year’s budget, by 31st December, the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development had not laid the report of the Petroleum Fund and yet this has been a question, even in the minority report. The minister has conveniently ignored this.

On the issue of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), the minister has conveniently ignored it. He has also conveniently dodged the issue of the cattle that we are supposed to purchase for an abattoir. 

May the country know, since when we owned an abattoir? When did we start buying fattened cattle for export as a country? I thought that abattoirs are owned by individuals and, therefore, buying cattle for individuals when we cannot finance our own budget is something that Members are very concerned about.

Regarding the issue that the Speaker has raised on the oil roads, Members were concerned with you borrowing money without necessarily having the designs of the roads and you are talking about a unit cost of above Shs 5 billion per kilometre – [HON. MEMBERS: “Six”] - That is why I am saying above Shs 5 billion. 

Honourable members wanted to know the unit cost and why it is so big. How did you arrive at this unit cost when you had not even taken the designs after borrowing the money? We have realised that there is a lot of money that we borrow but do not utilise. Possibly this could be one of the reasons why we are not performing well in terms of loans; we borrow money but we do not use it. 

I am not surprised that majority of our Members are talking about health centres that are non-functional and yet we borrowed money under the health sector and only 53 per cent of the health sector loans performed.

We have money that we borrowed for Jinja Hospital. That loan has never been used and Jinja Hospital has never received this money. We borrowed money for Ishasha-Rukungiri Road but the money has never been used. 

As such, Members are suspicious that we may again borrow money for the oil road – [MR OKUPA: “Training centres.”] - Yes, even for the training centres. These are the issues that Members were concerned with. 

We have an issue that was raised as a suspicion, that Government is printing money. We would like to know whether this is correct or wrong. Inform the country whether you are printing money on Entebbe Road or not so that we can put that to a rest. Do not conspicuously look over it.  

The other issue is the agriculture budget. According to the National Development Plan II, agriculture is one of the key priority areas of our economy. Agriculture is also the backbone of this country. When we look at the Maputo Declaration, all African countries committed 10 per cent of their national budgets to agriculture. However, I note that our allocation to agriculture is dwindling year after year. What is our position on the fulfilment of the Maputo Declaration in as far as allocation of 10 per cent of the agriculture budget of the economy is concerned? 

These are some of the issues that we think you should answer if you want us to support the budget and popularise it in our communities. We should be able to understand some of these issues because when you tell an ordinary person that as a country we are going to buy cattle when we do not have an abattoir or factory, it becomes an issue.  

Finally, I will speak on the issue of the scholarships. In the last Parliament, hon. Sylvia Namabidde presented a report that was thoroughly discussed by this Parliament. I still recall that the report pointed out a particular school called Kanyaryeru Primary School where State House, under the President’s scholarship programme, was paying for pupils in primary school. 

During the discussion of that report, we all agreed that State House scholarships should be suspended and possibly reallocated to the mother ministry or we set quotas for districts and, for example, we say that if the President has about 4,000 scholarships and now it is 7,500, we divide it among the districts and then the districts would come up with quotas. 

We could even distribute these scholarships among the Members of Parliament because these are representatives of the districts so that each Member can have about 10 slots and in that way we shall know that all the districts of Uganda are catered for. (Applause) We shall know that all the children of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and Persons with Disabilities are catered for. Can we know the criteria under which the State House scholarship operates? I thank you. 
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to update you on the issue of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. When we completed that debate, we sent a copy of the report of COSASE to the ministry and also the Hansard. That Hansard contained the text of the charter. We were not aware that you wanted us to lift it out of the Hansard and send it to you because we had already sent it to the Hansard.

Yesterday, I asked you whether your budget complies with the Sustainable Development Goals and you were supposed to report on that but you have been quiet.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like us to understand this issue of international obligations in relation to budgets. We have the Maputo Declaration, the Abuja Declaration and another declaration on defence. When we totalled the percentage of the budget that was required under this declaration, it actually goes beyond the 100 per cent. (Laughter) Therefore friends, we do what we can because we go and commit ourselves but when we return, we do not have the resources.

Our understanding of agriculture, and I would like everybody to understand me, is that there is no sector that is an island on its own. You must work together. When we do roads to Kasese, they support agriculture. When we do water, agriculture is supported. The Karuma Dam supports agriculture because the people who will be processing will be processing agricultural products. When you total all this, it is agriculture and that is our understanding.

If you read the Maputo Declaration, it talks about rural development, including agriculture so we need to understand this well. 

The other point is the cost of health centres II, III and IV. I personally and I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as a sector, do not support any exaggerated cost of the budget. This is a process and it helps us with checks and balances. If Parliament has found it, and we will cross-check, that actually these costs are exaggerated, we cannot support them. We have got to reduce them because that is the right thing to do. You cannot construct two rooms of health centres III and say it cost you Shs 4.6 million. 

However, we need to go deeper and ask, are we talking about health centres II with accommodation for nurses and other staff or are we only talking about something smaller? Are we talking about a theatre? We need to look at the design before we make conclusions. 

Regarding the unit cost of a road, I spoke to the Minister of Works a few minutes ago as well as the Executive Director of UNRA, and they said that they are making a study on the unit cost. There should be a standard unit cost and we hope that before we approve the budget, this study will have been completed so that we can come and compare. Should we find out that there is any exaggerated cost, it is our responsibility and duty to refuse it. 

Madam Speaker, we have launched an abattoir in Bombo. One of the investors from Egypt has put up an abattoir and they need 400 cows to slaughter. Therefore, we thought for us to encourage this production – (Interjections)– that is information I am getting from agriculture and given the mood in the House, I would request that the Minister of Agriculture Animal Industries and Fisheries comes and makes a proper statement to the House next week.  

THE SPEAKER: Is it a Public Private Partnership? We enacted a law on this. Is that friendship between Government of Uganda and Egypt?  

MR BAHATI: Our understanding is that the business model will not be that this money will go to the investor. This money is going to buy and stock cattle – (Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We in Luweero, Nakasongola and Nakaseke were all excited when this abattoir came because many of our people are cattle keepers and we can feed that abattoir without looking elsewhere. What we are lacking is water. In this drought, our animals have been badly affected. All the dams have dried up and the animals are eating dry grass without water. When they are in that condition, they cannot fatten. 

Therefore, instead of spending this money elsewhere, let them give us water for production. We are not asking for too much. Let them give us vaccinations in time because we can satisfy this abattoir, Madam Speaker. I wish to request my colleagues to support diversion of that money from going wherever they wanted to spend it and use it to assist the farmers to produce and then buy farmers animals locally. 

We also have another abattoir in Nakaseke, which is not operational because the cows are not doing well because of lack of water. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support my colleague, hon. Syda Bbumba. Apart from the abattoirs in Bombo and Nakaseke, there is also an abattoir by Pearl Meat in Nakasongola. These abattoirs need support. First of all, we need disease control in the area. If you are going to export meat, you must export meat that is disease free and that includes vaccinations and other disease control. 

The second thing is water for production. This time we want a comprehensive solution to scarce water in the cattle corridor. Every district is highly affected. This season, we have had to hire water bowsers to ferry water for farmers for the last two months. Imagine a farmer hiring a truck and having to fuel it to ferry water every day. This is too expensive for our farmers and they have no breather to make meaningful production. 

Therefore, instead of enhancing investors, carry their money here. Let us give capacity to our farmers to increase on their productivity and improve on our GDP. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, it is very disappointing to learn that in our country Uganda, where people who are cattle keepers are crying for water for production, more so in the constituency I represent, Kapelebyong County, and the entire Teso Sub-region, we have no water for production. 

We have received thousands of cattle from Karamoja in our areas and all the water dams have been exhausted. We welcomed our brothers from Karamoja and then learnt that Government is investing Shs 30 billion to support an investor who came from Egypt to look for business at the expense of Ugandans who have no water for production. 

The problem in Uganda is that there is no openness and truth and that is why things are not straightforward. Madam Speaker, there is currently equipment, which was bought by our Government for excavating dams in Karamoja. The Europeans gave us some money to support the extraction of dams. However, that equipment is laying redundant in Karamoja without money for fuel to excavate dams. 

As we speak, there is equipment in Nakawa, which has not been cleared. It is supposed to be used for opening dams and over Shs 30 billion was spent on it and yet our cows are struggling for a drink with the ordinary people from the boreholes. 

Madam Speaker, are we not tax payers in this country? This uneven distribution of resources in this country will cause more harm to this country in future. We are asking the planners who are in charge of this country to observe the principle of equity when distributing projects in this country. 

Madam Speaker, we do not agree with this move and I beg honourable colleagues that it would be unfair for us to endorse this money for fattening cattle at the expense of the taxpayers of this country. 

THE SPEAKER:  Okay. As the minister comes, the districts of Kaliro, Buyende and Kamuli are part of the cattle corridor and we have had no dams since John Babiiha built dams in that area. We have been asking and no one is responding.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to make just one correction and I beg that you bear with me, honourable colleagues. This is very important. The allocation of this money, from the information that we have, is not for the investor. It is to support the farmers. (Interjections) Yes, you can disagree but it is for the support of the farmers. Okay, if you choose instead of fattening to go for dams then Parliament will make that decision. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how are you going to choose whose cattle to fatten? Give us the programme. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, that is why I requested that the Minister of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheies could come and present a paper on how this is going to be done.

Madam Speaker, the final issue is from the Leader of the Opposition. She has raised a number of issues, which I have attended to – 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude.

MR BAHATI: The Leader of the Opposition is asking whether Government – I believe she is talking about the Central Bank –prints money. (Interjection) Okay, the issue is –

MR OKUPA: You are talking about the Central Bank but it is not the Central Bank. It is De la Rue and this company from Germany. Can you elucidate on that?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Central Bank, which is an independent institution that supervises the monetary policy of this country, prints money and they contract a firm to print it from outside Uganda. The debate in Government has been that given the amount of money that we are spending on printing the money, can we have a firm that can rehabilitate the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation to print all security documents here, including money or we continue going abroad? That debate is not yet concluded and once we make a decision, we shall come and inform the House.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question is very clear and is objective in nature. It has options A, B, C or none of the above. Are we printing money? A, Yes; B, No or C, none of the above. Sir, where is the answer?

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to turn and joke around? We need a clear answer to the question; are we printing money? Yes or no. That is my point of order. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are we printing money or not? That is what we want to know. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will give more than what he wants. Yes, we are printing money and we are printing it from outside, not in Uganda.

The last point was on the issue of our elders and the resources available. We shall make a decision during the budgeting process. That is what is available for that programme as per now. When resources increase, we shall be able to increase also.

Regarding the issue of scholarships, Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Prime Minister, from the vantage point, to respond to that issue because he has been following it up with other sectors. I would like to thank Members for the – (Interjections) - The petroleum what?

THE SPEAKER: The report that is required by the 30th of December every year.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have not submitted a separate report on the Petroleum Fund, as required by the law. The one that was submitted was part of the Auditor-General’s report and we apologise for that oversight. However, we will be submitting a separate report to this House in two weeks’ time.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for the support and for the comments that you have made – (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Before you thank the Members, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, the presentation of the report on the Petroleum Fund is a requirement by law. The minister is supposed to have tabled this report by the 31st of December so it is not a matter of apologising because you are actually violating the law. 

May we, therefore know, before we even go into the nitty-gritties of the budget, when you will comply with this law? He was supposed to table it concurrently with the Budget Framework Paper; so the two weeks he is asking for – next time it is not going to be a matter of massaging. We may even decide that we shall not handle the Budget Framework Paper if you do not comply with disclosure of the report on the Petroleum Fund. This is not the first time that this is not complied with.

Madam Speaker, I would imagine that we should put it on record that the minister should not massage issues to do with the law while we let him go scot-free. Next time if you do not bring the report together with the Budget Framework Paper, we shall not discuss the Budget Framework Paper itself. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as I said, we are going to bring a specific report for the Petroleum Fund, as required by the law, in two weeks’ time. We will ensure that we do that and we once again apologise that we did not meet the deadline. However colleagues, as you know, the Public Finance Management Act was a comprehensive Act and we started implementing it last financial year. We have tried our best to make sure that we comply with it and I think we have done well but where we have not, we do apologise.

Lastly, I thank the Members for your input and I look forward to you approving this Budget Framework Paper and also for better input during the budgeting process. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the Minister of Agriculture, animal Industry and fisheries is directed to urgently bring information on fattening of cattle so that we can know where the fattening is taking place. Are they Zebus or Ankole cattle? Which part of the country? How many per farmer? We want to know that and if we are not satisfied when you return here, we shall not approve the Shs 30 billion. I hope the Prime Minister will speak about the scholarships.

Honourable members, we have another opportunity to take oversight over the budget in the next few months. So, regarding these areas where you are not satisfied, keep them in focus and we shall dig them up again with the minister.

I put the question that the Budget Framework Paper be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Budget Framework Paper approved.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I thought it was important to make reference to the prayer that was made by the committee as we approve the Budget Framework Paper.

THE SPEAKER: What is the prayer?

MR LUGOLOOBI: The prayer was that, “In accordance with section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, I move that the report of the Committee on Budget Framework Paper for financial years 2017/2018 to 2021/2022 be adopted and that the Budget Framework Paper be approved with the proposed amendments.”

Secondly, “The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall lay on the Table the final version of the Budget Framework Paper before presenting the annual budget estimates for 2017/2018.” That is what would accommodate our proposals.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Budget Framework Paper be approved with the amendments proposed by the chairperson and the conditions attached by the same. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to acknowledge the work done by various people during this process. We only had five days, including a public holiday, to complete this work. Sessional committees sat during these four days and delivered the reports. The Leader of the Opposition, the shadow minister and her team presented – (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give Parliament is that the report that we have adopted, it is less the component of the entire education sector.

MR LUGOLOOBI: It is there; we included it in the report.

THE SPEAKER: It was there and they reported about 17 per cent, although it is not satisfactory. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members of the Budget Committee for the good work done. They worked during day, night and weekends to deliver this report on time. I would further like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your support in this process. I thank you all.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for delivering according to the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act. I thanked you from the beginning because you burnt a lot of midnight oil.

7.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I think the debate has been more or less closed but I have supplementary information. 

Concerning the question of State House scholarships, first of all, I would like to say, as many colleagues know, that State House scholarships have made enormous contribution to bringing up young people who would otherwise not have been able to access education.

Secondly, there has been an issue raised about criteria; what are the criteria? The people who have mainly benefited from the State House scholarships have been selected by His Excellency the President basically because these have been people either affected by war or who have lost their parents during war or – (Interruption)- I think we have little information, people are tired and I am concluding. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. We shall have an opportunity to examine the details when they bring the budget so our committee and members should be alert.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To conclude this point, you find that the main beneficiaries from the State House scholarships have been people who were affected by the Luweero war, people who have had problems mainly in LRA affected areas, Karamoja and other areas – (Interjections) - there appear to be some questions - (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The bush war the Rt hon. Prime Minister is talking about is about 35 years ago. The scholarship scheme, as far as I know, is funding pupils from primary one to the university. 

Sometime back when the President was responding to queries, and I mentioned this yesterday, he said, “These are the people who come to State House and disturb me, a fountain of honour. How can I just chase them away? They come to disturb me about school fees.”

I am made to understand that some of these are non-Ugandans. Actually majority of them are from Rwanda. They are taken to very good schools vis-à-vis Universal Primary Education. They go to good universities overseas, including Harvard and Leeds. 

Madam Speaker, the whole country was affected by the two wars that the Prime Minister is talking about; the bush/Luweero war and the LRA war. That is why our children are being starved at school today and even the basic feeding for lunch is not provided to them.

According to his statement, it is as if there are special Ugandans who were affected in a special way and they are supposed to be catered for in a very special manner. 

Madam Speaker, is the Prime Minister in order -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue we are talking about might be speculation. I do not know where the list is, I do not know the nationalities and I do not know how I can rule on that now because no one has the list. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, at one time when I served in that committee, asked for that list but it was not produced. 

During this recent one, the list was produced and was only given to the chairperson. Can we have it, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: To which chairperson was it given?

MR OKUPA: The colonel. Can we have that list laid on the Table and we get to know the names and where those young Ugandans come from? That way, we would have solved this problem but this issue of the Prime Minister leaving us with that open thing - That is why I was able to get these figures, which I presented here from primary, secondary schools, institutions and universities.

If that list is not produced here, we cannot go on with mere words. Can we have that list so that we can sort out the issue of the State House scholarships? 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister can be given the benefit of doubt to bring a comprehensive report for the Tenth Parliament. Some of us who have been here in the Eighth and Ninth Parliament know about this story, which never comes out. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the Prime Minister be given a chance to bring a comprehensive report on which citizens of this country have benefited for the last 30 years- 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think our interest is in those who have benefited from the time this House resolved that the money should go to the Higher Education Financing Scheme. 

MR MUKITALE: I agree, Madam Speaker, because we agreed in the last Parliament that we should stop money being extended from one side and bring it back to the pool so that places like Buliisa, which has never got a single coin, can also benefit. If that is proper - 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us ask the Prime Minister to bring a comprehensive report from that time when we made that resolution. 

Hon. Ojara wanted to report on the work we asked him to do. Please stand up. (Laughter)

7.10
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On 17 November last year, hon. Nandala-Mafabi brought a petition in this Parliament to allow Parliament to investigate the conduct and the management of UTL. Subsequent to that, a select committee was created, which I am chairing. We were given 45 days to finalise this very noble task. 

Madam Speaker, this happened during the time when we had so many issues on the calendar. This was during the Christmas period and also the time of the infamous court order from Justice Kavuma. This has interfered with our work and we could not proceed to meet the deadline. 

Madam Speaker, the committee requests this Parliament for an extension of the deadline by another 30 days so that we can effectively accomplish the task before us. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the select committee requests for an additional 30 days. Is it okay? I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. We are going to deal with the report of the Public Accounts Committee and the two protocols for ratification. If they have not been distributed, distribute the reports and also the one for the Standard Gauge Railway. The House is adjourned to 2.00 o’clock tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.12 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

