

Tuesday, 11 February 2020

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will begin by apologising for the late start. I was caught up in a few other activities outside the city. I think in our usual way, we shall work quickly and ensure we run through the Order Paper.

The second issue concerns questions for oral answer. Starting today, questions will be reflected every day, until they are all finished. They are quite many, yet they have taken long. The presumption is that the answer should be ready. So, every day, there will be questions for oral answer appearing on the Order Paper until they are completed.

I would like to also advise members of the press that if they are not sure about what to write, they should not write. If the press has to write, do your research properly instead of misleading the public and maligning Parliament. I hope that the press can pick themselves up and try to do a professional job instead of rumour mongering, speculating and passing out their own ideas.

There are a few issues of national concern. However, I would like to remind honourable members that these issues should touch the whole country not just individual issues from the constituency. I will ask hon. Faith Alupo – I think she has some matter. Is hon. Alupo present? Okay, let us have the matter on the unfulfilled pledges of $ 1 million for Uganda Cranes.

3.10
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding a presidential pledge. 

On 28 August 2019, after a very good participation in the Africa Cup of Nations, which was held in Egypt, the President of the Republic of Uganda hosted the Uganda Cranes to a dinner. During that dinner, the President promised to give $1 million, as a token of appreciation to the Uganda Crane’s team.

There is now a problem. The players are asking for this money before they can participate in the coming World Cup Qualifiers, Africa Cup of Nations Qualifiers and the Africa Cup of Nations Championship, which is going to happen in the next one month.

The concern I have is: can we know the whereabouts of this money? If the President fulfilled this pledge, then the country must know. If he has not fulfilled it, the President’s Office should avail us with information as to when they are going to fulfil it; it is a matter of concern to all the sportsmen and women of this country. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Education and Sports is not here. I do not know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development -

3.12 
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much as I am not in the docket at the moment, I know what took place since I attended the dinner. I do not recall if hon. Ssewanyana was there. However, since it was a presidential pledge, which is not a force, once the President has pledged, there are channels that are used. There is the leadership of Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA) and the players. 

Therefore, it would have been more proper, if we had got a complaint from the leadership of FUFA and the players so that –(Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate that the honourable member is a former minister and so, he may not be well acquainted with the norms of Government.

There is what we call Government assurances and there are rules that govern Government assurances. When we debated the motion to congratulate the Uganda team that went to Egypt, a Government commitment was made, by the very person who is now speaking as a former minister, that the President had committed himself to giving an equivalent of $ 1 million to the Uganda Cranes.

Madam Speaker, once a commitment is made by a Fountain of Honour, it becomes almost a law. So, ordinarily, the Uganda Cranes would make a budget in consideration of that commitment. Therefore, is the former minister in order to compromise the President’s commitment, by saying that it was a mere pledge that was not forced on him? To me, this is minimising the importance of a pledge from the President. Is he order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if the Fountain of Honour says something as he did, that he is committing to support the young people, it must be done. In other circumstances, it would be decree.

3.15
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssewanyana for raising this matter.

These pledges that come whenever athletes make our country proud have over delayed. Many times, getting these pledges processed has involved a lot of corruption.

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to your attention Ms Dorcus Inzikuru’s situation; the person who won a Gold medal for this country. There was a pledge for her to receive a vehicle and a house. The house was delivered but the vehicle has never been delivered up to date; it is almost coming to 20 years.

It is the same thing, which is now happening to the Uganda Cranes, where the former minister - he is no longer a minister but now a backbencher. 

Since he was there for a very long time, we would like to benefit from his experience in a way of fast-tracking these pledges not to massage the delays and corruption ends up eating part of the pledge. Thank you.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Ssewanyana for reminding us about this pledge. Normally, when the President makes a pledge, it is processed through the system.  We are going to follow-up this pledge and we will be able to communicate through the Ministry of Education and Sports directly to the Uganda Cranes at the earliest possible time.

However, as you know, the President has tried as much as possible to honour his pledges and the support that he has given sports in this country is not doubted. I have no doubt that even this $ 1 million that he pledged will be honoured. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that they were processing the pledge. It is true and we have no doubt but at least, we have to require from you some substantive proof in order to give these players encouragement and assurance as they head for the next World Cup qualifiers.

As they represent Uganda, they will not only see faces of Ugandans and Government officials showing their support at Namboole but they will also live up to their word.

Secondly, the honourable minister should be aware that the pledge is not only one. Probably, if you would come and report to this honourable august House and inform honourable members about the list of pledges, their number and total amount and if you require our support as the House, we shall unanimously come up to give you the help that you desire.

The Speaker has a number of times come in to boost support to the sports fraternity mainly netball, volleyball, basketball but her basket is not that big as compared to what you can have in form of Government, if we came together and plan for these persons.

That for all those that excel on behalf of Uganda this is a special slot so that it is known and whether they perform well in Ludo, athletics or javelin they know that there is a reward from their nation, it will be an inspiration and encouragement to our sportsmen to represent us better.

I would like to seek my colleague to come up with a well processed document that shows all disciplines that have gotten pledges from the President and what time he will take to honour them. Thank you, very much.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Government expenditure is through a budget. It is not that the President has some money in the sack to give at will. 

I expected the custodian of the budget who is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up and say that this money has been budgeted for in fulfilment of the President’s pledge either on the vote of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, vote of the Ministry of Education and Sports or vote on the Presidency or State House such that we know where the money is.

However, to say that the money was being processed through a system, what sort of system are we talking about? Let us not degenerate into some sort of a trading centre talk. If there is Government money, it is through a budget and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the custodian of the budget.

Tell us which vote? Is it part of the ministry’s vote or the President’s vote and the relevant sectoral committee could be able to confirm that the money is within the budget? I seek your clarification custodian of the budget.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Katuntu has taken sometime without speaking in this House and I did not know that he had changed.  We welcome you, hon. Katuntu.

When I said that the money was under the process, I expected that all of us knew that money can be processed through appropriation and through the budget. Therefore, we provided resources under State House for donations of the President. He can either use the donation budget line, which is under State House or we can appropriate it through the Ministry of Education and Sports.

We are trying to look at all the pledges that have been made in the Ministry of Education and Sports, then we increase the budget for sports in the coming months as we process the budget. That was exactly what I meant and I knew that the senior Member of this House; hon. Katuntu, was aware of what I meant as a lawyer. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, many of the issues here are constituency issues. I would be happier if you asked questions specifically. What we should be allowing as matters of national importance should be of a national nature like this pledge of the athletes and now, the issue which hon. Latif Sebaggala is going to raise. Ask questions very quickly and they will be answered.

3.24
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue of national importance about Ugandan students in Wuhan China.

I received messages from Ugandan students in Wuhan who are concerned about their plight in as far as the Coronavirus is concerned. 

Since I am a messenger and they have already signed requesting me to present this as an issue of national importance to this House, allow me to read verbatim what they have written requesting for assistance;

“In the midst of the on-going uncertainty and discomfort caused by the outbreak of the coronavirus in China, I wish to first of all state that I am writing to you from Hubei Province, Wuhan the epicentre of the tragedy, the statement focusing on the plight of Uganda students in Wuhan. 

Notably, there has been general lack of necessities including masks especially on the side of Ugandan students around the campus of Wuhan.”

It is plainly hard for such students to access grocery stores since services have been stopped around the campus.

Secondly, the skyrocketing of prices of commodities has greatly dented the pockets of many students, especially those who reside in the campus. Many shops have closed and they do not have any access. Besides that, there is no more supply in their dormitories and their campus because of the on-going Coronavirus.

Madam Speaker, this is their request. “It is, therefore, our outermost plea that the Government of Uganda uses its diplomatic engagement with the Chinese Government to allow for a timely evacuation exercise because many students from other countries have been evacuated.

Government should consider financial support to students so as to cope up with the situation. Finally, all students in Wuhan have been carefully quarantined for more than two weeks now, which confirms their health in relation to the virus. However, in the event of any suspected risk, quarantine measures should be advisable when we are back. We request the Government to intervene so that we can be evacuated as other countries have done.” 

It is signed by Peter Katwere, Thomas Kanzira, Jeremy Kansiime, Sharon Kikaayi, Mulongo and others. Madam Speaker, we need urgent intervention, as far as the plight of these Ugandans in Wuhan is concerned. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. However, it is not only in Wuhan. I received a letter from a parent whose child is in another province called Hubei, where they said all the children are quarantined. There is a lockdown; you cannot get in or get out. They have no masks, food and water.

I quickly contacted the Ambassador in China and also the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to ensure that the Government handles this but it cannot only be two provinces. I think all the children everywhere are endangered. We need assurance that they are safe and will get supplies but also whether there is an evacuation plan; it is quite serious.

3.29
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have all had endless calls and you realise that these young men and women are not only under threat of dying of starvation. When you are in a foreign land, normally equity demands that they attend to the nationals first.

You can imagine a situation in which our young men and women  are. Madam Speaker, some are undocumented. The number of the documented students ranges between 65 to about 150 but the undocumented are about 500. The issue they are talking about is that indeed, Uganda has an airline. 

Uganda Airlines, this is the time –(Interjections)– it can go on stopping even if it is not long range. (Laughter) When it was coming here, it was flown from Canada. I am not saying that this is what should be done immediately but Uganda can charter a plane. Thailand has done it. The Senegalese have done it. The Nigerians have done it. Even if we were East Africa together, we can get these children to safe passage first and assess them, even if it is for two weeks. 

If a citizen cannot be helped in this dire situation, this is not a matter that any of them could have foreseen. However, when they see country after country picking their own citizenry when no one is even reaching out to them in houses, they are threatened to not only die of the virus but also die of starvation, because all food groceries and shops are closed. 

You can imagine for even health facilities for - let us say - the women and they cannot access pharmacies or anything. Therefore, this is where embassies and Governments must come in and help their own people. If they do not do it now, when will it be?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the PS of Foreign Affairs informed Cabinet because I talked to him last week about this issue.

3.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed, yesterday in Cabinet, this matter was raised and we discussed it. The ministers of Health, Education and Sports, Foreign Affairs and our ambassador, Dr Crispus Kiyonga were tasked to find the possible way of making sure that our children are safe; evacuating and maintaining them in Uganda when they are here quarantined or sending logistics to help them where they are quarantined.

The two possibilities are being discussed because –(Interjections)– please, we do not want our children to continue suffering. We have to work with the Government of China to accept our proposals. They have to accept. They will be reporting to the Prime Minister this evening and we are taking this as a matter of urgency for the safety of the children and the safety of the 42 million Ugandans who are here. They are weighing them out and will be reporting to the Prime Minister this evening.

THE SPEAKER: Do we, therefore, expect an answer from you tomorrow? Does the country expect to hear the Government strategy tomorrow? This is urgent? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, definitely, the parents and the entire country would like to know what Government has decided to do. When the Prime Minister is ready - because they are reporting to him this evening - we can issue a statement tomorrow of what Government has decided because he is receiving the information from the small Cabinet committee this evening.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When students leave this country under the Ministry of Education and Sports, they are Government students. The Government is responsible for these students when they are abroad. Other countries in North Africa have repatriated their people and this is a very serious matter.

What I expected Uganda and other East African countries to do is to get together. Uganda does not have a long range aircraft but Kenya does. Why can’t the East African countries get together and bring back our children because this is a very serious issue? (Applause)

The Mission in Beijing cannot do anything. Since these students cannot access food anywhere, it is the responsibility of Government to move very fast and bring these children from there, before they are exposed to the dangers, which are going on presently.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what we expect, before you bring your statement, is to assure the country that where they are, they will access water, get masks and food, pending your withdrawal of them from that place. They should be assured that they will get some food and water and masks, as you plan on what to do.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are working closely with the Chinese Government and we are seeking their understanding, so that we can provide whatever is required for the children.  Whatever we do, we have to move with the Chinese Government. 

MR INNOCENT KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very important point that needs emergency attention. These people could starve while in China. While you work with the Government of China, could we get something for them to eat immediately? A response might take a week. Let us send them something in the morning so that they can survive. We can send them a few dollars for their survival. Thank you. 

3.37
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very serious matter and I would like to invite my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, to treat it with a lot of importance. China is threatening to execute its people –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Indeed, this is a very serious matter and I am handling it as such. Is hon. Paul Mwiru in order to impute improper motive by calling upon me to treat the matter with importance and yet, I am actually treating it as a matter of urgent attention and as a mother? He should be serious.

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate on why you think she is not handling it with urgency?

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I am one of those members of Parliament who are very attentive in this House and I take trouble to look at every Member of Parliament when he or she is speaking. I looked at the demeanour of hon. Ruth Nankabirwa and it suggested that she is not taking this matter very seriously. 

China is threatening to execute its own people. What we are looking at is evacuation of our people. The way she talked is as if Government is weighing whether to bring Ugandans to their country or leave them in China for the Chinese Government to take a decision on them. 

We have ever seen Government evacuating UPDF officers who were suffering from Ebola. They brought them back to Uganda. Therefore, when we talk about Ugandans being returned to their motherland, it is a duty of our Government. However, the laissez faire way of looking at the matter is to say we are weighing and China must have a final say on this matter – That is why we are saying –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I wanted to give is, when Gulu suffered from the Ebola epidemic, we got UPDF soldiers who were known to be sick and dumped them in Gulu. Therefore, if you could do that for the UPDF, why not our children who are in China? That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I call upon Government, most of all, my sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, to take this matter very seriously as it is very close to my heart. Thank you. 

3.40
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that many other countries have done it in the best interest of their nationals. Therefore, I would not agree with what the minister has said; comparing the over 40 million Ugandans with those who are in China. 

All other countries have millions of their nationals back at home but they decided, in their wisdom, that it is better – because there are measures that can be taken. When these people are brought here, how safe are they going to be and how safe will others be? Can we have quarantine for them?

Students are complaining that there is no transportation, no service deliveries; there is basically nothing. Even if you had money, you can hardly find a shop open to buy what you want. It is not a matter of having money because accessing what you want to buy is not easy.

I request that the Government quickly intervenes by ensuring quick evacuation so that Ugandans are back in the country. When the situation normalises, they can go back to China for their studies. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are discussing two very important issues. The first one touches health and the other one foreign policy issues. We are discussing a foreign country and the lives of our people in that foreign country. However, I do not see the two ministers; the one for health and the other for foreign affairs available and yet, these are very sensitive issues that touch our nationals abroad.

As I move my procedural matter, I seek your protection. Gen. Katumba Wamala and Dr Baryomunsi are almost stopping me from proceeding. I wonder whether we are proceeding well without knowing the whereabouts of these two very important ministers in regard to the two important issues that we are discussing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip and the Front Bench, I have just been listening to one of the children in a recorded message. The situation is really quite bad. They say they have no food, the banks are closed, there is no public transport, the supermarkets are closed. They cannot get out and if they do, they get arrested. They are going to starve. 

I think you should urge the Government of China to support the students who are in the universities with food, water and plastic masks for the start as you organise your meetings in the night. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the cost of a chartered plane to China from Uganda is not more than $ 100,000. We can afford it. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are represented by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. I have informed this House that he is one of those who have been tasked by Cabinet to make sure that our children are rescued. The Ambassador, Dr Kiyonga, is in the country and I think all possible means to secure our children are being –(Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the Government Chief Whip is saying that the Ministers of Foreign Affairs have taken up this matter very vigorously. However, you are aware that the three Ministers of Foreign Affairs are three persons we do not see in this House; they are perpetually absent. By making reference to them, you are actually telling us that nobody is taking action. 

Since the Government Chief Whip is also representing the Prime Minister, can you tell us, in no uncertain terms, that since the three ministers are not here, the Prime Minister will take on their roles to ensure that the concerns of this House are taken seriously? The way you are putting it - I do not want to say that my colleague was right by insinuating other motives. 

I would not like to go that far. However, I would like to say that if you are serious, can you now assume the role of the Prime Minister and assure this House that the action will be taken seriously?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this country deserves more serious answers. We are demanding that the Prime Minister comes here to address the country on this issue tomorrow during the sitting, on both the interim measures for their survival and the ultimate measures for either repatriating them or treating them from there. It is serious and tomorrow, we need answers about this issue. 

3.47
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not to dilute your ruling but to just point out that the debate has been very particular on students, yet, there are people affected by this situation. Two days ago, the Minister of State for Health made a statement to the effect that Ugandan traders who are in China should stay there. Did this pass for a Government policy? Stay there and do what? 

What is the guidance on other people other than students? I am asking this because the minister said “they should stay wherever they are.” Those who are here do not go and those in China stay in China? What is the clear Government policy on other Ugandans in China other than the students? Thank you.

3.48
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following this Coronavirus situation very closely and I have found out -(Interjections)- yes, the Coronavirus -(Interjections)- yes, I have been following. This issue of coronavirus is a very big one; some of us have interest to protected.

However, as we speak, it has skipped the capacity of a ministry because it is now a national concern because all our people who are there no longer have any food or money. Those who have money, have nowhere to buy what to eat. Therefore, it is a national issue and so, we do not have to tag it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs alone.

As a country, we should sit down and devise measures on how best we can handle this in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Otherwise, leaving it to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs alone is not good at this stage, which stage has been bypassed.

It is high time Ugandans sat together. If the charted plane cannot bring Ugandans alone, we can do it in conjunction with Tanzania and Kenya because their people are equally stranded there.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I urge the House to take this as a serious matter because Ugandans are now caught up in that place with coronavirus, which has no cure at the moment. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister will come here tomorrow to brief us first, on the plight of the students, their management while they are there and their possible evacuation. He will also brief the country on the other Ugandans who found themselves in China. It is very serious; we want answers tomorrow.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Buyende District. They are represented by hon. Veronica Kadogo and hon. Dhamuzugu. You are welcome.

We also have the employees of the Uganda Markets and Employees Union. They are represented by hon. Rwabushaija, hon. Rwakajara, hon. Bakkabulindi, hon. Kunihira and hon. Sam Lyomoki. They are here to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

Honourable members, the other issues, as I said, please, write the questions down. Let us now go to item three.

LAYING OF PAPERS 

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA AT THE 141ST ASSEMBLY OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) HELD IN BELGRADE, SERBIA

3.51
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on Table the report of the delegation of the Parliament of Uganda at the 141st Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU), held in Belgrade, Serbia, from 10-17 October 2019. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I have an executive summary of less than 10 minutes of what is contained in the main report, for presentation.

THE SPEAKER: Five.

MR SEBAGGALA: Five minutes, noted, Madam Speaker. This is a Report of the Delegation of Parliament of Uganda at the 141st IPU Assembly, held from 10-17 October 2019, in Belgrade, Serbia. Over 1700 parliamentarians, UN and civil society partners from around the world met in Belgrade, Serbia from 10-17 October 2019 for the 141st IPU Assembly, under the theme: “Strengthening International law, Parliamentary roles and Mechanism and the Contribution of National Cooperation.”

The honourable members of Parliament discussed the latest development to improve gender equality, empower young people, defend members of Parliament’s human rights and achieve universal health coverage. The Serbian National Assembly hosted delegates from over 140 countries with over 70 Speakers of Parliament attending as well as 66 Deputy Speakers and over 700 members of Parliament, from whom 30 per cent were women and 17 per cent were young members of Parliament under 45 years.

The 141st IPU Assembly had a total of over 2000 - one of the most attended assemblies so far. Notably, the Assembly was last hosted in Europe 20 years ago. Serbia was one of the first Members of IPU joining in 1891 shortly after the organisation was founded in 1889. This is the second time Belgrade hosted IPU Assembly. The 52nd IPU Assembly was held in Belgrade in 1963.

Madam Speaker, Uganda’s delegation comprised of you, as the leader of the delegation, hon. Latif Sebaggala, hon. Mourine Osoru, hon. Esther Anyakun, hon. Paul Akamba, hon. Roland Mugume and hon. Rose Kabagyenyi, who are the Members of IPU Uganda Chapter.

Topics covered during the 141st IPU Assembly

It was noted that since the IPU’s creation, 130 years ago, political dialogue, the rule of law and peaceful resolution of conflicts throughout parliamentary diplomacy had remained its guiding principle.

Gender equality - the IPU remains at the forefront of efforts to boost women’s representation in politics. The IPU forum of women parliamentarians looked at ways to ensure that universal heavy coverage addresses the needs of women and girls and how to remove the legal, social, economic and financial barriers that prevent them from accessing health care services.

The forum also held panel discussions to mark the 40th anniversary of the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) focusing on the role of Parliaments in legislating for gender equality.

Young people and children

The forum for youth discussed youth quarters to increase the number of young Members of Parliament drawing on IPU research, which has found a correlation between women and youth representation in Parliament.

Human Rights

The IPU Committee on Human Rights of Parliamentarians met to consider what action to take to defend close to 300 persecuted members of Parliament from Turkey, Uganda, Venezuela as well as new cases from Brazil, Libya, Sierra Leon and Yemen.

Sustainable Development
Giving a Parliamentary dimension to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development remained a core subject at the IPU’s Assembly.

Special segments to mark the 130th Anniversary of the IPU

At the 141st Assembly, a special segment was held to mark the 130th Anniversary of IPU.

Highlights

Ms Gabriela Cuevas Barron, the IPU President noted that IPU was the largest Parliamentary family in the world. On 30 June 2019, it marked 130 years of existence. The IPU had stood the test of time and adopted the various changes in the world.

Thank you very much because in our Parliamentary Week, we decided to celebrate the 130 years of IPU with the President of IPU, Ms Gabriela Cuevas Barron. We are very grateful that she was here and participated in our Parliament Week.

The Ugandan delegation ensured the country representation in the following meeting:

    1. The Governing Council
    2. The Assembly
    3. The Executive Committee
    4. The four standing committees meetings, namely;
    i) The Standing Committee on Peace and International Security
    ii) The Standing Committee on Sustainable Development, Finance and Trade
    iii) The Standing Committee on United Nations Affairs, and;
    iv) The Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights
    v) The two forum meetings
    vi) The Association of Secretaries General Assemblies (ASGP) was represented by the Clerk to Parliament. 

In that meeting, Uganda got various positions. Hon. Esther Anyakun was appointed on a very important Executive Committee of IPU for which we are very grateful.

The delegation also attended workshops, meetings and events that were organised on the side-lines of IPU as follows:

    a) Meeting with the delegation of Parliament of Algeria
    b) Meeting with Ms Hilary Gbedemah – Chairperson of the UN CEDAW
    c) Side event on small arms and light weapons
    d) Meeting with the delegation of Qatar Shura Council
    e) Meeting with the delegation of Parliament of Turkey; and
    f) Meeting with a delegation of Parliament of Egypt.

The above meetings discussed and sought solutions to issues of mutual interest.

In conclusion, the delegation actively participated in the meetings and side events of the 141st Assembly IPU contributed effectively and presented the position of Uganda on matters that arose in the course of the proceedings.

The delegation further noted the issue that will be addressed by Parliament of Uganda for effective delivery of its mandate to the people of Uganda. Thank you.
 
The Speaker:  Thank you, hon. Sebaggala. The paper is available for Members in case they are interested in the inner parts of the report.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE ESTABLISHMENT AND MANAGEMENT OF MARKETS BILL, 2019”

The Speaker: Hon. Rwabushaija, you could use just 15 minutes. It is not necessary to use all the 30 minutes.

3.59
Ms Margaret Rwabushaija (Independent, Workers): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 
I move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Establishment and Management of Markets Bill, 2019”

It is moved under Articles 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda recognise the right of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS Article 237 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda vests land, which is the primary factor of production on the citizens of Uganda;

AWARE THAT Article 40(2) of the same Constitution provides that every person in Uganda has a right to practice his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or business;

NOTING THAT the Markets Act Cap. 94 places the vital question of ownership of markets in Uganda in the hands of local authorities and Central Government contrary to the provisions of the Constitution;

RECOGNISING THAT in today's fast-growing world, several stakeholders like market vendors, private individuals and companies have joined the market business especially to manage and collect funds, provide cleaning services and offer credit facilities and market vendor’s associations also exist to manage and control markets to improve the welfare of vendors and yet, these stakeholders are not covered by the Act;

FURTHER RECOGNISTNG THAT since the Markets Act was enacted in 1942, there have been several developments that have taken place including increased urban population growth and the shift from subsistence to commercial agricultural production, which has led to the tremendous increase in the number of market vendors in all markets, resultantly overwhelming the capacity of the facilities and structures in these markets thus leading to the development of illegal roadside markets and other different kinds of markets;

NOTING THAT given the above listed developments, the Markets Act, Cap 94 has become inadequate in its content and therefore, does not match up to the current needs of market development, management and administration thereby greatly affecting the administration and management of markets;

FIRMLY CONVINCED that there is need to repeal the Markets Act Cap 94 of 1942, and introduce a new law that provides for the establishment, ownership and management of markets in Uganda in order to address the above gaps inherent in the current law that have led to numerous legal battles;

NOW THEREFORE, this motion is moved requesting:

1. 	That this Parliament accepts and grants me leave so that I introduce a Bill for an Act entitled, “The Establishment and Management of Markets Bill, 2019”, a draft of which is attached hereto;
2. 	Do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

I beg to move.

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by several members. Please, justify it.

Ms rwabushaija: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Justification for the establishment and management of the Markets Bills, 2019:

The current Markets Act Cap 94 was enacted by the Legislative Council (Legco) in 1942. Legco was the legislative arm of the colonial Government whose aim was to champion the interests of the colonial masters then. 

Uganda being a sovereign state, has undertaken a lot of economic reforms, both in structural and legal reforms. Most state enterprises were privatised in the 1990s and the economy was virtually left in the hands of the private sector players.

Article 237 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda places the primary factor of production, land, in the hands of the citizens of Uganda.

Article 40 (2) of the same Constitution provides that every person in Uganda has a right to practise his or her profession and to carry on lawful occupation, trade or business. However, the Markets Act places the vital question of ownership solely in the hands of local, central Government, which is unconstitutional and illegal.

The Bill therefore seeks to provide for establishment of ownership, management and development of markets by:

    i) Central Government
    ii) Local Governments
    iii) Companies
    iv) Private individuals 

Therefore, the legislation does not provide for this forum of dispute resolution given the current spates of market disputes between the market vendors and the controlling authorities.

The Bill therefore seeks to provide for mechanisms for dispute resolution in respect of markets.

It also follows that the current law is conspicuously quiet about the manner in which the vendors can elect within themselves a market management committee, which can negotiate or have audience with the local or central government for/and on behalf of the vendors.

The Bill, therefore, seeks to establish a Market Management Committee in every market in Uganda which shall run the affairs of markets.

Whereas The Markets Act Cap 94 was enacted to provide for the establishment and management of markets, the word "market" was not defined in the Act. 

The gap provides a leeway for several interpretations of what a market is. In today's world, there have been a number of market settings that have sprung up, some of which are permanent, while others are makeshift, and these include street markets, roadside markets, mobile markets, car boot markets, open space, supermarkets, etcetera. Regulation of such markets that were not envisaged in the law, therefore, becomes impossible. 

The Bill seeks to provide a working definition of the word “market” and provide for the regulation of the market.

Most urban centres collect revenue in markets with a purpose of enhancing revenue and promoting expansion of markets. However, a lot of the time, revenue collection in markets is contracted out to private tax collectors, but there has been persistent poor performance in revenue collection despite the high costs of operation and maintenance associated with market facilities. 

This is because revenue collection by private contractors is mired in corruption and fraud thus leading to considerable loss of revenue by local governments to private tax collectors.

Non-regulation of tax collection also leads to exploitation of market vendors and thus eventual resistance from the taxpayers.

The Bill seeks to provide for regulation of the revenue collection in markets with a view of expanding markets and promoting revenue collection.

Section 2 of the Markets Act empowers the minister to make rules for carrying into effect the purposes of the Act. The Act however does not define or specify which minister is supposed to make these rules and so people are left to guess who is responsible. 

It should however be noted that when the Act was enacted in 1942, Uganda had the centralised system of governance and so it was the minister for trade who was responsible for such matters. 

However, when the decentralised system of governance was introduced in Uganda, the minister responsible for local governments took over the governance of local government affairs. There is therefore need to clearly specify which minister the Act is referring to.

The Bill therefore seeks to empower the minister responsible for trade and industry to make rules for the better carrying out into effect the purpose of the Act.

Whereas Government has constructed a few modern markets in a few districts within the country, many of the market structures that are still in existence were originally intended for a smaller number of vendors. 

However, with Uganda's fast growing population, there is an increasing number of vendors and the markets can no longer accommodate the increasing number of vendors and the markets are also very old and dilapidated. 

The Bill therefore seeks to provide sufficient space in markets, enhance the designs and layout of common market vending infrastructures such as lock-ups, stalls, warehousing, wholesale facilities and restaurants. 

There is also need to provide for private services providers such as banks, clinics, offices and day care centres for breastfeeding mothers.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Bakkabulindi three minutes.

4.11
MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for bringing such an important motion.

Madam Speaker, my colleague quoted Article 237 about the primary factor for production being land in the hands of citizens. She went ahead and quoted the Market Act of 1942, which is still active now, which was meant to satisfy a few hands of the colonialists.

However, Madam Speaker, as we talk now, things have changed; we are now talking of empowering the market vendors. Not only serving them and satisfying the interests of a few, we want to let them have a say in the market affairs. Let them have a say about land because some of them are partners. They have got land but they cannot establish the market because according to the current law, that is the responsibility of the Central Government or Municipalities.

We want the Market Management Committees to be fully involved themselves, not somebody else from outside to appoint the management of the markets. We want to see them being involved in the process of tendering, whereby contracting out of revenue collection is given by the people concerned.

Now, in the current situation, somebody comes from outside; any businessman can be given such a contract and he generates a lot of money, while the people we have in the market can easily do the same job and get that money.

Therefore, in this coming Bill, these issues are going to be addressed.

Madam Speaker, my colleague has mentioned different types of markets, which used not to exist. She talked of the fixed markets, mobile markets open markets and car boot markets, which you have been seeing along the streets.

However, the most important thing is as we have different types of markets, the issue of hygiene is not being addressed. For instance, there is a market across Parliament, as you go to the railway. It normally operates on Tuesday and when it is a day for that market, you will not differentiate the street and where people are supposed to pass. At the end of the day, people spend the whole day there, but there is no provision for toilets. Then one wonders, where is the hygiene for such markets?

Not only that, sometime back the minister created a KCCA Ordinance some few years and thanks to God, it has not started operating. To me, it was discriminative. It was looking at Kampala alone and yet this Parliament is soon passing a law where most of the areas like Masaka, Mbale and Mbarara will be cities. Now shall we be passing laws for Mbarara and Mbale? Why don’t we come with a comprehensive law that will cater for all the markets in the country?

Madam Speaker, without wasting time, I therefore emphasize the need for a comprehensive policy or law on markets to guide on the issues of management and other related issues and I request the members to support so that our people - the market - vendors can be liberated and also get some money that can look after their families. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mwiru, but do not go into the merits of the Bill.

4.15
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Madam Speaker, markets are for indigent persons. It was a government policy that indigent persons would benefit from these markets but we have been seeing a paradigm shift in terms of operations. 

When markets were built by Government, we saw people who were not indigent striving for space in these markets. I saw it in Jinja and in Owino. As a result, indigent persons who were intended to benefit from these markets were left out. As a result, some indigent persons rent from well-to-do people. I do not know if, in this House, there are colleagues who own stalls in Owino and in some of these markets, which were constructed by Government. 

I support this motion because we should free the neo-compradors; those who have got money from whatever source to go and build their own markets. If you go to most of these markets, which were built by Government, you realise that most of the strategic stalls - When you ask who the owners are, they are well to do people. It has nothing to do with indigent persons.

That has forced ownership and I will give an example of Owino market. This was a Government market, which was supposed to be for the poor people but the President gave an order and it was given to NRM mobilisers in a presidential directive. They formed their association under SLOA and extinguished other indigent persons in the market. They raised the fees within the market and it has become very expensive for an indigent person to operate within the market. 

The other issue is chaos within these markets. When you look at section 1 of the Market Act, it leaves it upon Government to determine what should happen as far as management is concerned. We have seen RDCs interfering in the affairs of these markets, dictating who the leaders of the market should be. This has been taking place across the country; it happened in Jinja. We tried to intervene but when we looked at the law, it seemed like it put the mandate of coming up with leadership in the markets in the hands of Government. It has no procedure. 

The people who actually work within the market, the vendors, would wish to have their own leadership because it has other obligations, which relate to how the market should be managed. 

It is on those premises that I support the motion. I invite my honourable colleagues, more so my sister, hon. Nankabirwa, to support this motion. Thank you very much.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The member is seeking leave to introduce a Bill so that we can see what her proposals are. Of recent, we have been granting leave for people to bring their proposals so that we can discuss them substantively. 

I do not know whether we can continue entertaining justifications for a motion to seek leave, which is almost a right for a member. I do not know why we should not just put the question and grant her leave. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, sometimes this House has rejected the leave. 

4.20
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Worker’s Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Arising from what she has just mentioned, I would like to appeal to colleagues to allow our colleague to take leave and provide the Private Member’s Bill as entitled. 

This law is long overdue. You are also aware that a number of individuals are running private markets so it would be our appeal that a law be put in place so that these markets are monitored and they are able to provide safe working conditions for vendors and other people who use those markets.

In that regard, I would like to appeal to our colleagues to support this motion. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that leave be granted to hon. Rwabushaija to go and print the Bill and return for the first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 88/04/10 THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS

4.22
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): “On 20 September 2019, the Sudanese Government carried out an air raid in the Uganda Air Space causing loss of lives and property in Nacara village Ojapi Parish of Tara Sub-County in Maracha District.

A letter asking for compensation for victims of the raid was filed with State House, Kampala on 11 October 2014. The letter was responded to on 12th July 2016 and the matter referred to the Solicitor General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for further management.

    i) Why has the Solicitor General failed to act on this formal request from State House regarding the compensation claim by victims of the 1991 Ojapi Air Raid?

    ii) When will the victims of the infamous air raid be compensated?

    iii) How do you intend to ensure that such cases are expeditiously handled to avoid injustice in future?”

4.23
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank God that your voice is very clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kamuntu.

PROF. KAMUNTU: When you take a look at the question, it implies that the Sudanese Government carried out an air raid in September 2019 and that a letter asking for compensation for victims of the raid was filed in 2014. This implies that the victims were victims before the raid. It also implies that a letter responding to this went to the Solicitor-General in July 2016. 

As soon as I got this question, I contacted the Solicitor-General because of the complexity of this question. By the time I came, these facts had not been established. As soon as they are established, I will respond to the question. Otherwise, the information that this question contains could not be readily obtained because of this conflict. Thank you. 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was the one who submitted this question for oral answer and I would like to state the facts.

The air raid by the National Islamic Front, at the time, which was led by Gen. Ahmed Omar El Bashir took place on 20 September 1991. It is a typing error to say that it was “20 September 2019.” 

We are talking about three decades of anguish for victims of an air raid where our Uganda People’s Defence Force – let me say the air force for that matter – could not secure our air space. 

Ordinary people settled in a village called Nacara in Ojapi, Tara sub-county, by then in Arua District suffered significant losses in terms of life and property and some of them are crippled up to now. 

I am sure that colleagues like Gen. Katumba Wamala, who were in charge of the army at that time, will know the kind of impact an Antonov creates on local people. 

Indeed there were attempts made to seek redress and justice for these people. The corresponding letters were submitted. There was a claimants’ letter submitted to the Office of the President on 11 October, 2014 and it was replied to on 12 July, 2016. The claimants wrote another letter to the Solicitor-General on 11 December, 2016.

Madam Speaker, for the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to say that the he is still not acquainted with the facts of this matter, when our people have been waiting for justice for over three decades, is very unfair.

I seek a clarification from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs as to when he will bring a comprehensive statement on the actions that are being taken by the Solicitor-General and when these people will be compensated. Broadly, what measures has Government taken to ensure that we do not become victims of foreign aggression? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the crux of the matter is really about the failure of the Solicitor-General to act on the issue of compensation. Why has he not paid and when is he going to pay? That is what they are asking.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, now that the honourable member has clarified that the date is not “2019” but “1991” I will – on the basis of this clarification – come to the House with a detailed explanation on the state of affairs. If you give me a week, this will be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is really an old matter and the question has been with your ministry even before you went there.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The truth of the matter is that after I read this item on the Order Paper today, I went straight to the Solicitor-General. However, because of this confusion on the dates, he could not easily find the appropriate response. Now that the clarification has been made, I am going to come to the House with a full explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Can you give us an explanation by Thursday?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us go to the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING APPROVAL OF AMENDMENT OF THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING ACT, 2013

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to move a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament seeking approval of Parliament to amend the Second Schedule to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013.

The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Parliament enacted the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 to provide for the prohibition and prevention of money laundering; the establishment of the Financial Intelligence Authority and Financial Intelligence Authority Board, in order to combat money laundering activities; to impose certain duties on institutions and other persons, businesses and professions who might be used for money laundering purposes; to make orders in relation to proceeds of the crime and properties of offenders; to provide for international co-operation in investigations, prosecution and other legal processes of prohibiting and preventing money laundering; to designate money laundering as an extraditable offence, and to provide for other related matters; 

AND WHEREAS under the Second Schedule to the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, a list of accountable persons was provided to facilitate the combatting of money laundering; 

AND WHEREAS Section 139(2) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 provides that the minister responsible for finance may, with the approval of Parliament and by statutory instrument, amend the list of accountable persons in the Second Schedule by adding to the list any person or category of persons if the minister reasonably believes that that person or category of persons is used, or is likely to be used in the future, for money laundering purposes; 

AND WHEREAS the minister responsible for finance proposes that a resolution should be passed by Parliament to give approval to amend the Second Schedule relating to accountable persons to include virtual asset providers; 

AND WHEREAS the minister responsible for finance, in accordance with Section 139(3) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013 consulted the Financial Intelligence Authority Board, which agreed with the minister's proposal to amend the Second Schedule relating to accountable persons to include virtual asset providers; 

AND WHEREAS the minister responsible for finance, in accordance with Section 139(3)(b) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, by notice in the Gazette, gave the persons to be affected by the proposed amendment at least sixty days' notice to submit written representations to the minister and no such person submitted any representations to the minister; 

NOTING THAT virtual asset service providers are natural or legal persons who conduct one or more of the following activities for or on behalf of another natural or legal person – 

    (i) exchange between virtual assets and fiat currencies; 
    (ii) transfer of virtual assets; 
    (iii) safekeeping or administration of virtual assets or instruments enabling control over virtual assets; and
    (iv) participation in or provision of financial services related to an insurer's offer or sale of a virtual asset; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. That in accordance with Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Parliament in accordance with Section 139(2) of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013, approves the proposal by the minister responsible for finance to amend the Second Schedule of the Anti-Money Laundering Act, 2013.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development published in the Gazette his intention to amend the schedule and from what the minister has said, there is no objection. Therefore, I now put the question -

MR KALULE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to what the minister has asked Parliament to allow him amend. However, in his statement, he does not tell us whether he is removing certain companies or individuals or he is adding other people on that list. May I be assisted to know what he really has in mind by the kind of amendment he is asking for?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the Gazette that you published?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I do not have the Gazette here but maybe to inform members that what we are trying to add on the schedule are service providers like the people who are providing cryptal currencies. Otherwise, the people who are operating on the internet but they cannot be traced and the law does not capture them. Now, it is possible to trade in these assets without physical presence. We are saying we need the legal backing to be able to capture, if there is anything wrong taking place.

Madam Speaker, it is as simple as that. It is virtual assets providers. An example that we all know is that it is possible for one to trade on a Stock Exchange in New York in cryptal currencies without having an office in Uganda. That can be used in a way to do money-laundering; to clean up money when – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, this Government has not even recognised cryptal currency. We have always suffered here and complained about Bitcoin and Cryptal Currency yet our central government is very clear. They have not provided modalities for its operation and they have not accepted whether it should be used for legal exchange. Is the minister therefore in order to make us make a law in anticipation of what they are not yet allowing to operate in this country? 

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to request the minister to explain under which rule he is moving this amendment.

Secondly, the minister should tell us whether Cryptal Currency is now something legal or illegal so that we as we proceed, we know. That is the clarification I am seeking from the minister, who is my good friend.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like know something. Would a trader sitting at Lake Bunyonyi understand this to mean Cryptal Currency? Would an ordinary Ugandan understand this to mean Cryptal Currency?

MR BAHATI: To begin with the question raised by the Speaker, there is no other way that we could describe these assets that are operated on the internet other than using the term “virtual assets”. That is what is appropriate.

Regarding the question raised by hon. Abala, even if we have not got a legal regime to regulate cryptal currencies, we know that there are countries, which have accepted them. Someone can use –since we are required to collaborate with the organisations that we belong to, to fight anti-money laundering, they can use the cryptal currency even when there is no law regulating it here. However, they can use it in Uganda to steal people or use it for purposes of anti-money laundering.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the motion has been accepted and we are debating it now properly. I think I am in a way justifying the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know whether the term “virtual asset” is defined in the parent law? 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development grapples with the definition of “virtual assets” you have asked the first question that is important.

If the minister wants to convince this House that it has been for the matter of cryptal currency and Ponzi Schemes that is his justification for the introduction of this as part of the schedule that we have, I think he should come out expressly so that the whole country knows that these are the steps one should follow when dealing in matters of electronic money transfers or transactions.

As Parliament, we have always been here demanding from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come out with a legal framework that must regulate that space of trade but they have sat back. Now, you come to Parliament asking us to join you in defining something that was not defined as part of the parent law. Unless we have a definition of what we call the “virtual assets” like the Speaker is trying to ask you to come with, we cannot come up in the schedule because it would be ambiguous. That is why you even said “and related...” 

Madam Speaker, we cannot legislate in anticipation. You will use that bracket to curtail people from innovating, trading or creating financial solutions. So, try not to be vague if you really want our support.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is a matter that requires some examination. We would like to see a copy of the Uganda Gazette in which it was published and submit the matter to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for scrutiny and then report back before we can take a decision. Is that okay?   

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, there is a point I raised regarding the rule under which the minister was raising the motion but he has not given his response to me. This will bring us all together as we operate. Under which rule is the minister moving this motion?

MR MPUUGA: Thank you very much. Hon. Bahati is usually smart. I have never seen him this shabby and looking as though he is here to settle a personal score with some individuals. I think he can benefit from your wise guidance.

I thought initially too that this proposal can benefit from wider consultations. It does seem that he knows something about particular dealings that are not defined in our laws. Therefore, I think he needs to go back so that we can assist him properly define what he wants to achieve, which we can achieve together.

Madam Speaker, I suggest that and like you have guided, maybe there are people he is aware of that need to be involved in the consultations.

I remember raising a red flag sometime last time about cryptal currency, to which he did assent that they are actually operating without any law. Could it be that the minister could even think of shelving this and instead go back to come up with a clear law on these financial space so that we move properly. Otherwise, right now, we are moving back and forth. There is something we are not hitting yet the minister has decided to surround it a bit; he has hit it a bit and then go back and hit a bit. Maybe he could think of going to hit the problem because there are many virtual assets including planets and other things in the virtual space. Even technology is virtual asset. So, what are you trying to arrest, honourable minister?

You could benefit from the guidance of the Speaker that we go to the committee and arrest the problem together. We shall help you, honourable minister. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I moved under rule 55 regarding motions. The fact that the Speaker has given us this important window of going back to iron out this; we thank you. After all, I saw the Attorney-General not coming out to support me, so I take the window.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO EURO 300 MILLION (EURO THREE HUNDRED MILLION) FROM STANBIC BANK (U) LTD AND EURO 300 MILLION (EURO THREE HUNDRED MILLION) FROM TRADE DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE BUDGET DEFICIT FOR FY 2019/2020

4.46
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to present the report of the committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to € 300 million from Stanbic bank (U) Ltd and the same amount from the Trade Development Bank to finance the budget deficit for FY 2019/2020.

Before I proceed to present the report, I would like to lay the following documents on the Table:

    1. The brief to Parliament by the minister of finance on the proposal to borrow € 600 million.
    2. The report of the committee on National Economy on the proposal.
    3. The minutes of the meetings, which were held to consider the proposal.
    4. The Cabinet minute extract approving the request
    5. The letter from the President from the minister of finance seeking for consent to the loan.
    6. The debt financing proposal by Absa Bank Uganda Ltd and financing consideration by Citi Bank and the Trade Development Bank condition for financing the loan.
    7.  The expression of interest, budget support financing terms from Stanbic Bank.
    8. The certificate of approval of environmental impact assessment from NEMA. I beg to lay those documents I have referred to in this file.

I would like to thank my colleagues with whom we worked together in scrutinising this loan. It is rather an unusual loan and we had to put in more energy to be able to do justice to it.

Introduction  

Article 159 of the Constitution provides that Government may borrow from any source, and the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament. 

In addition, Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 20l5 (PFMA) authorises the Minister of Finance to raise money by loan and to issue guarantees for and on behalf of Government.

On 5 December 2019, a Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to €600 million of which €300 million from Stanbic Bank (U) Ltd and €300 million from Trade Development Bank to finance the budget deficit for FY 20l9/2020, was presented to Parliament and referred to the Committee of National Economy and the committee wishes to report as follows:

Methodology 

The committee reviewed six documents enlisted under paragraph 1.1. Parliament approved Shs 40,487.9 billion for expenditure in the current financial year. The budget was to be financed through domestic revenues amounting to Shs 20,448.73 billion. 

External Financing was supposed to be Shs 9,433.57 billion, local revenues and Appropriation in Aid was projected at Shs 387.01 billion; interest payments amounting to Shs 10,585.15 billion. 

With regard to external funding, budget support loans were approved up to Shs 575 billion and according to the National Budget Framework Paper of 2020 - 2025 which was presented last week, the approved budget for Financial Year 2019/2020 was projected to have a budget shortfall of Shs 2,018 billion on account of lower projected domestic revenues amounting to Shs 1,478 billion and projected grants of Shs 540 billion and these are broken down in Table 1.

With regard to performance for the period June to October 2019, overall revenue collections amounted to Shs 5,467.78 billion against a projection of Shs 6,071.07 billion creating a deficit of Shs 603.69 billion in the first quarter. 

By the end of November 2019, the collections had increased to Shs 6,910.8 billion against a target of Shs 7,592.3 billion registering a deficit of Shs 681.76 billion in the second quarter.

The committee was informed that to facilitate budget execution for half-year of the current year, Government received some budget support grants, acquired an advance from Bank of Uganda and borrowed from the domestic market in line with the approved fiscal framework.

With regard to spending, by half year, 56 per cent of the amount projected had been disbursed and this is indicated under table 2.

Despite the approved supplementary expenditure by the minister, the loan request indicates that the current financial year budget has additional expenditure pressures amounting to Shs 1,432.02 billion for security, classified expenditure, wage shortfalls, counterpart funding obligations for projects and emergencies. 

The loan request is based on the expected revenue performance for the financial year and non-receipt of the World Bank budget support loan and unrealised capital gains, which was projected.

It is worth noting that the primary deficit has been the major factor contributing to the increase in Uganda's debt in recent years.

Madam Speaker, moving to compliance, the draft financing terms for Stanbic Bank and Trade Development Bank were submitted in compliance with the Parliamentary Approval Guidelines for the loan requests. On consistency of the expenditure with the country strategy, the loan request is within, since it is approving what was already provided for in the approved budget. 

On the financing budget deficit, the total loan request is Euros 600 million to cater for the projected budget shortfall in the budget for the current year to be financed by borrowing externally from the two banks, which I have alluded to: Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited and Trade Development Bank, formerly the PTA Bank. 

According to the brief to Parliament on the loan, the projected URA revenue shortfall on the approved budget for the current year is Shs 1,873.55 billion. Non-receipt of World Bank budget support funds of Shs 375 billion and non-realisation of capital gains tax of Shs 225 billion brings the total shortfall to the figure, which I have already alluded to. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered a number of financing options. The brief to Parliament indicates that Government considered the option of domestic borrowing but this would have the problem of crowding out the private sector, which is the cause of high interest rates on the market. If this money was borrowed from the market, interest rates would have gone up because the banks would have got a super borrower and therefore, they would not mind about ordinary borrowers. This would deny the market money for growth. 

In addition, Government would borrow from the domestic market at a very high rate because the rate would be around 14.85 per cent for a 10-year bond and 15.1 per cent using a five-year bond. These interest rates are too high and super commercial. 

It is observed that the approved domestic borrowing had already increased from Shs 534.9 billion in the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2019/2020 to Shs 2,830.9 billion in the approved budget. Also, domestic financing has been on the increase in the recent past. 

This increase implies that over the years, the economy is going to be denied resources that could have been used for production to support growth due to the high interest rates sustained by domestic borrowing as the banks prefer lending to Government than the private sector. 

In comparison of loan financing terms for the four banks – they approached four banks - the comparison, which led to choosing Stanbic Bank and Trade Development Bank are indicated in Table 4. 

According to the indicative terms of the loans contained in Tables 5 and 6, the two loans are on commercial terms; they are not concessional. The general terms of the two loans require the submission to the bank of the Attorney-General’s unqualified legal opinion certifying that the financing agreement has been duly executed and ratified and is legally binding on the Republic of Uganda after receipt of evidence of approval of the loan terms by Parliament. Those terms apply to the two loans.

However, the loan from Trade Development Bank carries another condition, which has to be fulfilled; a list of approved infrastructure projects to be funded under the infrastructure because the Trade Development Bank prefers much of their money to go to finance infrastructure projects.

Madam Speaker, on implementation, once approved, the loan will be disbursed to the Consolidated Fund. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will be responsible for ensuring that funds are properly utilised to finance the current budget as approved by Parliament and accountability thereof provided to Parliament in line with the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act, 20l5, as amended.

It is estimated that as a share of rebased GDP, the budget deficit will increase from seven per cent to nine per cent of the approved budget. It is slightly higher than the EAC convergence criteria. Nonetheless, it is within the aggregate convergence criteria of 50 per cent because after this, it will stand at 36 per cent.

As at end of June 2019, the debt stock was Shs 47,063.23 billion. With this addition, it will go up by two per cent. On debt sustainability – as I have already indicated – it is still within the debt sustainability criteria.

Adherence to the Public Debt Management Framework, 2018

The committee observed that the Public Debt Management Framework, 2018 outlines the principles of acquisition and utilisation of public debt between 2018/2019 and 2022/2023. Government shall continue to pursue concessional borrowing as the preferred means of meeting external financing. 

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that this loan request before Parliament is a unique case because it supports both recurrent and development expenditure whereas our preference is borrowing for development. 

The committee therefore recommends that Government should adhere to the Principles of Acquisition and Utilisation of Public Debt as well as the guidelines for borrowing set out in the Public Debt Management Framework, 2018.

On tax administration, it was noted that tax administration is not supporting the economy. The committee noted that the current tax administration by URA is contributing to low revenue collections as opposed to supporting the economy to grow. In fact, it is the reason why we are borrowing otherwise, if they were performing well, our borrowing would be quite minimal. We would not be borrowing for recurrent expenditure.

In spite of Government investing heavily in tax administration, for the last 10 years, tax to GDP ratio has not grown within the desired level of 0.5 per cent per annum. This has contributed to the need to borrow to finance the budget deficit. 

Taxes tend to focus on the small formal sector that is heavily taxed and yet high taxes do not necessarily imply higher tax revenues. Some of these small businesses have been overtaxed and as a result, some of them have collapsed.

The mode of administration has been associated with unfair taxation and discrimination towards some taxpayers, especially importers and those who are honest and pay their taxes regularly. If you pay your taxes regularly, you become a candidate for permanent follow up and unfair taxes.

This has made some of the affected importers to close their businesses, hence slowing down the growth of the economy. This has also affected the job market and job creation.  

Madam Speaker, customs tax should be one of the sources of revenue. However, because importers are overtaxed, many of them have pulled out of businesses. Some of them are now in real estate, which has created a new problem on the market. They are constructing houses, which cannot be rented because the would-be tenants cannot afford them.

In addition, URA has made some statements regarding taxes and retracted them within a short time, creating economic instability. There has been inconsistency. Today, they make this statement and after two days, they retract it and that has eroded the confidence in the tax body.

Further, the committee noted that the Domestic Revenue Mobilization Strategy, which was finalised by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in the first half of this year, had a number of policies, which were developed but have not been operationalised. They lie on paper yet it was urgent to operationalise them. 

The committee recommends that Government should provide a formal statement on the operations of Uganda Revenue Authority to Parliament within one month. We need to know what is going on. We cannot continue with this set of affairs. 

Further, the Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy that envisages increasing domestic revenues by at least 0.5 per cent of GDP every financial year should be implemented to reduce on the need for borrowing to support the budget and rather limit loans to specific projects.

The committee observed that the budget deficit has been on the increase in the past few years consistent with the country planning framework that frontloads infrastructure development in the medium term. As a result, the growth rate of debt to finance the budget deficit has been high in the past few years because the infrastructure projects take a long time to pay back, many of them start servicing before they yield dividends.

The committee recommends that Government should develop strategies for reducing the cost of public expenditure. Government should also halt the creation of new administrative units that increase pressure on the meagre resources thereby reducing on the fiscal space or if it is important to have them, let them be staggered out to be implemented as revenue improves. 

On the projected budget shortfalls, the committee noted that the total loan request is €600 million to cater for the projected budget shortfall in the budget for the current financial year. The projected budget shortfall arises from what I have already alluded to. There is a shortfall in tax collection and unrealised grant from the World Bank and unrealised capital gains tax.

However, the committee notes that these project shortfalls may be realised later in the financial year. If that luck comes, the committee recommends that if these funds are realised in the current financial year, they should be ring-fenced for early repayment of the loans we are taking now. 

Additional financing funding pressures in the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020

The committee observed that the loan request of €600 million is to cater for the projected resource shortfalls on the approved budget of the current financial year. 

The committee recommends that Government should rationalise available resources in the current financial year while strengthening domestic revenue mobilisation, to ensure there is no further need to borrow in order to support the budget for the current financial year. We know that in this financial year because the budget is heavily loaded with the election budget, we need to rationalise elsewhere to ensure those constitutional activities take place without necessarily causing new borrowing pressure.

Should need arise for additional borrowing for budget support, this should be purely on concessional term. I would like to repeat this to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that the borrowing should be on concessional term. Please save us the agony of borrowing on commercial terms.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that due to the pressures I have alluded to and the failure to realise what was projected, the request be approved subject to the recommendations herein. I beg to move. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary one-third of the Members. You are free to make your comments. (Mr Atiku rose_) Is it a point of procedure or you are going to contribute?

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the committee but I raised before the committee that I would present a minority report. We worked on this report until last week –

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know if you actually filed a minority report because it is supposed to be attached to the main report. 

MR ATIKU: That is why I rise on a matter of procedure to beg for your indulgence. 

Madam Speaker, the minority report should have been uploaded yesterday but I was not feeling well. I did not meet the Clerk of the committee to hand it over to be uploaded. However, I have it here. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the chairperson of the committee aware that there is a minority report? 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, there was talk about it but along the way, it seemed like they had dropped it. We brought it to the attention of the Members that we were going to upload the report but the minority report was not there. Maybe, as he stated, he came today when it was already late. The main report was uploaded on Thursday last week.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should really respect our Rules of Procedure. If you intend to move a minority report, inform the chairperson of the committee and attach it so that as the main report is being presented, there is a minority report too.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, if the report was uploaded on Thursday yet the clerk called me yesterday, then there is something wrong. Otherwise, the minority report is here signed by four people who have a dissenting opinion on the majority report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I cannot go to check what the clerk of the committee did because that is not my business. Let us proceed. 

You can assign Members to contribute on that issue. Otherwise the main report has been signed by the minimum one-third. Can we have your views, honourable members?

5.13
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, honourable colleague, for the report you presented. However, I beg to disagree with you. Your findings and observations were good but your recommendations are terrible.

For us to engage into borrowing of a commercial loan, as a Government - and we sit here as legislators to approve that the same Central Government competes with the private sector in borrowing in the same economy - is a vote of no confidence in the operations of the central bank. If no one can trust the Treasury Bills and Bonds of the Central Bank and not even the banks which it lends money to when they have run out of cash, then who will respect the scores of our own Government? Who will comfortably come to invest in Uganda where the Central Government competes with the private sector?

And like you rightly said, the players who are the commercial banks will comfortably lend Government and leave out the private sector. Therefore, in an economy that we want private-sector led and on the other hand we are advocating for the same Government to compete with a small business player to borrow the same money to fund their projects is very absurd.

I would like to imagine a small farm owner coming up to borrow and compete with Government for the same funds. Definitely Stanbic will choose Government. The only way that Government should acquire money should be by issuing Treasury Bills and Bonds, which the same banks can also come and pay for and in form of that Government can even earn interest from them. At the end of the day, it will raise the funds that you require.

Going back to the subject matter, the loan itself; commercial in nature as you can see. Interest rate 4.5 per cent per annum million euros; that means Ugandans shall foot a bill of not less than Shs 58 billion per annum as arrangement fees and you are borrowing from Stanbic.

Ladies and gentlemen, the arrangement fee is 1.75 per cent. What sort of arrangement fee is that being negotiated? That is Shs 21 billion for just arranging this loan. 

The negotiators were not only lazy, they were also poor and we cannot join them in acceptance of this commercial loan. It is inconceivable that we, members of Parliament, can sit here and discuss that we are going to borrow €300 million and that there is an arrangement fee from a bank that is a player here of Shs 21 billion and we also approve and give a nod of approval for such a loan.

If we want to draw money from Ugandans, we can explain to them that we have a shortfall of this and we want to increase taxes in order to get this money for this particular purpose. Not that Ugandans do not want to pay tax; the issue is to tell them why they should pay tax and where this money will be allocated.

If you say that we want to construct more technical schools, more referral hospitals, Stadia for sports or improve on their social health care, they will be with you. Just give them the justification and we shall pay. After all, we have been footing bills on electricity; more taxes have been engineered on petrol and fuel and we have accepted it. Just tell us what we should pay more to ring-fence this than sending us into commercial borrowing to compete with the private players and hence definitely kill the economy.

Finally, the issue they gave was that Uganda Revenue Authority is not performing. This Government has been saying that Uganda Revenue Authority has performed and even certain players in the Uganda Revenue Authority were due to share about Shs 12 billion as bonuses for having performed very well. This is a matter we are handling in COSASE and duly investigating.

Now, if you say Uganda Revenue Authority has been performing very well and the tax base has grown and they have been collecting good revenues and they are being paid good wages, why then do you come back to us? And in your report, you said Parliament shall task the minister to come and explain why Uganda Revenue Authority is now underperforming.

Your two statements are contradictory; you are giving the right diagnosis and right observation but you are saying we must commit the patient to die. We cannot join you in this. Therefore, -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Just to give information that it is true that in this Financial Year 2019/2020; Uganda Revenue Authority has not performed well. However, in the Financial Year 2018/2019, they surpassed the target that we gave them. According to the Uganda Revenue Authority Act, we are supposed to give the staff a bonus when they surpass the target and that is what happened and.

Therefore, the bonus that you are referring to is not for this financial year; it was for last year. However, this financial year, we are not performing well. That is the information I wanted to give you and – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You are saying we give a bonus when they have surpassed the target. What about when they have not hit the target? We have made a loss; aren’t we also supposed to penalise them for failure to hit their target?

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and I here worked in that organisation. When you hit the target, you are entitled to a bonus. However, it comes from that money where you have overshot. You do not have to come and borrow for it. That is where it automatically comes from. If you have said Shs 16 trillion and you get Shs 18 trillion; the bonus comes from Shs 2 trillion. That is how they used to give us the bonus.

MR BAHATI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi asked what happens if you do not perform well. That is what the committee is recommending; that there is need to do something about the current situation. However, when they perform well and surpass the target, they are rewarded and when they do not, they do not get the bonus. However, they are also under pressure to act.

Madam Speaker, it is also important to note that our revenue collection - and I want to explain this - is increasing but our Budget requirements are also increasing at a faster rate than the revenue increase. There is no other way - this bank that we are borrowing from is standard - the issue of the arrangement fees is a standard procedure. 

Even if at individual level you went to the bank, before a loan is dispersed to your account, you pay a certain fee from the same bank. Therefore, the bigger the amount of money, the more the service cost that you will pay. Thank you.

MR NSEREKO: In conclusion, I would like to persuade honourable colleagues in this House to reject this loan in order to protect the interest of Ugandans. As an august House and honourable members, we cannot sit here and be part of those that will be responsible for having accumulated debts; not only onto ourselves but also being responsible for having encouraged Government to compete alongside with the private sector in borrowing in the same commercial banks.

In any case, it even kills the regulatory principle as to why modern Governments do not borrow - (Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Muhammad Nsereko for what he has presented. However, he has consistently made a mistake. What he has said is not what I argued against. I said we are recommending borrowing from external sources because we do not want Government to borrow from the public to compete or overcrowd the private sector. That was very clear in my statement.

I also said that if Government competes with the private sector, the interest rates go up to the disadvantage of the private sector. That is why that route of borrowing from the public was one of the reasons we discouraged it. 

We recommended the option of borrowing externally so that our private sector can continue to borrow money –(Interruption)

Mr nsereko: Are you accepting this loan or not?

Ms bbumba: We are accepting it because of the desperate need - (Interruption) 

Mr nsereko: Madam Speaker, you can see that the information is not in good faith. When you kill the mother, definitely the child dies. That is what you have exactly said.

If you do not want to destroy your own economy that is responsible for not giving you the rightful amount of taxes, you should ask yourselves why the tax base is narrowing. It is narrowing because of your continued participation in borrowing from the same market. 

The banks cannot lend the business players in the private sector because Government is competing in the same market. At the end of the day, this will be as recurrent as a disease. 

Madam Speaker, it started with the cameras. He was here; we warned of the same when they borrowed from, I think, Standard Chartered Bank. We asked what the hurry was. At the end of the day, it has become a vice. We are killing our own private sector as Government takes over. 

Unless we stop this now – that is why I said that the committee gave the right prescription and diagnosis but they ended up saying, “continue killing the patient.”

The Speaker: Before I call hon. Acidri, I would like the honourable chairperson to explain to us what external borrowing means. You have talked about the €300 million from Stanbic Bank (U) Limited. Is that external borrowing?

Ms bbumba: Madam Speaker, this money is going to be borrowed externally –(Interjections)– Stanbic Bank is global. Stanbic Uganda is the arranger. I have been very clear in my statement that Government is avoiding borrowing locally.

If we were borrowing locally, we would borrow in shillings but this is in dollars. Anyway, I think I have been misunderstood but the borrowing is external. It is not from the local market.

5.27
Mr james acidri (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When hon. David Bahati told me that we should support this loan, I thought it is a good loan –(Interjections)- that is not necessary.

First, I have never heard of the Committee on National Economy bringing us a loan that they have rejected. They will always bring reasons around the loan and it finally finds its way to the Floor of the House.

When will this committee ever tell us, “We rejected this loan at committee stage because we feel it is not worth proceeding with?”

Madam Speaker, on 12 June 2017, the President clearly said that he does not want loans, which will not add value to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Recently, the President said that we must only borrow for critical funding. He outlined national infrastructure, railway construction, electricity generation, irrigation schemes and strategic roads as the core areas of consideration for borrowing.

From the report presented, we have been told that we are borrowing because of expenditure pressure. The pressure outlined includes security, classified expenditure and wages. These are not the priorities that the President stated when we were trying to think about borrowing in this country.

We are now borrowing to fix a chronic fiscal deficit. These problems are structural and are within our budget. We all know that we continue to pursue a luxurious expenditure when our resources are limited. When will Government ever come up with a clear restructuring plan where we had proposed to merge the different ministries and agencies among others? When will we come up with that plan in order to cut down on expenditure? When are we going to deal with the critical areas that tend to increase our expenditure in delivery of services in this country? 

It looks to me like we are not handling the real problem. If we are having difficulties increasing revenue, then we should not have difficulties in reducing the expenditure such that we fit within our means.  This is where this Government must come out clearly. We should cut down all wasteful expenditure and fit within our means so that we avoid borrowing that will become a burden to the future generation.

I am very reluctant to support this loan because I believe it is not following the guidelines that were issued by the chief executive of this country.  Thank you.

Mr mugume: Madam Speaker, I would like this to be on record.

The Speaker: Maybe you will inform hon. Mbabaali. There is nobody on the Floor.
 
5.31
Mr mbabaali muyanja (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. I would like to thank the committee for its elaborate report. They have raised some pertinent issues regarding Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) tax collections, which must be observed.

Today, Uganda’s economy is growing at 6.5 per cent, which is very high. Given that scenario, the GDP has been raised to almost Shs 34 billion. That means that URA must collect taxes on the percentage of GDP but not less than what it is now.

We should be looking at better avenues of cutting down and expanding the base for tax. We should widen the tax base by URA going outside the normal traditional taxpayers. If need be, we can cut down – (Interruption)

Mr gume: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my friend for giving way. I would like to inform my colleague that we are discussing borrowing for a budget that has been approved; so, it does not arise for Members to observe that we are being luxurious. We are the people who approved the budget and the borrowing is coming to supplement a shortage in income. That is my information. 

MR MBABAALI: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, if need be, to widen the tax base, I feel the tax holiday given to investors can be reduced to sizeable years rather than five years. You can reduce it to three years because the economy has moved forward. Uganda Revenue Authority should observe the recommendations of the committee. I rest my case.

5.35
MR MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the chairperson of the committee to understand that by merely saying that Stanbic is global and therefore, they are borrowing from external sources, is not correct.

Stanbic has only one parent company. The rest of the Stanbic branches you are talking about are mere subsidiaries; branches. When they come to prepare their consolidated statement of financial position, they will only have one statement. Therefore, the question of deceiving us that Stanbic is global and we are, therefore, borrowing from external sources does not make sense. 

I, therefore, would like to make her understand that we also know what she is talking about and she should not over assume that she is speaking a different language that we do not understand. This is the same language we understand –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give him is that in the methodology, it is very clear that they met four banks including Stanbic Bank, Citi Bank and Absa. This means that they did not fly to South Africa. They met Stanbic officials from Uganda and not anywhere else. For the chairperson to say that it is global or external is a typical lie.

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, I am not against this borrowing. However, what I want us to understand is whether it is external or internal because the two are different and operate quite differently; their requirements are quite different. If we are deceived here, we would make a wrong decision and at the end of the day, we would throw our own people into trouble.

I support –(Interjection)– yes, I swear. Unless, we do not understand what we are talking about but internal and external borrowing are different. 

Therefore, I want us to say whether it is external or internal so that we understand clearly what we are going to get committed to because we are not committing ourselves but the entire country. It is not only for those currently around but even those who will be born in the future. Thank you.

5.38
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three brief issues to raise to the chairperson and the minister concerning this borrowing.

Madam Speaker, the report alludes to the Public Debt Management Framework 2018, as amended. If you look at the whole spectrum of loans that we have considered this financial year, you are not sure whether the reference is to the old framework of 2013 or the amended one. 

We need to be guided on where the cut off was between the 2013 framework and the amendment so that we can know what we are dealing with because there is a likelihood of confusing the approach to this borrowing.

Similarly, Madam Speaker, the report alludes to sustainability. I am made to understand that under sustainability, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not include domestic arrears as part of public debt. The minister will clarify. If this is the case, our indebtedness is being under declared and there could be a very big problem at some stage, if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development believes that domestic arrears are not part of domestic debt. When we are paying them, they are considered under the Budget and we also borrow to pay some of them.

Therefore, we need to understand whether the minister has since shifted the definition of public debt to something else that we do not know and guide us on why and how they want to consider domestic arrears.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the debate about internal borrowing and how it is clouding out private investment draws me to believe that there is a problem with our Special Drawing Rights (SDR). I think it is high time the minister came to the Floor of Parliament and made a statement on the position of our SDR. Why are we going for commercial borrowing if our SDR is in a safe position?

Madam Speaker, our SDR is the premise we use to go for multi-lateral borrowing, which is ordinarily friendly, long term and gives us room to do perspective planning and financing. What is the position of our SDR?

Madam Speaker, I would like to insist that the minister should come to Parliament and give us the position on our SDR. I am very sure the chairperson is well abreast with the language I am using. We would not be discussing domestic borrowing as a constraint now if our SDR was safe because it is the safest source for us, as a poor country.

You get the sense that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is borrowing from street moneylenders. The conditions are problematic. Maybe the committee should interest itself in investigating the depth and the safety of our SDR so that the conversation about domestic borrowing, which is again not understood as being either foreign or local - We need clarity on these issues, Madam Speaker.

Finally, I would like to invite the minister to go back and re-think the reasons they gave in withdrawing the Liberalisation of Social Security Bill because you missed out on an opportunity to mobilise domestic savings locally. You need to go and revisit; that is why we are struggling.

In countries in East Africa where they have liberalised social security, domestic savings are very high and interest rates are low. I do not know whether when you do comparisons of economies and how they are performing, you go into the nitty-gritty of understanding the sources and why they reach the levels they are at, to be able to guide their citizenry that way. 

We are constrained, as private persons, because we are competing with Government in borrowing from banks. It is improbable that you can grow a private sector led economy when you are competing. Maybe Government should consider going back to invest directly like it was doing instead of living in denial and constraining those who are struggling to invest privately. 

I conclude by saying that this loan is problematic; it is steeped in convoluted language, it lacks clarity and I am constrained to support it.  I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Mpuuga, before he makes his conclusion. I would like Members to understand that the purpose for this borrowing is to support the appropriation that you passed. When you passed this appropriation, you passed the side of the revenue, which is estimate and you did not give the Executive cash but you gave us a go ahead to collect money. We have not been able to fulfil what you passed. There is, therefore, a shortfall, which is what we are talking about. 

The last is that we should understand that as we go to borrow - it would have been better if we got cheaper concessional terms but unfortunately – even at an individual level, there are banks one can go to and get a mortgage; there are banks that specialise in that but there are also banks that one can go to and gets an overdraft. Therefore, to say that we should go - given that we are left with only three months to the end a financial year - and get money from the World Bank or Exim Bank of China, is not possible. One cannot go to get an overdraft in a situation where they need a mortgage or a mortgage in a situation where they need an overdraft. 

Concessions have their own terms. One can borrow money from there to finance the social sector. Otherwise, one cannot go to the World Bank to borrow money for budget support; they are not specialised in that.

However, the terms that we have passed here of 4.5 per cent are the normal terms within which we have been borrowing at even with Exim Bank of China on concessional loans. Honourable members, you appropriated this budget. The people of Uganda are waiting to receive these services. Therefore, I urge you, especially the other side of the House, to please support this. It is to finance what you appropriated. Things like salaries. Do you want Government to be stuck in three months?

MR MPUUGA: First of all, do not blackmail the other side of the House. We speak the same language as a House. 

Secondly, we agree that we passed the budget but we did not send you to street money lenders. We sent you to do prudential financial management and proper planning. That is really what –(Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, the two banks from which we are recommending Government to borrow - the Trade Development Bank, formerly the PTA Bank, a bank owned by African countries and Stanbic Bank – are some of the reputable multi-national banks in the world. 

Is hon. Mpuuga in order to call these two banks street money lenders, something which can affect their credibility and cause a run on those two banks, by their customers? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the banks in question are well known. One was created by an Act of the COMESA and the other is a bank supervised by the Bank of Uganda; they are not street banks. The Member is out of order. 

5.47
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need to debunk some of the misinformation here. 

This Parliament was stampeded upon to pass a budget of Shs 40 trillion yet we approved a budget framework paper of Shs 34 trillion. There was a minority report in this House that pointed out that this would cause a problem in the future. The honourable minister here stood up and said that there would be no problem. However, we pointed out that from our collections, we would have Shs 20 trillion to service debts and in the budget, they said, we were going to borrow Shs 20 trillion. 

That budgetary and the physical indiscipline is now catching up with you, honourable minister and when we argue like that, you say, “the other side of the House…” yet this must be set clear.

Secondly, if you have, in your contemplation, that you are going to borrow to support your budget, that is done much earlier. This loan was introduced in the second quarter but then you did not tell us that you were foreseeing a shortfall of some amount of money and that you would need local borrowing. That is where the problem comes in. 

We are borrowing yet they are not telling us what the shortfalls are in specific figures. They only say that they are borrowing to support security and classified expenditures. 

Classified expenditures’ budget in this current budget year, which is about to end, shot from Shs 700 billion to Shs 3.2 trillion and we raised a lot of questions here. Why are we again borrowing unspecified figures to support the same sector? 

We are again saying that this borrowing is going to support wage shortfalls but it is not clear by how much. We are saying this borrowing is going to support Government’s commitment to counterpart funding. By how much, again it is not clear. 

This borrowing is also going to support emergencies. We have told the minister, most of the times that emergencies are the very reason, the framers of the Constitution, in their wisdom, created the Contingency Fund. How much money is in the Contingency Fund to take care of emergencies? How much of this, if we borrow, will go to that Fund? It is not clear who is going to manage this. 

Madam Speaker, I think this is unproductive borrowing. If it was going towards roads, for example, no road was done in the whole of West Nile in this financial year and in the National Development Plan III that has been approved; no road is going to be done in West Nile. 

Even the electricity that we are generating in Karuma - we have a station in Lwiyo that will take this power to Juba, not to West Nile. We are not going to be connected to the national grid. If in this request you had said that West Nile will be connected or that we will have these roads – give the Members some tangibility to take home. Short of that, this is just a consumption amount that we are not going to support. 

Let us look at the debt burden for Uganda. Even when we borrow for other sectors that can inspire economic development, right now we are at Shs 42.1 trillion. 

Let us look at the revenue to GDP ratio. The sub-Saharan standard is 18 per cent but Uganda is only at 12 per cent. Tell me that we are going to borrow and that we are going to repay this money within the period that we are supposed to.

We borrowed for the Entebbe Expressway and we said that while we collect the tolls, we shall pay back the Government of China. Tell me how much money we have collected up to today. 

Honourable members, we should stop Government from going for un-concessional loans. We must because that is not how governments operate. If you go for a loan, which is non-concessional and again take it in a sector which is not productive, then we are mortgaging this country to some people. I do not want to go deeper on how money exchanges hands in that committee. I can accuse you even on record here.

You wanted to borrow, Members refused and you still stampeded them to get the money. We should not allow this because short of that, there are people who are cutting deals. Now we have Mafias in loan issues. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, every one of us has an opinion to share and we should share it in a manner that is allowed in this House –(Interjections)- yes, we have heard this before. 

We are talking about a shortage as the committee report has stated. We have a revenue shortage of Shs 1.8 trillion. We anticipated that by this time, the MTN licence fees of Shs 375 billion would have been paid but it has not been paid. In the budget which we approved, we had also anticipated that the capital gains tax of Shs 200 billion from the oil company would have been paid but it has not been paid. We have a supplementary of Shs 437 billion. There are clear explanations. 

The issue of electricity load that the honourable member is talking about is part and parcel of this budget. Is the Member in order to allege that there are some monies moving around? Can he substantiate it on the Floor of this House? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anywarach, the allegations you have made are extremely serious. Can you substantiate on how money moves – from who to who and how much?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker that is the talk in the corridors everywhere –(Interjection)- that is why even hon. Acidri said the minister talked to him to come and support this loan[HON. MEMBER: “Information.”] I am not interested in that because it will water down my point –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. A point of order was raised and the Member requested that the honourable member substantiates his allegation. The Member has not substantiated but he has instead continued to tell the House that the information was in the corridors. 

This is House where Members have to raise issues that are substantiated – scientifically or clearly. Is it procedurally right for our colleague to raise such sentiments about Members of Parliament without substantiating and he continues to without withdrawing his allegation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if you have no evidence of who paid and received money, please withdraw the statement. Talk in the corridor is not evidence.

MR ANYWARACH: Let me allow information from hon. Acidri –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Madam Speaker, indeed before the House started, hon. Bahati asked me why I always oppose everything. I told him I oppose issues based on facts, not partisan approach. He requested me to support this loan because it is critical. It had nothing to do with money exchanging hands but he asked me to support this loan. He did this right here and the cameras can be able to show when we were discussing –(Interjection)- This is the information I wanted to give to the House.

Secondly, on a critical note, when we talk about questions such as where is the Contingency Fund –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not divert this debate. Members, I see nothing wrong with a minister – whose matter is coming – lobbying colleagues.

Hon. Anywarach, if you have no evidence about money moving hands, please, withdraw the statement.

MR ANYWARACH: I painfully withdraw it but I will talk to you in person –(Interjection)- Yes, I will. I am very confident about that –(Interjection)- Honourable member, I am the one submitting and I will be nailed myself; not you. I know what I am talking about. Do your research and stop interfering with me.

Madam Speaker, when we are borrowing loans, especially for budgetary support and moreover from our local banks, we must think of how we are stifling the business environment for businesspeople. If you go down town, you will find that businesspeople go to the banks and they are denied money –(Interruption)

MR BURUNDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I carefully listened to the honourable member’s submission. However, I was shocked to see that instead of the Member addressing the Chair, he was trying to attack hon. Mawanda. Is the Member in order to refuse to address the Chair and instead begin attacking hon. Mawanda?

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear what he was saying to the other Member. Please, conclude.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, it is even my first time to see that honourable member speak in this House –(Interjection)- when we stifle the business environment by competing with our own businessmen for the same loans they should go for – you go down town and you will find that businessmen are losing their property left, right and centre. It is in good spirit – (Interruption)

MR BURUNDO: Madam Speaker, it is on record that I spoke for the whole of last financial year, on the Floor of this Parliament, 17 times. It is not easy. (Laughter) Is it in order for the Member to insinuate and shame me before my electorates and Ugandans that I do not talk on the Floor of Parliament? Even now, I am addressing Parliament. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the benefit of the electorates in the highland of Elgon, I confirm that hon. Mungoma is a very active Member of this House. (Laughter) He has even moved motions here, especially on education. He is very active.

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, it really pains me for the honourable colleague to continue distorting the clear information I have given to this House. In my report, I clearly stated that we are avoiding Government borrowing externally because we do not want to stifle the private sector –(Interruption)

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Madam Speaker, the committee reported about the loan terms and conditions, under section 3.3, which is on page 6. Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is listed under section 3.3.1 of the report.

Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is operating in this market. We are going to borrow €300 million from Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited and the condition is submission to the Bank of Uganda the Attorney-General’s legal opinion certifying that the financing agreement has been dully executed and ratified as legally binding in the Republic of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable chairperson of the committee in order to continue denying that €300 million is going to be raised from a local bank? 

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to put this matter to rest. Where is the money coming from and who is the lender? 

MS BBUMBA: There are two banks; the Trade Development Bank, formally PTA, which we know well is a bank owned by African countries. The second is Stanbic Bank represented by their subsidiary as the arranger. Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is the arranger but money is coming from the consortium, which is located abroad.

Madam Speaker, for Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited to lend money of that magnitude, it has to be approved by Bank of Uganda. This money is outside the approval of Bank of Uganda. This is just the face of the multinational.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I am getting disturbed. You said that the borrowing is beyond Bank of Uganda’s mandate. Now, under whose mandate are you operating?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, for purposes of this process, it is important to note that the money is coming from two banks. One is Stanbic Bank and another is the bank that she has mentioned.

The local bank here – anyone can interpret it the way they understand. The local bank here is Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited that is arranging resources from the global bank to lend to government. What Parliament should do - according to the Constitution - is that we should look at the terms of the borrowing and the purpose for borrowing.

Madam Speaker, from section 3.3, you will see that from Stanbic Bank, we are getting €300 million. The maturity period is seven years, the grace period is two years and repayment period is five years at a rate of 4.5 per cent. This rate is within the terms of the commercial loans that we have approved before and it is what we are looking at. We do not want to complicate an issue that is straight forward. This is what Parliament is approving; the amount of money, the purpose for which it is being borrowed and the terms.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, you guided wisely when you asked the fundamental questions. The first was a cover up that we are not borrowing locally. The answer is that you are borrowing locally even though you are trying to cover it up. You are asking A to help you acquire money from B. You are actually borrowing from them. A is locally domained and controlled in Uganda. You cannot abdicate that. Like you said, one is a face. 

Secondly and most important, the honourable minister said the reason we are borrowing is that what we had expected from companies like MTN and oil companies have not been given. That is where the biggest challenge is. Is MTN outside the domain of control of the Ugandan Government? The answer is no. Who has failed to recoup this money from an operational company at the level of MTN with assets known all over the world that should lead Ugandans to borrow for the failures of a multinational company that collects over Shs 180 billion, every month, from the Ugandan economy? That Ugandans should sit here and borrow because MTN that collects over Shs 180 billion has failed to honour its commitment!

Madam Speaker, there is a big problem. If you fail to justify the reason you have failed to raise this revenue –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, we seem to be missing the point. There was a loan request for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to borrow €300 million from Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited.

Honourable colleagues, look at the committee report. It is titled, “Report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to €300 million from Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited and €300 million from the Trade Development Bank to finance the budget deficit”.

The two sources are clear. It is Trade Development Bank and Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited and even if you were to scrutinise the books of Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited, those accounts are different from wherever they raised the money. Therefore, it is not science; it is just basic legal sense. The lender is Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited.

Madam Speaker, the issue now is, does Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited have the authority to lend this money to Government without the approval of Bank of Uganda? Did the committee get that approval from Bank of Uganda? The chairperson of the committee has just told us that. Did you look at that approval by Bank of Uganda? No. If Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is not the lender, who is the lender and why isn’t that lender appearing in the report?

Before we go into the details of the merits, I think we need clarification on this. We do not even have to struggle. In law, companies are different from the shareholders. That is what we call corporate personality. It is possible to have a bank arrange finances because it happens all over. 

Banks can arrange finances but that does not mean that the people where the finances have come from are the lenders. The contract will certainly be between the Government of Uganda and Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited. May I, therefore, ask what the learned Attorney-General chambers approved? Did they approve the anonymous provider of the funds or Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd because that is the contract we are looking at? Let us not run away from the documentation. Those approvals have been laid before us. If so, can the clerk read to us whether it is Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd or any other institution, including the request to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the fundamental matter is what the honourable chairperson raised, that the local bank has no capacity to lend that money in its own right except with the Bank of Uganda. Therefore, did it get the authority to lend beyond itself and from whom did they get the mandate?

6.14
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not sure about the capacity of Stanbic Bank and whether it needed prior approval of the Central Bank. As far as I know, if the balance sheet of Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd can support the sum of money, they are completely within their rights to lend that money. They signed the contract, the agreement was approved and therefore, they had the capacity to lend that money. 

MR KATUNTU: The question is: Who is the lender? The chairperson of the committee has clearly stated on record that Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd is not the lender and yet all the documentation refers to Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd.

MR BAHATI: I would like to state that we are debating two different issues. The two banks where we are borrowing money from, as we have stated, are Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited and Trade Development Bank, to finance the deficit of the budget. The point that Members were talking about is a matter of economics, that when you get money locally from this bank, you, in a way, overcrowd the private sector to get money from the same bank. 

Yes, it is Stanbic Bank but it is coming with a syndicate of a number of financiers to raise money externally to lend it to the Government of Uganda. In other words, it is not -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to explain.

MR BAHATI: In other words, the point of saying we are overcrowding the private sector here by borrowing from Stanbic and Trade Development Bank does not arise. That is what the chairperson was trying to explain.

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that we do not complicate the matter through legalities. We are borrowing €300 million from Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd and €300 million from Trade Development Bank for purposes of supporting the deficit because of shortage of revenue and other reasons that I have given - (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Honourable minister, I can understand going to the Trade Development Bank to borrow but for Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd, which is local, are you telling us that our Government has become so incapacitated to the extent that they are not able to source external funding and have to resort to Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd? We have gone to China, European Development Bank and the Islamic Bank. Why Stanbic Bank when we have the capacity to reach out to others?

MR BAHATI: The point Members should understand is, whether you borrow from outside or inside, it is still borrowing. What is before this House are the terms and purpose for borrowing. That is what we are asking Parliament to approve; that is what the Constitution requires Parliament to do. There is nothing wrong with borrowing internally; we want money.

6.19
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter has now become a matter of opinion. On the documents introducing the motion, you have Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd. Even if this money was coming from heaven, the lender is Stanbic Bank Uganda Ltd.

If you look at page 5 of the report, one of the reasons we are seeking - The report I have has no page numbers but the committee reports that part of the reason for borrowing was non-receipt of the World Bank budget support loan. Why didn’t we receive the World Bank support loan? It is because there was a time when the World Bank was uncomfortable continuing lending to you and it gave reasons. 

You need to tell Parliament if you have not addressed those reasons and that is the point hon. Mpuuga was making. If you were borrowing and the World Bank had promised to lend you money but it has not and you start looking around the streets - that was deliberate figurative language. 

It is also very painful for the minister to begin blackmailing us each time he presents a loan request. This Parliament approved the budget when you were sure of the sources of financing, including the loan from World Bank that you did not receive. We approved the budget thinking that the sources you indicated were going to bring you money. 

If the money does not come, there are easier things to do but before I go to that, the committee reports additional expenditure pressures amounting to Shs 1.4 trillion. My understanding is that this money was not captured in the budget, so you cannot come here and tell us that we are still financing the budget as you presented it. You have already come here with supplementary requests. The chairperson notes that even with those supplementary requests that you brought, there is an additional pressure of Shs 1.4 trillion, which will finance classified expenditure. I do not know how the wage now becomes part of the additional pressure because I assume, honourable minister, that you had presented this in the budget. You are now talking about classified expenditure as additional pressure, something that was not in the budget.

Look at the budget, including the one that we are processing now, hon. Bahati. In this budget, interest on this money that you casually borrow is Shs 3.5 trillion. The interest you are going to pay on this money, which you keep in commercial banks and pick, is Shs 3.5 trillion. However, in the same budget, you are also invading the same banks to borrow.

We process a budget here and the country thinks that you have presented a budget of Shs 39 trillion when actually half of the budget is to pay one bank so that you can go and pick from another bank. That is what you are doing in the budget and you know it, hon. Bahati, because it has been raised to you in the Committee on Budget and all of us who have appeared before it. 

Therefore, I want to ask the minister to withdraw this loan request –(Interjections)– That is my opinion; even if you say, “Aaaah!” We do not share an opinion. (Laughter) I thought that was the reason I was allowed by the Speaker to speak. You can support it one hundred per cent but I am saying, we should not and I do not support it. (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague, hon. Ssemujju Nganda, is that as Parliament, during the process of going through the budget and budget performance, we have had sectors reporting budget cuts. They keep reporting how they failed to execute certain projects because the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never gave them money, or that they failed to achieve certain goals because the ministry never released the budget for a particular activity.

It seems our sectors across are comfortable with the behaviour at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What is at stake this time around that they must look for money, even if it means going to a commercial bank in Uganda? The honourable minister must tell this Parliament what is at stake. He keeps saying, “we will have no money for your salaries if you do not approve this loan” but we feel that is not convincing enough.

Madam Speaker, if we move on with this, we would have started a precedent that every time there is a budget shortfall, we rush to a commercial bank to borrow, which will be very unfortunate.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to say, Attorney-General, remember when it came to the loan for the developer of the Lubowa Hospital, the first opinion was that on that one, they could hurry and they did not need parliamentary approval. I think along the way, someone told them that Parliament is full of people who are wise and then they said, “No, no; we now need it.”

When hon. Bahati brought the loan request here, he said, “We made commitments; there are fines.” Even before you came here for approval, you were already telling Parliament about the fines. It is not proper that each time you come here, you put Parliament at gunpoint to approve borrowing because if you remember, at that time it was not financing the budget –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI:  My friend, hon. Ssemujju, I do not know what is happening this afternoon - (Laughter) - for you to really say that I put Parliament at gunpoint, yet I moved a motion here officially, which was referred to a committee of Parliament. 

The committee has had this motion for almost two months now. Is it in order for my friend, hon. Ssemujju, to say that I have put Parliament at gunpoint, when actually I do not even have that capacity? I do not have the capacity to force Parliament. The motion is being debated, it has overwhelming support, there are also people opposing it and it is moving on very well. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Bahati does not have a gun. (Laughter) He has brought the matter for debate and we are exchanging views on the same in a friendly manner. He is out of order.

Honourable members, I was looking at the documents. It is indicated that Stanbic Bank is the mandated lead arranger. The documents indicate the lenders on record as Stanbic Bank Uganda and/or Standard Bank of South Africa and other lenders invited by the mandated lead arranger. So, Stanbic Bank is an arranger and is the one looking for the other friends to come and support. That is what they are doing.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, where they are arranging the money from, which we are going to pick from Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited, actually does not change my opinion on this money. This is because usually, for all loans, we do not first ask the bank where the money will come from; they usually arrange.

However, the point I was making - hon. Bahati, sorry, I am a student of communication and communication is not straight – is that for almost every loan request you bring here, it is as if the world depends on its passage. I referred to the one of Lubowa. You brought it when there were already commitments made. You told Parliament that if we did not pass it, we would be in trouble. That is the point I was making and I know you knew it but you simply wanted to spice the debate.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, if you look at the domestic refinancing, even if you are now borrowing from South Africa, you simply go back to the budget - Domestic refinancing is Shs 7.3 trillion, yet we already owe these banks money. So, we go and take one sack to one bank and then go and pick another. The banks have become lazy because who would not want to lend to Government?

You are stifling the economy but blaming Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) for not collecting revenue. Who are they going to collect from? Businesses are closing. When it comes to MTN, you cannot go and close it but the smaller businesses that are being closed by URA are many. They cannot repay their loans but they also cannot get money to finance their operations. For you, the solution is now to say that you go and arrange because if you said you are borrowing this money locally, the procedure is going to be rigorous. 

Therefore, I would like to invite Parliament to reject this loan request so that we can send a lesson to those who are in finance that Parliament cannot be blackmailed into accepting loan requests anyhow. In fact, recently, the President, if I recollect, wrote to Parliament withdrawing some of the loan requests you had brought with flowery justifications. He said he was tired of this borrowing – (Interjection) - He did! I do not know where the finance minister has been.

We will be making a very big mistake borrowing for things that are not even explained in the report. I thought the chairperson and the committee would help us understand how much of this money is going into classified expenditure because classified expenditure is usually the shortcut for those who want to do campaigns.

6.32
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You provided additional information, which I thought was lacking. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development actually helped me to narrow down what the real issues are. This is not the first time we are debating loan requests or borrowing in this House. However, I could admit that it is probably the first time we are borrowing from Stanbic Bank. We are used to borrowing from World Bank. 

Borrowing is borrowing by whatever name you call it and from whichever source. Our preoccupation should be whether the justification is sufficient. Do we have a shortfall? Do we have a deficit? We could be here pretending. We are saying nobody likes to borrow, but you are running a home called Uganda. You made projections to get from capital gains - somebody will pay your debts so that you clear certain things. You expected some financing from Kira Municipality but they have all had negative responses. Must the home called Uganda collapse? If the question is posed that way and the answer is in the negative, then it gives us the option to borrow. 

The Speaker has given the clarification on domestic or external borrowing. My appeal to honourable members is that looking at the committee’s report, and I am sure they had difficulty in processing this, probably this loan is to finance budget deficits -(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, protect me from the Member of Parliament for Kampala Central Division.

The issues are well articulated here. We have a challenge. Some people may not get salaries. Some services that we committed to the people of Uganda may not be delivered. Should we have a stalemate when we have the option to borrow or should we not borrow because we are tired of borrowing? At individual level, I do not know how many people have given up on –(Member timed out.)

6.35
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a lighter note, I realised that the Government now is not any different from an ordinary man in the village who will borrow money for the sake of marrying a second wife because this is a consumptive loan. (Laughter)

Secondly, I – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the Member and I are very tight friends. He worked in Tororo and served the people there. Is he in order to trivialise this very important national matter of the budget and compare it to a luxury of acquiring a second wife? In this case, the country is not able to take care of the first wife. Is he in order to trivialise this matter to compare it to people who acquire second wives in his constituency when they borrow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter is quite serious. It is actually a necessity; it is not a luxury. So, hon. Ongiertho, you are out of order. 

MR ONGIERTHO: Madam Speaker, I was only comparing the consumptive nature of the borrowing. The point I wanted to make is that looking at the areas that we want to finance, I am a little curious. If you even look at the trend over the years on where supplementary budgets go, they are specific areas. 

Supplementary budgets are arranged in a way that you are moving money from certain areas to specific areas. Over the years, the areas where monies are moved to are known. A lot of time, they are covered under security. It hurts me.  

Today, we are saying there is a deficit but I can tell you that by the time the financial year is ending, you are going to find that there are certain agencies and probably district councils that will take money back to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, it is hurting to find that some of these agencies, apart from removing money for a supplementary budget from them, will even return money to the ministry, yet here we are talking about budget deficits. It is painful.

Finally, we also need to look at the budget discipline of some of these organisations and agencies. Looking at also the trend in terms of the supplementary budget and where we want to borrow from and give money to, what discipline do those agencies and organisations follow in managing their budgets? I think we also need to take interest in that. 

We know for sure – one of my colleagues here mentioned – how over the years, the budget of classified expenditure has moved from Shs 700 billion to over Shs 3 trillion. You can be sure that over time, it – (Member timed out.)

6.40
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It would not be desirable under our current debt burden to go for such a loan. However, when we committed, through appropriation, we envisaged to get some money from different sources that have not been forthcoming. One of them is domestic revenue mobilisation.

Honourable minister, as we painfully support this loan request, I would like you to seriously reflect on the performance of Uganda Revenue Authority with the remarkable inefficiency that is very imminent at the moment. Over the past few years, we have been analysing the budget performance as we reviewed the Budget Framework Paper. We found very many unfunded priorities, some of which are even related to counterpart funding for projects that have stalled. I know this would not be a desirable time to approve such a loan request but given these circumstances and since we already committed through appropriation to spend this money, I would urge my colleagues to support this loan request so that this project is not stalled.

Briefly, that is what I wanted to state. We have already committed to spend this money and we have a serious impediment in executing this very important programme. Thank you.

6.42
MR MOSES NAGWOMU (NRM, Bunyole East County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I wanted to know, basing on the guidelines which were given by the President, whether this loan passes the test. He guided some time as he communicated to this Parliament. I would like that clarification from the minister.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I have listened carefully and everybody was alluding to the fact that Uganda Revenue Authority was underperforming. I would like also to know whether this loan in form of budget support is going to energise Uganda Revenue Authority to collect money. I am asking this because I happen to have been the head of revenue intelligence operations in Uganda Revenue Authority and there are a lot of issues, which need to be seriously addressed in Uganda Revenue Authority.

Uganda Revenue Authority has the capacity to collect the money. However, there is a problem right now with a lot of exemptions, which are making Uganda Revenue Authority not to collect money. Secondly, there is a lot of leakage, from the time when certain things went wrong in the change of the administration. 

Rental taxes are not being collected. If you went to these shopping malls and arcades, the rent charged is like Shs 2.5 million each month but they understate by giving them receipts of Shs 300,000. We need to address some of those bottlenecks so that we can bring our country to a certain level of development.

My brother -(Member timed out.)

6.45
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am making a submission in relation to this request by the committee. They have come up with some facts and the most important is the issue of MTN not meeting its obligation in terms of payment of taxes. I am wondering why this is so.

Madam Speaker, many of us are consumers of MTN products; many times you have to buy airtime and other things with cash. Therefore, I am wondering how MTN can fail to pay money to the coffers of this nation. This is a very serious matter. There are very many cases of tax avoidance and tax evasion in this country and MTN is an example. We need to look at this critically.

Sometimes, we go and purchase items at different locations. Many times, when you purchase an item and ask for a receipt, they give you a blank receipt which does not have any attachment to the company name. It means people are cheating this Government in a very serious way and Uganda Revenue Authority is not doing its work to make sure that these taxes are collected. Therefore, I am wondering whether there is any connivance between Uganda Revenue Authority and traders. I have found this happening over and over. Wherever you go and buy, they do not give you headed receipts and this is a serious loophole.

Finally, I would wish to say that next time, Government should look for concessional loans where the grace period is longer and we pay back less, instead of going for commercial loans. Sometimes when you go for concessional loans, the interest rates are better and friendlier. 

Therefore, I rise to say that I will support this request put forward by the committee. However, next time let us make sure we tighten our belts and collect monies in the right way through Uganda Revenue Authority and also go for concessional loans. Thank you.

6.48
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The gist of this loan request is premised on four things which Members are not giving attention to. One is our ability to pay back the loan; two, the terms of the loan; three, the purpose of the loan; and four, our standing performance in the general loan rate.

Madam Speaker, I graduated at Law Development Centre and currently, I am doing research on debt sustainability analysis in Africa. I accessed a document from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; permit me to read it. “Composition of Uganda’s public debt stock: As at June 2018, we stood at $12.55 billion. By the end of June 2019, the external debt in proportion of this was $8.35 billion; domestic debt comprising of $4.2 billion. This represented an increase from 34.8 of our GDP to 36.1 of our GDP. Comparing to World Bank rating, which recommends 50 per cent, we are still in a good zone to borrow.” That is one. 

Madam Speaker, permit me to read for you again. I looked at the public debt levels in sub Saharan Africa and I will select just five countries: Zambia stands at 60.1 per cent; South Africa stands at 59.2 per cent; Kenya stands at 61 per cent; -this is 60 in proportion to the GDP – Ghana stands at 54 per cent; Uganda is approaching 40 per cent. This means that we are in a favourable environment to borrow.

I am giving information based on a document I got from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. This document concluded by saying that Uganda remains at a low risk of debt distress but with a high and growing debt service burden.

Now, the question that we need to look at from that angle is: How -(Interruption) 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the Member submitting is actually a member of the committee.

MR MULINDWA: That is wrong, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Climate Change.

MR ANYWARACH: Okay if that is not correct, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that on the measure of debt to GDP ratio, Uganda stands at 36.1 per cent. However, the issue is revenue to GDP ratio where we are at 12 per cent. We are only better than Tanzania, which is at 11.8 per cent. The sub Saharan standard is supposed to be 18 per cent. That exactly determines your liquidity and the ability to pay back debt. 

Madam Speaker, the current international measure is moving away from determining the performance of-

THE SPEAKER: You are now smuggling a contribution yet you raised a point of order. You are now submitting.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to still keep on convincing this House based on debt to GDP when now the test has moved to revenue to GDP, and we are doing badly at 12 per cent? Is he in order to mislead the House?

THE SPEAKER: I think he was building his point. Please, proceed.

Mr mulindwa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, our analysis should be on our capacity to pay the debt. I would like to give an example of Kawolo Hospital. We last received drugs in Kawolo Hospital in October 2019 and there are no drugs up to now. The reason is that there are no funds and this happens all over the country. 

Budget support is allocation to other Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), and I am giving that example. If this loan is for budget support, I would like to support the report of the committee that we go for the loan.

6.53
The minister of trade, industry and cooperatives (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, we all know that we approved and appropriated the budget. It has already been implemented and we only have three months to go.

The report has identified gaps - a deficit – and fortunately, it has also identified sources of funding. Honourable legislators, we are all part of Government and we are responsible for the running, management and representation of our people. I would like to appeal to you that we support this loan request to the end because the report has come up with remedial recommendations, which we could watch out for in the future. For now, let us support it so that the public finance management of this Government runs on. I rest my case. Thank you.

6.56
Mr david abala (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity.

The challenge we have is the inability of Uganda Revenue Authority to collect money. That is what has brought us to this level. I would like the Prime Minister to tell us the punitive action that Government is taking against URA because this is a big problem.

Secondly, the long process of negotiation is where the other problem lies. That is why on the issue of MTN, for example, we are still negotiating up to now. They have taken a long time yet MTN is over charging and cheating Ugandans all the time but they are not paying.

The other thing I would like the entire country to know is, first of all, we approved this budget but we now have a problem at this stage. We are cornered and it has become difficult. We are now between a rock and something else. In my opinion, as a Parliament, we may approve this but I would like the minister not to relax regarding URA. At one time they talked about scanners. It was a song but they have failed to collect the taxes.

The worst problem is this animal called tax exemption. Very powerful companies are exempted from paying taxes and poor Ugandans are the ones paying. This is where these problems emanate from. That is why I would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development not to relax. Thank you.

6.59
Ms idah nantaba (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification because we are all bothered by the interest rate. If you read the committee report, it shows that the committee was equally bothered by the high interest rate that we are supposed to pay at the end of the tenure of the loan. 

Table 3, page 6, shows the comparison of loan financing terms for the four banks. I am specifically pointing to the arrangement fees, which have the same figures everywhere. I have been informed in Parliament that Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is an arranger. We have said that we are okay with that. That means that the arrangement fees go to Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited, when you look at this table –(Interjections)– Whether it is shared or not, we have all agreed that Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited is the arranger.

When you go to page 8, we have the indicative commercial terms for the two banks that we have considered. Trade Development Bank has an item called “agency fees” of € 20,000 payable on signature date and each anniversary of signature date until the facility is fully paid. The arrangement fees that are applicable for Stanbic Bank Uganda Limited now adds something else called “agency fees.” Are we not paying for the same thing? When you look at table 3 on page 6, it does not have the agency fees but when it comes to page 8 in the indicative commercial terms, you see agency fees.

I would like to seek clarification from the minister where this item is coming from because when you look at page 6, the item is missing.

7.01
Mr abdu katuntu (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The budget process should be one where the minister should ordinarily get support from both sides of the aisle. We require funds for purposes of development of this country and ordinarily, we should not have any controversies.

Having said that, we should be concerned about borrowing by this Government. Borrowing in itself is not a problem but when it degenerates into reckless borrowing, you have to check yourself. A big portion of our budget goes towards debt repayment. Have we re-examined it? 

Colleagues, the monies we are borrowing are a future burden to our children. Is it a prudent fiscal policy, for example, chairperson of the committee and Minister of Finance, for us to borrow from private commercial sources to finance our current expenditure? Is it prudent that we borrow for consumption? Hasn’t His Excellency the President made that clear – “Why are we borrowing for Cham cham?” I heard this from His Excellency the President –(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are borrowing for budget support.  I really beg Members of this House to understand the point that we approved budget estimates that included revenue and expenditure but we are not performing well on the revenue side. Therefore, this money is to support the activities that we approved. It will support sectors of infrastructure - (Interjection) – Yes; it will support all sectors because it is for budget support. It is about putting money where there is a shortfall.

I think, Madam Speaker, we really need to understand that point; we are not borrowing for cham cham. I do not know, Madam Speaker, whether the honourable member needs to put the word “cham cham” on record.

MR KATUNTU: Cham cham means consumption. If you want us to speak economics - recurrent expenditure –(Interjections)– That is what it means and the President has put it in those terms.

The honourable minister appeared before us and during that conversation with one of the stakeholders, which was the Electoral Commission, they said their budget had a shortfall. Colleagues, is it correct for any sovereign country to borrow money to organise its own elections? You see, when the minister talks about budget support, it includes consumption. We should be borrowing money for development projects. This may pass but we should be talking about the future.

Hon. Bahati, to me you are one of the most active ministers. I am sure Madam Speaker will agree with us, because you have been in this House every day. You respect this House because you answer all questions put to you. Your colleagues sometimes do not. That is why year in and out, you are voted the number one most active Member of Parliament. It is because you are always in this House. Please, take note of that. 

We do not need to borrow money for our recurrent expenditure. We instead have to cut our budget. In simple English, they say “cut your cloth according to your size”, and that is what we should be doing, and it takes financial discipline.

Madam Speaker, I go to the second point about the Budget Framework Paper. The point made by hon. Bahati and I think hon. Kyambadde and –(Interjection)– not Oboth really; I do not remember the point hon. Oboth made –(Laughter)– because I had walked out not. For you to say that since we already passed the budget we should rubberstamp this is taking us for granted. Let us maybe examine ourselves when considering the Budget Framework Paper, so that we just do not pass it if we do not have enough resources. What they are trying to do is to blackmail this House by saying “We have already passed it, please rubberstamp this”. We are not a rubberstamp institution.

Thirdly, honourable minister, do you know that as we talk, Government owes suppliers of goods and services to a tune of almost Shs 540 billion? I am talking about court judgments and awards. These are people who have sued Government, got judgments but Government has not paid them for four years. They say it is not a public debt; instead, we are running to borrow money instead of paying our debt. 

Colleagues, these are your clients. You could be very enthusiastic to say “pass the budget” but there are people out there who borrowed money from the banks and their businesses are –(Member timed out.)

7.09
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We passed the Financial Institutions Act. It says that no commercial bank shall lend to more than one client at 20 per cent. Given the tax base of Stanbic Bank Uganda, which stands at Shs 1.4 billion dollars, 20 per cent of that is only Shs 280 million and we are borrowing €300 million. That means that anytime, the bank is going under and we are in danger. I need to understand that.

Having said that, Madam Speaker, Government needs money to fund activities and we do not have a problem with that. The problem we are having is: What is the budget for? Isn’t it for providing public goods and services? So, there must be a huge leakage. If it is not there, then we need an explanation. If our budget is Shs 40 trillion, let say for simplicity, and the domestic revenue collection is only Shs 16 trillion, it means from the day we pass the budget, we have a deficit of Shs 24 trillion, which is more than the amount that we are collecting locally. It is like one wanting to have a huge coat yet the cloth is just too small, which is very dangerous. Why don’t we cut the coat according to the cloth we have? I think we need to go back to the drawing board.

Honourable minister, don’t just have a high appetite for borrowing every minute. Come here and say, “My sources are these and maybe the money is too little” and let us pass a budget according to that, rather than us going to sell this country thinking MTN is going to pay. Incidentally, MTN is not very far from here. Why haven’t you closed them if they have not paid? It looks as if you have no debt with them. If you had a debt with them, it would not take us two minutes to reach MTN; if you want, we can escort you now to go and close MTN and get the money.

Madam Speaker, I do not know if you have looked at the terms. They are even worse. Let me go through them briefly. Even the PTA Bank you are talking about is saying that as soon as you sign, you must take off €20 million. In short, they are going to give you € 280 million. It means on day one, we are borrowing €280 million but we are paying interest and commitment fees on €300 million. Who negotiated such a loan for us? Do you have the country at heart? It is saying on the signature date, € 20 million should be deposited.  We are in danger. 

There is an arrangement fee of 1.75 per cent. I think for our own bank to give us at 1.75 per cent is dangerous. What is it arranging? It only involves coming to see hon. Bahati to sign and you charge us 1.75 per cent! We all go to banks to borrow; the arrangement fee is one per cent. Why should they charge us 1.75 per cent?

Nobody should hide the fact that Stanbic Bank is happy to lend us money because it is very sure to collect. However, when Nandala goes to the bank to borrow, he will not be given the loan. Commercial banks lending to Government of Uganda is making people of Uganda not produce and the truth is that if you do not produce, there will be no way to tax. I can assure you, I am not so sure about the GDP we are talking about because if the GDP is increasing, the tax revenue should also be increasing. I do not know why the GDP is not increasing. My colleague said he was a URA intelligence officer. I do not know how intelligent this is; maybe he will help us to understand. I can tell you, the moment the GDP increases and the tax is not increasing, the country is destined for problems. 

I know that we are going to approve the loan request you want because we are in danger, but the thing we want to put across to you is that first, you must go to the drawing board. Should Government of Uganda continue to go for commercial loans? If yes, then say that you are selling Uganda. If no, then we should say that it stops here and we must return to look for the best way of raising funds.

We also need to think about these terms that they have given us; for example, the default rate. I can tell you we are going to default, given the circumstances we are in. If we do not default, we are again going to borrow to pay a loan. It is very dangerous to borrow from here to pay there. That is why they brought the – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the contributions. I just want to say to the Government that we are going to take a decision whichever way, but it is a painful one especially because of the reasons given, that URA failed or neglected to collect two taxes. We are telling the country that we need to borrow because we failed.

In my other life as a lawyer, if you have a dispute over money, you deposit it somewhere. Now MTN is doing their work, there is no deposit anywhere and we are continuing to talk, I do not know until when. Life is just going on. I hope we shall never have to hear on the Floor of this House that we are borrowing because we have failed to collect taxes which are due. This is from two companies - MTN and the other one; what was the other one?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, one was the licence fees, which we are negotiating, and there is something we have to make a clear statement over. The other one was the capital gains stocks with the oil companies, which also is taking long. We thought we would conclude them but we have not yet done that. 

THE SPEAKER: I think that they should be obliged to put aside some money as you are talking. How come they have a free ride as if we are – The funding is needed for servicing this country! 

I want to appeal to Members to take a decision. I want to put the question.  

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we are borrowing Shs 2.4 trillion. We need Parliament to be properly constituted to make this decision. The procedural issue I am – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that a question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House approves the loan request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done quite a bit for today. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon. 

(The House rose at 7.19 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)

