

Thursday, 25 February 2021

Parliament met at 2.39 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just two pieces of communication. First, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association - Uganda Branch - in conjunction with Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) has organised a two-day non-residential sensitisation workshop on gender related Bills. 

It will be conducted from Thursday, 4 March to Friday, 5 March at Golf Course Hotel Kampala, from 9.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. on both days. This is therefore to invite the all the Executive Committee members of the CPA and all the members who subscribe to UWOPA to attend. Please notify the Secretariat of UWOPA about your participation, just to confirm the numbers.

Secondly, tomorrow is the annual general meeting of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. It is an important meeting for the members, especially those who are going to be leaving Parliament.

It is very important that you attend this meeting to discuss the issues of the association and all matters that are affecting you. Thank you very much.

2.42
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national important. There is an outcry at the district local government over non-remittance of local revenues by town councils and divisions to the district.

Madam Speaker, as you are well aware, money used to pay the district councillors’ allowances is drawn from local revenues collected by the rural sub-counties to the district and yet most revenues are in urban centres or town councils, which do not subscribe to the district. 

For example, when you look at Wakiso District, it has 103 councillors but out of that number, 32 are from town councils and divisions. When you compute, they pay them Shs 500,000 per sitting and they have 12 sittings in a year. When you look at one councillor, they will use Shs 6 million to pay him or her and it would cost Shs 192 million to pay all those from the town councils and divisions, excluding others.

This means that Wakiso District will use Shs 960 million for the 33 councillors in a period of five years, excluding others. It is the same thing in Kasese and even Nakasongola.

My prayer is that since town councils and divisions collect much of the local revenue, and the payment of councillors’ allowances is tied to the 20 per cent collected in the previous financial year, Parliament of Uganda should allow town councils and divisions to pay a certain percentage. This will cater for the councillors’ allowances because they also send councillors when in the actual sense, the money used to pay them is from the local revenue of the rural sub-counties.

My second prayer is that Government of Uganda increases the percentage in the national budget from 15 to 30 per cent for districts. This is because all the civil services such as the education service, health, road sector and others are implemented at the district. Why do we tie most of the money at national level rather than to district local governments? I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Wanzala, for raising that important issue. This matter touches the budget. I therefore would like to ask the Minister for Local Government to expeditiously come and respond to this matter and maybe give us guidance as we go into preparation of the budget. We invite him to bring the response to this matter on Thursday next week.

2.46
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising an urgent matter concerning our environment, particularly flooding in Kampala. When you go to Speke Resort Munyonyo using Gaba Road, there is a wetland on the left side. I have discovered that some people are reclaiming it by pouring debris to form plots so that they can trade from there. I have also seen this happening in Namugongo. In effect, we are denying water its natural home. This is not only happening in these two places; it is all over Kampala and Wakiso.

Because of this, we are witnessing persistent flooding even on the roads. Just last week, there was serious flooding where water crossed Jinja Road at Banda junction as you go to Kyambogo University. Cars had to wait for almost four hours to allow the water to have its way.

Madam Speaker, we are blessed that we have the concerned minister here. Where are the environmental police? What happened to them? I thought one of their duties is to stop people who pour debris in the wetlands where water is supposed to settle. I call for action from the Ministry of Water and Environment. How I wish that something could been done and we put a force that monitors these happenings everyday.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister for Environment is here, maybe she could respond to that issue.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleague for raising the concern about degraded wetlands. This is not only in Munyonyo, Namugongo and Kyambogo but it is all over the whole country. 

This is a problem we are trying to address. You are aware. I have been standing here, telling the country that as Government, there are measures we have tried, to recover our wetlands and the environment at large. Some of the activities were interrupted during the COVID-19 lockdown. We are already resuming some. 

Yesterday, I received a delegation led by the LC I chairperson from Munyonyo, Mr Yassin Omar complaining about the same place. Least to say, one of the areas you are talking about is also where I reside. Indeed, last week we were all caught up. 

Fellow countrymen, I would like to assure my colleague and the country that we are trying to catch up with this degradation. We want to implement a hard hand. These are Ugandans who do not even value the fact that we have to protect the environment. The institution of Government is sometimes overwhelmed when you find people dumping debris in wetlands at night. We are catching up with them. 

Yesterday, we had a meeting with NEMA. Please give us a bit of time. If you have that evidence, I would welcome it. If you catch some of these people, please capture the vehicle details. Let us help each other so that the law catches up with them. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Constitution creates an environment committee which is headed by the Prime Minister. 

Hon. Aogon raised a very serious matter and I have had the benefit of listening to my friend, the honourable minister. Our friendship notwithstanding, she seems not to have contextualised the seriousness of the matter. She seems to be speaking about something else. I am wondering whether it is in order for the minister not to respond with specifics in respect of the plan being taken by Government to address the matter other than speaking to us generally. 

The Attorney General has even issued a guideline to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development that no certificate of title can be issued in a wetland. However, if you move around now, whoever is building in a wetland has a title. Is the honourable minister in order to respond casually to a very serious matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I believe the minister was building her response and I know that she is going to address the real issue.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague cannot doubt the stamina we have for conserving the environment in this country. I was trying to assure my colleague, the MP who raised the issue and to draw his attention to the fact that we are dealing with an even bigger issue. 

For what he has already raised, I assure him that we are going to catch up with those people. There are other measures which are awaiting actions. I do not want to address only one issue, which is already on the Floor. I am going to have a total plan which will be rolled out. 

As I said, we had already set out some measures but because of the COVID-19 lockdown, they had been put on hold. Now, we are going to restart some of these activities. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, the clarification I would like to seek, when you talk about wetlands, this is something that affects all of us and our livelihood as Ugandans. 

However, in Uganda, there is a way your technical people handle the issue of wetlands. You find when it is a small Solomon somewhere, the issue is handled expeditiously and he is evicted from that wetland but when it is the big minister somewhere, the process drags on and on. 

Honourable minister, how are you going to fast-track indiscriminately to ensure that all people of whatever level leave the wetlands and then we can stop flooding?

The issue that hon. Aogon raised is affecting every area. There is flooding in almost every area of Kampala and Wakiso whenever it rains. This is something that needs quick action so that we recover from this. There is a lot of pressure.

I wanted you to clarify and give information to the country on how you are going to handle this using the law, the way hon. Mwiru raised. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, we are being repetitive. I have ever come to this Floor of Parliament to project the undertaking of my ministry. Highlighting, as much as agreeing with colleagues, the plight of the wetland degradation and others in totality. 

It also has a financial implication which we have all along been pushing for. I stood here and said that there is a plan to which we need a financial budget attached and we do thorough work once and for all. 

As for the issue my colleague has just raised, we shall respond to it immediately. We do not have discrimination before the courts of law. That is why I am asking that we have the culprits. Can we not discriminate against anybody? Let us all join hands. These people who are degrading the environment are part and parcel of us. Can we all join hands? That is my plea.

As Government, we already have the laws in place. The President has been very categorical about this. He said that we need to see that all the civil servants like the CAO, the RDCs are brought to book where the wetlands are degraded under their watch. 

These are interventions I was referring to. I ask that you give us a bit of time and you will see action very soon. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I hope we shall be able to see somebody convicted of an environmental offence. We hope to see a building brought down, which was wrongly constructed in the wetland. That is what we want to see. That is what the members are asking for. 

MS ANYWAR: Your advice is taken, Madam Speaker. I still want to say that there are a lot of things which we still want to see in place. The law is in place. Some of these, the courts of law which are pro-environment – you advised that we should take it back to Cabinet. We raised that and we concluded. Therefore we cannot discuss it here until it is done. 

We have taken on what you have advised, Madam Speaker. I want to assure the country that the law is going to catch up with degraders of the environment, and particularly the wetlands. Thank you. 

2.58
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, in regard to the Children’s Forum to protect the rights of students who are involved in football at the Africa Cup Championship tournament, for under 17 and under 20 years.

A concerned parent sent me a message saying that he has a child in Royal Giants Secondary School who is supposed to sit Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) examinations starting tomorrow. 

This child was called to the cup in preparation for the Africa tournament for the under 17 years; this is putting the child’s future in education in danger. These children are about to be denied their right to education and particularly as they are supposed to participate in this national examination.

The Minister of Education and Sports needs to guide the country - we know that sports is part of education but if participating in a sports activity is going to deny the holistic benefit of this child’s future career, then it is important the minister guides the country on how children in candidate classes can participate in some of these national events without necessarily denying them the opportunity to sit their exams. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are they in the camp here in Uganda or outside the country?

MR ATIKU: While others are already outside the country, some are still within the country. There are rules. Once the players are in the camp, they cannot leave. So, it is important that the relevant minister makes a statement to Parliament to guide the country in as far that procedure is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This matter is important; someone should send for the Minister of Education before we close today’s sitting so that the country can know what to do. Today is our last sitting for this week.

3.01
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise an issue of national concern. Last week I heard the Minister of ICT and National Guidance briefing the country that Cabinet had accepted to roll out the merger of institutions.

Merging institutions would not be a problem because Government said that they will be saving over Shs 900 billion. The challenge we have however, is that these institutions have constitutional mandates. I am not very sure that the Minister of Public Service has already started the process of the amendments because it would be very bad to merge for the sake of doing it.

For example, I read in the press a story that Equal Opportunities Commission will be merged with the Uganda Human Rights Commission. While the Uganda Human Rights Commission concerns itself with human rights issues, the Equal Opportunities Commission is concerned with issues of gender, equity and proposes how Government gives service delivery. If we just blindly save money and not look at the mandates, I fear we might be going for destruction.

I remember before we finished one year, that Act on gender and equity had come back for repeal. We need to be very clear on what we are merging.

I want to propose that the Minister of Public Service comes here with a detailed plan on how we are going to run these processes, because issues of constitutional mandates have to go to committees to generate reports to ensure these institutions are merged the right way. 

There is saving more but looking at the expertise in terms of the human resource to me is very critical and even in terms of salary payment and enhancement. Can I now take information before I conclude?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, hon. Asamo. Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. When you talk about merging institutions, you need to realise that most of them were created by Acts of Parliament and they are employing more than 9,000 people. These might cause litigation against the Government.

When plan to merge, for example, Uganda Road Fund with Ministry of Works and Transport, why do you leave Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) behind. Parliament must come in to determine under which criteria these mergers are taking place.

UNRA is staying behind but Uganda Road Fund is being taken back to Ministry of Works yet they were all created by an Act of Parliament. These people will take Government to court and a lot of money will be spent. 

That is why I support what the hon. Hellen Asamo is saying; we need to look at this area very critically before we start merging without the involvement of Parliament that enacted statutes that run these entities. Thank you.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The right person to come and brief us is the Minister of Public Service. He should give a detailed plan on which institutions are merging. They are talking of about 183. Where are their mandates going to be? How are they going to be handled and how do we manage the human resource therein? Thank you?

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, Government will be given an opportunity to come and brief the House. However, preliminary information is that as the Minister of ICT and National Guidance addressed the country yesterday but one, the exercise of merging the institutions was being concluded by Cabinet. The objective of this exercise is to increase efficiency within Government. 

Secondly, it is about saving resources that we have been spending under different agencies; we can remove duplication and achieve the same objectives.

We set up a committee of Cabinet to come up with a clear roadmap because we know that some of the things that we have to do are about amending the relevant laws, look at the contracts of the existing staff in those different institutions and so on.

A committee is now in place. It will come up with a specific roadmap on how this process is going to be handled. We hope that it will take a maximum of two years after it is completed before we start on its implementation.

What we have done is the right way to increase efficiency in Government. As you said, the preliminary saving we are seeing out of this exercise is Shs 900 billion, which can actually be applied for the development of others.

Once the committee has finished the work of the roadmap, we shall request Parliament to allow us make a presentation here so that the whole country knows how we are moving forward. 

Hon. Asamo, all those things that you have raised, including change of laws and contracts of staff, are things that we have considered and this exercise is going to take two years. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, I thank you for that explanation but we would be at peace, as Parliament, if this proposal to merge was informed by a certain study and process. The information we have, honourable minister, is that it is a group of Internal Security Organisation (ISO) people who sit somewhere and look at these agencies, wish some away and wish to retain some.

Is there any scientific study that has been done to know which agencies are contributing how much to the economy and which agencies were losing money or it is still with the famous Operation Wealth Creation officials, who sit somewhere and determine these changes?

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, hon. Patrick Nsamba. The Government that you used to belong to does not work that way. We have a process that we put in place. This exercise has been on for two years. A study was carried out by Public Service.

Actually, I must say that – I think it was hon. Ssewungu who raised the issue of Uganda Road Fund – as you will be seeing, even Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) is going back to the mother ministry. So, a study has been done. There has been an elaborate process to come up with the rationalisation of institutions in this Government. 

Therefore, we do not work that way, hon. Patrick Nsamba, and that is –(Interruption)– I wish you had stayed in this Government; you would have known how we work, properly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite hon. Namayanja. You have two minutes.

3.11
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of great national importance.

On 1 July 2020, the Ministry of Local Government handed over cities. The cities that were handed over were given guidelines. Unfortunately, these guidelines were challenged in courts of law.

Madam Speaker, all the excitement that came with the new cities is now becoming a great challenge. Right now, even collecting garbage is a problem because the administration of the new cities has been challenged.
 
There is no structure or law, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has not even made the third quarter release for the municipalities to run as they were. It becomes a problem to see that we are living in a vacuum.

My humble prayer is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to clarify why the funds are not released. I also pray that the Ministry of Local Government tells us how these cities are going to be run.

I would like to inform members that I am one of the elected mayors for the new cities -(Applause)– and I do not want to fall in a vacuum when it comes to administration in the new regime of Masaka City. That is my humble prayer, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Namayanja. May I, on behalf of the House, congratulate you upon your election as the only woman city mayor in Uganda? (Applause) 

I would like to add that when the accounting officers for the cities were being appointed, I asked the Minister of Local Government about the legal structure of those cities and whether the town clerk of a municipality was also the town clerk of the city. He said that for the time being, that is what is happening.

I also reminded him that I needed to see the laws relating to the other cities. We have the city of Kampala in the Constitution. We have a law for the city of Kampala but we do not have a law for the other cities. It is something that needs to be addressed so that the people who have been elected and the citizens know what to do in their cities. 

However, I do not see the Minister of Local Government here. I do not know who can assist us with this matter. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I also join you and colleagues in congratulating hon. Namayanja upon her election as the first female city mayor for Masaka. Congratulations! (Applause)

The second point is that we came here and, in the interim, worked out a formula for the accounting officers and took your guidance seriously. We know that there are some legal challenges regarding the city. However, regarding the budget, we agreed that the budget which was meant for the municipalities should, in the interim, help the cities to take off – to do the planning – as we prepare to fund them fully.

Therefore, as resources come, we will be able to increase their budget but as we speak, the municipal councils’ budgets will continue to finance the operations and preparations of the cities as we move forward.

Regarding the other legal matters, Madam Speaker, I request that you give us some time next week to come and update the House. The Minister of Local Government will do that accordingly.

I thank you –(Interjection) - I am off the Floor.

THE SPEAKER: He is not there now. (Laughter) Hon. Waluswaka?

3.16
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Yesterday afternoon, as we were debating the – I do not want to call it “the famous hon. Niwagaba Bill” – rain, thunderstorms and hailstorms hit my constituency, particularly Busolwe Town Council.

The whole police station of Busolwe was blown off. Right now, the entire police station is in shambles. Busolwe Primary School was blown off.

More so - I am lucky the Prime Minister, the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are all here. The Government came out with a policy that all schools should be installed with lightning arresters. 

Madam Speaker, lightning struck three pupils; some shops, churches and a mosque were blown off. My prayer is that there should be an urgent response from the Government especially on the police post, schools, churches, mosque and the people who lost their property. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I see the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. I do not know whether he can say something about the situation in Busolwe.

3.19
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague for bringing to our attention what happened to Busolwe and other areas in his constituency. We got that information and we have sent our taskforce to evaluate what we can do in the area.

However, you are aware that we recently launched the disaster maps, which indicates possible hazards in different parts of this country, depending on the various factors, particularly, where drought, flood and landslide can hit. All that information is available and we intend to ask our colleagues in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get our department a budget. Otherwise, up to now, we do not have any budget for such occurrences. We depend on the Contingency Fund, which we beg the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to give when disaster strikes. 

I hope that in the next budget, Parliament will appropriate money to cater for such. We should have a budget so that in situations like this, we do not need to move from place to place. That is an internal – I just brought it for information, and not for you to debate it now. It may, however, come because we are discussing with our colleagues in the Cabinet. We are trying to see if disasters can now be managed professionally. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Committee on Presidential Affairs is encouraged to take an interest in this matter since we are going to be working on the budget to ensure that some provision is made for the disaster management in the country. 

3.22
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance to do with security.

As I was heading to Parliament from West Nile, I was intercepted by people in a vehicle, which we commonly refer to nowadays as “drone”. I have got complaints from my colleagues, Members of Parliament; some of whom are also in this House. These vehicles called “drones” are now used for kidnapping people. These drones are still in Arua, Yumbe and Obongi. 

The President recently addressed the country on issues of security. What is the use of the Head of State talking about an evil, when the evil continues to happen? Family members of leaders and members of the Opposition, including leaders of the opposition political parties like National Unity Platform (NUP) and Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) in West Nile still live in fear of being kidnapped.

I rise, therefore, here, seeking for interventions of this House on my life, the lives of my family members and leaders – Let me take this information, and then I conclude –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to provide is that yesterday, the Speaker directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to the Floor today with the list of missing persons.

Madam Speaker, when you made that directive, there is a lot of expectation because many families have missing loved ones. As we await that list, I would like to provide information, hon. Fungaroo, that possibly, we will know from the list that will be read, as directed by the Speaker, those who are living in fear and those who have been abducted. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, hon. Basalirwa, for this information. The information is good and I welcome it. However, I see it as if the information mainly talks about those who are missing. What about someone like me, who is about to be abducted? (Laughter) What about my family and children?

They followed me, as I was crossing from Obongi to Adjumani. People are chasing a sitting Member of Parliament who is still working. Where is the parliamentary immunity we talk about? 

Have we now criminalised the Opposition? Don’t we now want political opposition in Uganda? Don’t we want political dissent in our country? As we wait for information on those who have been abducted, we need assurances and provisions to take care of those who have not yet been abducted but are about to be abducted.

Our history and experience in West Nile is bad. People who are abducted do not come out as normal people. They come out when they are sick. They get tortured and poisoned while in detention. There are people who are dying slowly because of being poisoned by these people who are abducting other people in unmarked vehicles. They carry guns while they are in civilian clothing. Some of them are the police, particularly the DPC of Obongi called Abel Ruganza (ASP). He is the master of all these evils and he tells people openly that “I can kill you or I can abduct you, and nothing will happen to me”. I have reported him to the RPC of Moyo. I have even talked to the Director of Operations of Uganda Police but this young man seems to be above the law of Uganda. What do we do now? I need your help.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first, I will direct the Inspector General of Police to provide security for hon. Fungaroo. Also, as a sector, the Minister of Internal Affairs should examine the complaint made by hon. Fungaroo and ensure that both him and his family and the other people are secure.

I also direct the minister to investigate the conduct of the person, hon. Fungaroo has named, who is the District Police Commander of Obongi so that the situation of the member can be addressed. The minister should come back and give us an update by Thursday next week. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we had recommenced the debate. There were a number of members who wanted to speak. Can I invite hon. Alyek, hon. Akurut, hon. Wamanga Wamai and hon. Lubogo? Let us start with those. 

3.27
Ms judith alyek (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I take this opportunity to thank you for making it back to Parliament?

The Speaker: Thank you.

Ms alyek: You are welcome. I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for bringing the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019. I have about five comments to make. 

The first comment is about ministers being ex-officios. We know very well that ministers represent Government, and they should be abreast with Government programmes. For better representation, a minister should be a politician, and being a technical person is an added advantage.

We know that when the President is appointing ministers, they sometimes do not have qualifications they are supposed to have acquired for the duties that they are going to execute. Therefore, I would suggest that ministers should be politicians, so that when they are appointed, their technical qualifications are aligned to their appointments.

The second comment is about the Resident District Commissioners (RDC). The office of the RDC is very important in the district. It oversees the security, does monitoring of Government programmes and also supervises district officials who implement Government programmes.

Madam Speaker, there is a challenge –(Member timed out)

The Speaker: Please conclude.

Ms alyek: There is a challenge that I have seen with the office of the RDCs. Some of them do not know security matters very well. Some of them do not even have monitoring and evaluation skills.

Therefore, I would propose that in order for the RDCs to be effective and efficient in their duties, they should be trained when they are appointed. When they are appointed and are not trained, they just go to offices and start working without any knowledge, probably. Nonetheless, some of them have the knowledge and others do not have this knowledge I am talking about. 

This office is important and should be retained only that the office bearers should be trained, in order to be efficient and effective.

Another thing that I would like to bring to this august House is about the Panel of Speakers. Honourable members, you have seen the backlog of business of Parliament. The Panel of Speakers is necessary. I, therefore, do support this and feel that it will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of Parliament. We have only two Speakers, and if we add on the number by creating a Panel of Speakers, it will help us to address all the issues resulting from having a few.

I would like to mention something about the restoration of term limits. The amendment, we remember very well, was brought to this august House when we were debating age limit. The motion was moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and seconded by hon. Odonga Otto. We passed it when we were voting for three things: the age limit, term limit and extension of the term to seven years. It was challenged in court by some members even though the President had already assented to it.

All in all, I support the restoration of term limits, so that we know who will come in as our President and who will serve this country. We would like to see to it that they serve within the terms that we have limited them to. That is to say, two terms.

On the issue of a seven-year term, we need first of all to consult on it. We do not need to hurry bringing the seven years in this discussion. 

First of all, we need to go back to the electorate and also consult the lower level leaders. Let us consult them because, it should not only be for Parliament of Uganda that we are extending our term to seven years. We need to start from LCI up to the President.

Therefore, if our people agree that we should have the seven years, together with the lower level leaders, then we shall come back and agree at once that let the term be extended to seven years. I beg to submit.

3.33
Ms violet akurut (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the member who moved a private member’s Bill that brought up this Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

I have about three issues that I would like to bring forth on this amendment. The first one is about repealing the office of the Prime Minister. We know the value of this office and the work it has been doing. Honestly, we know the Prime Minister is a Leader of Government Business, and for quite a long time, he has been accountable to Members of Parliament. I think that the proposal for repealing this office should be re-thought because it is quite important and we need a Prime Minister.

The second issue is about the removal of the army representatives in Parliament. Yesterday, there was quite a lengthy debate on this, where I think they have been even named, “a listening post”. All of us know the mandate and roles of MPs and their functions of legislation, appropriation and oversight. By the time we begin to have a Member of Parliament regarded as a “listening post”, then it brings a lot of fear to members, especially, about the army representatives.

In the just concluded general elections, there was a serious outcry about the involvement of the army officers in the elections. It could be the reason that some members lost in the elections. Could it be because of having such “listening posts”? –(Interjections)– people who come and listen and at the end of the day, they feed somebody somewhere then you are witch-hunted. I think we would – (Member timed out)

The Speaker: One minute.

Ms akurut: We would wish that the army representatives are there but they should not be a “listening post”. They should not be here to witch-hunt colleagues. 

However, I was also wondering why the number is different. Why should we have 10 army representatives, yet the youth, people with disabilities, and workers are five?  I think we need to reduce the number to five in order to equalise and have equity seen here.

I would like to make a contribution on the issue of Panel of Speakers. Article 82 of the Constitution mandates you, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, as the only persons who have a right to Chair parliamentary Business. Without that, nobody else can be able to Chair Parliament Business in the House. The establishment of a Panel of Speakers shall be able to cure this. 

We know how busy the Speaker and Deputy Speaker have been in this House. When you are not present, then the Business of Parliament is at a standstill. When the Panel of Speakers is established, it will be able to cure this lacuna.

Therefore, I concur and support that the Panel of Speakers should be created, so that when the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker is indisposed and/or are not able to Chair the House, then a Speaker from the Panel of Speakers should be able to Chair the House, and there is continuity. 

We would like to appreciate that, as human beings, we break down and get tired. So, we do not need to have a break in terms of the business of this House, especially when the Speaker or Deputy Speaker are out of the country or are engaged in other important business of Government. I concur on the aspect of having the Panel of Speakers –(Member timed out.) 

3.38
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join those who have thanked hon. Niwagaba for bringing up the Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution. 

I also thank him for keeping his ears on the ground because we are here to legislate for Ugandans and to listen to what they want. What hon. Niwagaba has brought up is what he has picked from the people and has brought to this House for us to discuss. 

Term limits are very important. Even if somebody was a terrible person, you can bear with that person knowing that after two five-year terms, that person will leave because the Constitution says so. It will not force people to come up in demonstrations or go to the bush to take up guns because you know that you can stand the two terms, until that person is removed by the votes from the people. Hence the importance of term limits. 

It is also very unfair that as Members of Parliament, we come in here and try to change what the people want; we change from five years to seven years. This is wrong. What happens if the performance of the Members of Parliament is not good? What if their level of debate is low? Would you want to have those people in the House for seven years? It would be an embarrassment to Uganda. How would you send these people that cannot perform outside to go and meet other Members of Parliament? Therefore, five years are okay and we cannot go against that.

Concerning the Speakers’ panel, this is not only coming up in this country. It is in many countries around the world and the Speakers have got a lot of work. They are invited to the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Union, ACP and different organisations around the world; so they are very busy. 

If we have a Speakers’ panel, it can help when the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are away. I have already seen some people coming up and they want to become Speakers. If all those people had been on the Panel of Speakers, they would possibly have gained some knowledge on how to run the House. 
Therefore, the Panel of Speakers is very important and it must be retained; it is very unfortunate that the committee tried to ignore it. 

Madam Speaker, the position of the Chairman of the Electoral Commission has always caused a lot of problems. There is no chairman that has been there and people have not complained. We want this post to be advertised. People should apply, be interviewed and then they become chairman of the Electoral Commission. 

We had the chairman of the Electoral Commission of Zimbabwe in this country and he told us that he applied for the job, was interviewed and he passed the interviews. When he came in, he knew that he had passed and was given that job; so nobody would come up and say that he was appointed and could not conduct fair elections. 

We have seen how some ministers have fumbled in this House. We want professional ministers to run these ministries. Professional ministers would run ministries and the rest would be in the House as Members of Parliament. We heard a minister here tell us that they are sacrificing – they are ministers and are also in Parliament. We want Members of Parliament here and ministers appointed from professionals to be able to run the ministries. 

RDCs are a wasteful expenditure. We have got the District Police Commanders, the DISOs, RISOs and Regional Police Commanders. Why do we need RDCs? These people can run the security of a district. In most cases, these RDCS do not measure up – you have seen what goes on in the districts; so we have to save money. 

We have been borrowing money from the World Bank and the African Development Bank which is a wasteful expenditure. The position of RDCs should be abolished. 

Commissioners work on behalf of Members of Parliament. Therefore, let Members of Parliament choose their commissioners; they should not be chosen from somewhere else. Let the Members sit and choose Commissioners who are going to work on their behalf.
 
With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I thank you. I would like members to look at some of these issues objectively; to make sure that we amend the Constitution for the people of Uganda - that we work for the people of Uganda. We should not come here and be selfish and just pass laws that are against the people of Uganda. 

3.44
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me time to have a word to this Constitutional (Amendment) Bill. 

I would like to begin by thanking hon. Niwagaba for having this opinion on our Constitution. Although the committee was so merciless that looking through all the recommendations they made, they rejected almost everything. It is as if they had a thing against you. It feels bad, especially the issue of the Panel of Speakers. The committee came up and gave very good analysis; how the Panel of Speakers is very helpful in other countries. However, on giving their recommendation, they rejected hon. Niwagaba’s proposal. 

That is a system that is cropping up in this House. Committees go and do very good work; they present very well but on making recommendations, they end up making wrong ones.

Madam Speaker, I support the issue of having the Panel of Speakers. We have seen how you suffer and work very hard– some of us appear here and leave you here. We go watch you on television in our offices. We also reach home when you are still there. This House should support the Panel of Speakers so that we relieve you of some of the work that goes on. 

On the issue of the Army in Parliament; in 2017, I watched when the Army Members of Parliament turned against their fellow Members of Parliament. At the time, we were in the Chambers so they just showed us that they are not here for us – we are not their colleagues. When their colleagues came, they started beating up and boxing other Members of Parliament as if they are not their colleagues. 

Madam Speaker, the good thing is that His Excellency told us that they are “listening posts”. We have the UBC programme and very soon we shall introduce the parliamentary TV; so they should sit wherever they want and listen to what is going on here. 

In addition, sometimes if they want, they can come to the gallery and listen. They cannot miss listening to some of the debate that is going on. (Laughter) 

On the issue of term limits, we will have done a service to this country, if through this debate, we returned the term limits. Probably, it can give some healing to this nation so that next time we get another leader, that leader does not think that this is his home but his country. I think we need a President who comes, serves and leaves. Tanzania is a country that rarely has violence because they have managed that. Madam Speaker, when we achieve that, I think we would have achieved a lot for this country Uganda.

On the issue of extension of the terms this matter was not part of the proposal, but still the committee brought it like they did it the other time. I wonder why the chairman wants to insist on seven years. The other time, hon. Magyezi never proposed it, but he brought it. The committee on legal should be investigated specially about this thing of seven years. They smuggled it in the other time, they are again bringing it in again. We need the committees of Parliament to stay within the boundaries of what has been proposed by the mover of the Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.49
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on three or four issues only. On the amendment of article 11(ii) and article 111, the proposal to have a Deputy President instead of a Vice President; honestly, we have a Vice President in Uganda. When you look at position of the Vice President in H.E. Edward Kiwanuka Ssekandi, Ugandans sometimes forget about his existence. The black man’s dictionary differentiates between these two - the vice and the deputy.

The position of the deputy derives its powers from the principal, who in this case the President. On the other hand, the vice may have powers that are not derived from the principal.

I would like to agree with the people who proposed this that it is better we have a Deputy President instead of a Vice President. In modern democracies, the Deputy President is the principal assistant of the President and deputises for the President in the executive function; the vice on the other hand is appointed by the President, meaning that this person has to be aligned to whatever the President is saying.

The Deputy President is elected as part of the joint ticket with President, in other words, he is a running mate. If the committee wants to maintain the nomenclature as they say, let the Vice President be elected together with the President such that he or she is equally accountable to the people as in article 1(1) to (4). Madam Speaker, it is a good practice because it prepares other Ugandans for the top office.

On the amendments of Article 78 of the Constitution, to remove the army from Parliament, let me refer you to Article 78(1)(a) (b) and (c). Let me read it verbatim: “Parliament shall consist of –(a) members directly elected to represent constituencies; (b) one woman representative for every district and (c) such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.”

Madam Speaker, the army, youth and PWDs recently added the elderly. Last week, I proposed that the first run up in the presidential elections should be part of Parliament. Others interest groups like police, prisons, sex workers, comedians and musicians will demand to be represented.

Madam Speaker, unless members have forgotten, the preamble of our Constitution is still very fresh in my mind: that recalling our history which has been characterised by political and constitutional instability, oppression, which were caused by the mismanagement of army - the Governments at that time failed to control the army. Therefore, bringing the army on board gives them a platform to manage their views better.

Madam Speaker, I propose that we retain the army in Parliament or if we want to abolish it, all the interest groups as mentioned in 78(1) (b) (c) should go with it; Let us do away with workers, youth, and women representative, so that we remain with directly elected representatives only, because you are part of the constituencies which we represent.

On the proposal to have ministers, the Vice President, Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General as ex-officio Members of Parliament, I think that is a good proposal. However, it has a bearing on Article 93, which bars Parliament from debating issues that have a bearing on the Consolidate Fund. 

I thought it is a good idea for ministers to come from outside Parliament because it would be giving members to concentrate on their constituencies and ministers to concentrate on the national issues. I would like to propose that instead of having them from within Parliament or outside, let us leave the powers as enshrined in Articles 111. 

Let me read that for you verbatim because it encloses all this: Article 111(a) reads, “There shall be a Cabinet, which shall consist of the President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and such number of ministers as may appear to the President to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state”. I would like to propose that we maintain that “as the President may see fit to manage the country”, other than restricting it to Members of Parliament or outside Parliament.

As I conclude, on the creation of the Speakers’ penal, unless if Article 93 is also amended accordingly, when you look at the size of the Eleventh Parliament that is coming and compare it with the size of the Sixth Parliament then, it justifies the need for the Speakers’ panel.

3.55
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of my colleagues who have talked about hon. Niwagaba’s Bill. I also feel that the position of the Prime Minister should remain intact because we have previously seen the work, which the Office of the Prime Minister has done to our country.

Secondly, people are talking about the army. We know what the army does. Having 10 members from the army is too much. They should also be five just like other interest groups like the youth. When it comes to the RDCs, they should be retained because we have always had them - we had district commissioners. These do good work and those who do not, should be trained as a colleague mentioned. People should pass through training to ensure that they do good work with their friends. 

When we come to our commissioners in Parliament, we were elected by the people. The people put all powers in us to make sure that we elect our own from Parliament. 

I would like to also add my voice on other issues like the Panel of Speakers. The Speaker sits here all the time. Colleagues doze, go out and come back but she is here. I concur with the members who agree that the panel should be formed. Thank you very much.

3.58
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have around six issues to raise. The first is on the issue of ministers. I think the ministers should come from those who are brought here by the President and those brought by the people. As one of the honourable members said, a minister should be fairly technical in the field of the ministry he/she is going to head. 

On the issue of UPDF, I think UPDF is needed here, but the numbers are too many. I have a proposal; since police and prisons are also complaining, I propose that the UPDF comes down from 10 representatives to five and then we have three police representatives and two prisons’ representatives. They are wondering why only UPDF yet they all handle guns. (Laughter)

On the issue of the Deputy President, I think the first runner up of any election should be the Deputy President. 

On the term limits, due to public demand, I think we should restore them. 

On the EC boss, to allow selections, it is just arithmetic. Any person, not only lawyers, can head it. Indeed, Eng. Dr Badru Kiggundu was an engineer and a mathematician and he did well. Therefore, we should not limit this position to only lawyers. 

On the issue of the seven years, this very House passed the seven years and court quashed it. We cannot bring it again. Let us leave it to five years. 

On the issue of RDCs, I think, in line with Government policy of reducing expenditure, this office should be abolished. (Applause)

The issue, which is very okay, is the Speakers’ panel. No member has come here to disregard it. I think, hon. Niwagaba and hon. Oboth, this is the main point. 

When we start amending the Constitution to bring this and the other, we shall bring havoc. For us not to bring havoc in the country, I beg members that we consider the issue of the Speakers’ panel. This is because when we pass this here, the court will not quash it and even Cabinet will sign off on it.

Otherwise, we may be wasting time with the rest. I beg to submit. 

4.02
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Allow me to congratulate you upon the just concluded elections. Congratulations to those of us that went through and those who did not make it, we pray that the Lord will open up another door for you. 

Allow me to appreciate hon. Wilfred Niwagaba for the initiative of bringing this private member’s Bill. I would also like to credit the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for processing the Bill and for coming up with this report. 

Allow me to make a contribution to what is going on right now in this House on the amendment of this Bill. Out of the many objects of this Constitution (Amendment) Bill, I will interest myself on six of them. 

The first is on the Speakers’ panel. I am in support of this. We are aware of the fact that this issue was first discussed during the Constitution (Amendment) of 2015 and the proposal was adopted by the House then, when it adopted the minority report that had accompanied the main committee report in the House. 

It is an international best practice in most Commonwealth countries to have additional persons to preside over the House in the absence of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Uganda being one of the countries under the Commonwealth, I think it would be very prudent for us to adopt this to help us have continuous flow of Parliament.

Secondly, on the issue of presidential term limits, most democratic countries worldwide have presidential term limits. You remember very well, in 2017 when we were doing consultations, most of the population indicated the need for us to restore term limits. I am therefore in support of us restoring the presidential term limits in our Constitution. 

On the appointment of ministers from Members of Parliament, I would concur with the proposal that ministers are picked from the Members of Parliament. When the Members of Parliament are appointed as ministers, they appreciate and understand the challenges that Members of Parliament and the country have at large when it comes to service delivery and execution of some of these policies that we have as a nation. 

I am also in support of the RDCs remaining. You are aware of the role of RDCs in monitoring and inspecting the activities of local governments. 

As Members of Parliament, we have gone around this country doing our oversight role but we encounter many challenges when it comes to service delivery by some of the civil servants. We have only been able to register positive performance in some of these districts where the RDCs have been able to supervise most of these Government programmes. 

You can also go ahead to make sure that they go through an induction, to enable them get acquainted with their roles in monitoring these Government programmes. 

Honourable colleagues, those of you who have been out there doing your oversight role in some of these districts, we have a very big challenge when it comes to implementation of Government programmes. It is only the RDCs who have been able to help us in doing this. 

I also propose that the term of MPs remains at five years. 

Lastly, regarding the issue of holding presidential, general parliamentary and local council elections on the same day, I am not in agreement with this. Just imagine the president, the constituency MPs, women MPs, LC V, district local councillors, LC III chairpersons, LC III councillors being elected on the same day. All these people have two agents each. Just imagine the crowding. For example in a place like Buliisa, which is a one constituency district, we do not get our results in time. It takes almost two days for the results to be announced. How much more will it be if we converge and have elections on the same day? This is my submission and I pray that the elections remain the way that they have been holding them.  Thank you, so much.

4.07
Ms JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and hon. Niwagaba for bringing up this Bill. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the capacity and potential that we have in the women. It is on record that hon. Kadaga represents the women of Africa and has steered this House to the extent that we wanted.

As we move to amend the Constitution, it is very imperative that we look at the roles and the population of the sexes. In Uganda, 50.8 per cent are women and 49 per cent are men. 

When it comes to representation of members in Cabinet because there is nothing for us without us - When we are moving this amendment there should be equal representation of men and women since that is the population that we have in Uganda; that would put Uganda at a different level.

Apparently, when they are analysing countries that have played a big role in addressing gender equality, Uganda is still in numbers. If we did that it would mean that Uganda would be one of the countries promoting gender equality in terms of this amendment.

I want to refer us to Article 21 of the Constitution, which talks about equality and non-discrimination. Whereas the Constitution gives the President powers to nominate the Cabinet, it does not stipulate it, it just talks generally on gender.

What if no woman at one time became a President of Uganda there is a possibility that we can have only three women as Cabinet ministers and the rest can be men? That is in the different countries but let us make a precedent in Uganda. Honourable members, I am lobbying you so that it can be implemented. 

Two, I would like to draw members to the attention of what was already resolved in the previous parliaments. The Speaker and her Deputy have been overwhelmed. We are going to have the 11th Parliament with over 500 members of Parliament.

The Panel of Speakers does not call for a debate, it should be a resolution of this House since we have the mandate. I would like us to look at what has been seen in other countries.

I happen to represent Uganda in the continental Parliament, let us go to Kenya, Zambia, Malawi; most of the African countries and others have the Lower Parliament and the Senate.

We should be able to benchmark those countries and have this done in Uganda. We would have a Lower Parliament and the Upper Parliament but let us not be mean to ourselves. If we are saying that we remove the UPDF, I am not against it.

Let us have one district, one Member of Parliament who is male and one Member of Parliament who is woman so that when we have these districts, we only have one woman Member of Parliament and one male Member of Parliament that will be representing every one so that we remove all these other issues that we are talking about. 

As I take my seat the status quo on Cabinet appointments must stay, ex-officio and sitting members of Parliament. 

Voting for the presidential, parliamentary and local government is a very contentious issue that we should draw our attention to because as we speak now, after voting the President and members of Parliament people get relaxed. 

Let us adopt that we vote the President, members of Parliament and the local council V and its chairman on the same day and then the other local councils can be voted differently.

With those remarks, I believe that this constitutional amendment will help Uganda to move forward and cut on the cost of expenditure.

4.13
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM,	Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and hon. Niwagaba for the work well done.

I have about six issues on constitutional amendment. One is about the Deputy President. I 100 per cent concur having seen that the current position has no budget and does very little unless directed. 

Term limits should be reinstated so that we stay within two terms although voters are saying say that it should go to all voted people in offices including LCI, councillors, mayors and Members of Parliament. They are saying that when it is only for the President, they are seeing a lot of unfairness in the law makers; why should it only be the President but not all other leaders in elective positions.

About the Speaker’s panel, when you cross to our neighbouring country Kenya the Speaker’s panel is there but they are like the commissioners whom we already have. I do not see any problem if the commissioners can be part of the Speaker’s panel to avoid unnecessary expenditure of the taxpayers’ money. The commissioner can double as the Speaker’ panel.

The army is historical and to avoid repetition of what transpired in the past of military taking over power, we can still accommodate them because they are useful to the country.

I propose that the status-quo be maintained on the issue of ministers. 

On election to be conducted in one day; unless you did not experience the confusion in our elections. If there is confusion when they are having only Members of Parliament, what will happen when all sub counties, district councillors and the chairperson are elected on the same day?

I propose that the status-quo remains, we only have to sensitise our people to know the importance of local government leaders, so that they can vote for them overwhelmingly like they normally do for Members of Parliament and His Excellency, the President.

If that is done through local government to sensitise our people, I do not see any problem why we do not maintain it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will have hon. Lubogo, then hon. Karubanga. Is hon. Taaka here? Where is hon. Taaka seated? After hon. Karubanga, we shall have hon. Taaka. Is hon. Kinobere here? That will close the old list before we take on the ones of today.

4.17
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appreciate the sponsor of the Bill and to thank the committee for the work that they have done. I am going to speak on a few issues. Issue number one is about having a panel of Speakers or the Speaker’s panel, for that matter.

When we are making laws, we always have to bear in mind that there is a gap that we are trying to plug in. Is there a mischief that we are trying to cure? If the issue is that there is a problem or there are some issues we are trying to address by creating a Speaker’s panel, I think it is absolutely “yes”.

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, sometimes, I wonder how you are able to handle this work, sitting in this House from 2.00 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. or beyond. I wonder how you are able to do it. 
Anyhow, we also have to bear in mind that the Speaker is a member of Parliament. The Deputy Speaker is a member of Parliament.

The Speaker and Deputy Speaker, at many times, have to represent this country and this Parliament in different fora. At the same time, they have to participate in the affairs of the constituencies they represent. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary to consider having a Speaker’s panel.

I also think that there are matters, which are not highly controversial, meaning that as we consider creating the Speaker’s panel, we could probably have particular matters that should be delegated to them to handle.

Sometimes, the House does not sit simply because the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are not present even when we have important motions. Even when we have noncontroversial and nonpartisan matters that should have been handled and the House would proceed with business. Moreover, this panel is going to be one of people who are already members of Parliament. 

Therefore, if you are to consider issues of, for instance, resources, I do not think it is going to have that much implication because these are people who will be already members of Parliament.

However, I would like to object to the proposal by the sponsor of the Bill that the position of Vice-President be abolished and we instead have a deputy president. I also object to the proposal to have the functions of the Prime Minister shifted to the deputy president.

I do not think we should take that direction, Madam Speaker. The President, many times, always seeks to delegate the Vice- President to perform some roles. By interpretation, the work of the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MR DAVID KARUBANGA (NRM, Kigorobya County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I also would like to thank you for giving me this chance. I would also like to congratulate you upon being re-elected to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR KARUBANGA: I congratulate our colleagues for having gone through this vigorous exercise of electioneering. Those who went through, congratulations and those who did not, let us wait for next time. 

I also would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for moving these proposals and the committee, for the wonderful work done. I have mainly two areas, which I would like to object to; not object but add my support. On the issue of the Speaker’s panel, I would like to say that that is really a good proposal because of the workload.

The area of tenure of seven years is good but only if it can start with the Twelfth Parliament. This will help us to avoid the noise, which came the other time about us legislating for ourselves in order to benefit. Government spends a lot of resources and our people tend to take too much time in electioneering, other than working. Therefore, I support the proposal as long as it can begin with the Twelfth Parliament.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of the army, the army plays a historical role and we all know. I remember a colleague saying yesterday, that they look like listening posts but from that listening point, they make reports, which are part of representation. The army should remain in this House.

On elections being held on the same day, logistically it is very difficult and I pray we maintain the status quo.

On the term limits, I feel that since we are under a multiparty system and we have the people, for as long as we can guarantee them a free and fair election, which is periodic, the safety valve we have is the people voting. We should leave it open to the people. After all, the Constitution says that power belongs to the people.

On the issue of the Prime Minister, let us maintain the status quo. For the Vice-President, maintain the status quo. For the RDCs –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, hon. Karubanga.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For RDCS, maintain the status quo. I would like to thank you and I think that is all I had to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Taaka? Has hon. Lubyaayi arrived? We shall then have hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Namuganza in that order.

4.24
MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate you and all Members who were re-election. I congratulate you upon coming back alive.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MS TAAKA: Madam Speaker, I wish to submit on a few issues in the Bill. First, is the issue of term limits. I wish to support the reinstatement of term limits because even when I went to consult on the lifting of the age limit, the people were in support but on condition that we reinstate term limits, which did not go through in the courts of law. Now that it is here, I support it. We should reinstate the term limits.

On the issue of the UPDF being in Parliament, I really think that - based on our history and the reasons as to why the UPDF was included as one of the interest groups to be represented in Parliament, I do not think we have healed from the wounds that we experienced. 

We are still running a young democracy and up to now, we have not had a peaceful handover of power. Much as we have been electing leaders every five years, we have not seen a peaceful handover of power from one President to a new face, in order for us to see how the army reacts.

We have witnessed change of Governments. The Police Force and Prisons Service always do not participate in the change of Governments and may be, fighting and whatever else. They stay and continue to serve, even when Government changes.

However, for the army, we have not seen how they could conduct themselves. Therefore, for now, I think the army should keep their place in Parliament for reasons of our history as we – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to close.

MS TAAKA: As I conclude, I feel that the Office of the Prime Minister should stay, except that we should withdraw the programmes that are implemented by that office so that it only remains with the supervisory role. 

The RDCs have been very vital. We should only establish the way they are appointed. Since they are public servants and paid using public money, they should have qualifications and their work well stipulated such that they are impartial. 

On the Electoral Commission, we should not restrict it to people who have been judges. I think this is an office that anyone, who is well qualified, can handle even if they are not judges because we have seen it from experience. Thank you. 

4.28
THE MINISTER FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also congratulate you and Members for successfully going through the elections. I thank hon. Niwagaba for the motion and the committee for processing the amendments. 

A matter like this, which touches the Constitution is very important. That is why in the last Constitution amendment, Members were requested and given time to go and consult. Some of these matters are so important that they would even require further consultations with the people that we represent. 

If I am to start with the proposal of the deputy president versus the Vice-President, we know the previous vice-presidents. For people to come and tag the change because of the current Vice-President, they would not be taking that office seriously. I remember that when hon. Kazibwe was the Vice-President, there were some Ugandans who complained that she was too loud and too much. When hon. Bukenya was the Vice-President, he took an initiative and went almost throughout our constituencies to promote rice growing in the country.

Therefore, I do not think that the Office of the Vice-President is silent or not powerful enough. It might be that the current Vice-President decided to take the office the way he has for strategic reasons. It is a constitutional office that has been powerful and it remains so. 

On the proposal for the deputy president, in our African context, I would agree with the committee that we leave the office of the Vice-President as it is. If we want to change to deputy president, let Members be given an opportunity to have a more thorough examination and, probably, a commission should be appointed to consult further on the matter. 

With this amendment coming from a private Member, having a very short period for consultation would not be in tandem with the proposal. Therefore, I agree with the committee. 

On the issue of the Prime Minister, I would like to say that the Prime Minister plays a very vital role in coordinating Government and the Executive and in guiding ministers when there are issues in the ministries. There are very many interventions that the Prime Minister undertakes in processing Cabinet matters and following up Cabinet decisions and resolutions. 

The Prime Minister is the engine of the Executive. Therefore, I do not agree that that office should be removed. I agree with the committee that the Office of the Prime Minister be retained. 

On the appointment of the ministers, I still agree with the committee that the appointment, according to the Constitution, is discretionary. The President appoints from among the sitting members of Parliament but he also has discretion to appoint ministers from outside Parliament. 

My experience and the experience of many members of Parliament is that sometimes Members who are appointed from outside Parliament find it very difficult to resonate with the request from members of Parliament. Sometimes, even assessing the policy issues in the context of what is on the ground and what the people want vis-à-vis scrutinising it at that level becomes very difficult. 

Therefore, it should be a mixture. There are also circumstances where members of the Cabinet who are not placed in a ministry of their profession have done better than those who have been placed there because of their profession. 

A minister is at a strategic and policy level. He or she is not doing technical work. The ministries have technical people. Even if you are technical in that field, you cannot really process the technical nature of the work in a ministry. Therefore, for the strategic direction in a ministry, let us agree that the current mixing be retained. 

On the issue of term limits, I take consideration that when the discussion of term limit came in 2005, we debated it. In the last concluded constitutional amendment, we debated the matter but in – (Member timed out.)

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also congratulate you upon your re-election as a member of Parliament. (Applause) I would also like to add – first of all, I thank hon. Niwagaba for bringing these very important proposed amendments. 

On the issue of RDCs, as a former Deputy RDC, I know the work that they do. Article 203 of the Constitution describes the roles of the RDC but it is very brief. I heard Members saying RDCs head security. That is true but their role is not limited to that. They also supervise both Government and non-Government programmes. I have seen some Members here already lobbying to become RDCs. (Laughter) Therefore, do not abuse where you are going. The status quo should be maintained.

I support the proposal to have the Speaker’s panel, as long as their roles are properly described to avoid confusion. Sometimes, when Parliament convenes, you might have one of the members of the panel coming to the Chair and maybe, out of excitement, passes something. Another will come and does a different thing and the main Speaker comes and reverses it. I think we must have their roles properly articulated. When do they chair, under which circumstances and what are they limited to? If we do not go into it properly, we may cause confusion.

The Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) should stay since every country seems to be strong because of their military power. I am glad to have a Prime Minister, who is a General. He will tell you more. Therefore, do not talk about UPDF. (Interjections.)

On the issue of term limits, it should not be now. About the seven years, I know that some of our colleagues fear because the country is watching but they love seven years.  (Interjections) If you put a secret ballot, you would see something different. It will go through. Therefore, I support it. 

There is a lot of wastage of resources in elections yet, we are still a developing country.

Another issue regards the Vice-President and Prime Minister. I propose that we maintain the status quo. For the Cabinet, the status quo should also be maintained. It does not mean that when you are an ex officio Member, you cannot perform as well as a minister. In fact, sometimes, these ex officio Members have also been Members of Parliament. Therefore, why would someone say that they should be only elected? Some ministries are very busy that if possible, we would even have ex officio Members in some ministries to keep work flowing.

For the local councils, I do not see any problem. If we can have elections in one day, we shall avoid many things. It is only the tally centres that can be separated. There is a lot of rigging, time wastage and insecurity in these local council elections because once people finish to elect the higher leaders, the local council elections are ignored. Usually, there is a low voter turn up. Why don’t we have it done in one day? 

It is very possible that a person who has woken up to come and vote, can vote here and there and we have different tally centres for local councils and upper elections. We can only separate the leaders for the municipal mayors. These are few and can be managed better. Therefore, I think we should have them elected in a day. (Member timed out.)

4.40
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also congratulate you upon making it back and all Members who made it. Those who did not, I call upon you to join me for serious business.

The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda was made in a healing way. It was made following the chaotic Uganda we had had since independence. Therefore, it had ingredients of recovery and reconstruction. After 35 years, most of those objectives have been achieved.  We should now go to a constitutional order that looks at development and serious business for national development.

I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba because this is now very timely that we should make a law and have a Constitution, which does not talk of what happened during presidents Amin or Obote time, which should lead us to prosperity and development. The current Constitution should be touched in that direction. I think we should have a more comprehensive process to look into this.

There are many ingredients that we can look at but our development equation in Uganda is unbalanced by a few aspects. One of them is the issue of governance. In this same vein, I would like to specifically look at the proposal to return term limits. 

Due to the instability we have had in Uganda for many years, when we are sleeping, we still wake up and think that we can go back to instability. We should return term limits and entrench them. The moment this is done, the rest will flow.

That is the biggest question the country has. We have never changed a president peacefully. We have had 35 years of recovery, which will soon be 40 years. It is at this time that we should follow the main route of development like other countries. Let us join the main route and entrench term limits.

The next point I would like to talk about is the issue of the military in Parliament. The historical perspective of introduction of the army is very clear. We all know about our own Ugandans and the UPDF. We still face the same common threats and I think we have the same interests. Therefore, I pray that for the next few years, UPDF stays in Parliament. Otherwise, their stay is always evaluated after every five years. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.44
BRIG. GEN FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate you upon your re-election and all Members who made it back. For those who did not, let us hope for the best thereafter.

I am carrying just a pinch of the record that I have in my library on conflict in this country and Africa generally. The African Continent has been belittled by conflict. Secondly, our country lives in a region that has two conflict systems - the Great Lakes conflict system and the Horn of Africa conflict system. Conflict studies inform us that conflict systems feed on and into each other.

It is also true that most of the political interventions in Africa have been either through the military or because of the weakness of the military. Where do those two points drive us to? Given our history as the preamble in the Constitution says and given the fact that we are not yet home and dry, as far as political stability is concerned, it becomes prudent that we maintain military representation in Parliament. 

The military is part and parcel of the body politic of any society. If you want to exclude it, we shall have the 1960’s experience, where there was a signpost at each barracks; “Keep the politics out of the army.” Whereas that was the case, in 1960 the army was deployed in Tororo to quell a riot. By the time it was done, 1000 people lay dead. 

In 1964, there was a referendum in the lost counties. When the Banyoro decided to go back to Bunyoro, there was an uprising in those counties by the Baganda landlords there. The army was deployed to deal with the situation. 

Again, in 1964, the military had a mutiny and the minister in charge of internal affairs then was sent to Jinja to quell the riot. He was taken hostage and whatever their demands were –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I need your protection. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members, please. 

BRIG. GEN KULAYIGYE: All their demands were given. In short, for us to sustain what has been registered politically in this country, we cannot forget the costs we have taken to reach where we are. It will be foolish for the country to throw away the ladder that has brought us this stability. I support the military stay in Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.48
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Due to the pressure of time, I am going to be very brief. 

On the issue of the army staying in Parliament, I support them to stay in Parliament for the reasons that other Members have mentioned, especially because of the turmoil we used to go through. They were kept behind the scenes and they did not know what was going on but they are now part and parcel of us. There is no way they can say that they did not know what was going on. I support that they remain in Parliament.

As regards the Speaker’s panel, I remember that at the beginning of 2020, we experienced some vacuum when you and the Deputy Speaker were away. We kept coming here and we were told that both of you were not around and so, we did not know what to do. I support the Speaker’s panel but then, the Rules of Procedure of Parliament should define their elements and what they are supposed to do. 

The Prime Minister is the link between Parliament and the Executive and therefore, that post should remain. The Prime Minister prevails over his fellow ministers and work will move on well. 

As regards the Electoral Commission, I do not see the reason Members suggest that only lawyers should be appointed chairmen. There have been teachers and engineers there. In the Electoral Commission, they have a legal department, which assists whenever there is need. 

The office of RDCs is very important. The only reason Members are against this office is because RDCs do not do what they are supposed to do. During elections, they are the ones who want to give directions as to who should be elected. They leave their responsibility of ensuring that there is security and instead, cause insecurity. Otherwise, the office is important and it would be supervisory other than political.  

I support the reinstatement of the term limits. There is no problem with the seven years. Members come to Parliament and before you realise it, you have spent so much money. By the time you realise that you are just beginning to get something in your pocket, it is already time for the next elections. Therefore, Members –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have order. That is her opinion; please, allow her to speak.

MS MUTONYI: Just as hon. Namuganza said, some people fear the population but I have got calls from my constituency; the councillors and chairpersons are saying that I should support the seven years because they know what they have gone through and they want to mend fences. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.52
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since elections, I have not had an opportunity to speak on this microphone. I take this opportunity to thank the people of Butemba Constituency, in Kyankwanzi, for giving me an opportunity to serve them for five years. It has gone down in the books of history; my children and grandchildren will surely know that I was once a member of Parliament. I would also like to congratulate my successor.

Madam Speaker, I congratulate you upon being elected back to Parliament and I wish you well in your endeavours because I know the next step you are looking forward to. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I am very grateful to hon. Niwagaba for bringing up such proposals at the right time. Sometimes, because of the politics of the day, when you hear that a member from the Opposition has brought a Bill, it divides people. However, these Opposition members are also Ugandans and they feel for their country and wish her good. I think it is high time that we applauded such people.  

In addition to that, I would like to say that any understanding well-tested Ugandan can chair the Electoral Commission.  Anyone capable should be given an opportunity to lead, not just someone that has studied law. 

I would like to support the idea of holding parliamentary, presidential and local government elections on the same day, because it will save time and money. It will also help eliminate some of the vices, like rigging. Therefore, we could handle it in one day and people will save time. 

Concerning the army representatives in Parliament, since we have other special interest groups, it would be okay. However, in the line of trying to reduce Government expenditure, we could reduce the number to five.

When one of our colleagues spoke here, during the outburst that took place in 2017, I was present while one of the Generals knocked out one of our colleagues. They almost did the same to me. I felt bad but I just forgave him because I know that he probably did it as an individual and not on behalf of the force. Therefore, let us retain just five of them. 

As regards the proposal for the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General to be ex officio Members, it is a good idea, just as it is for the ministers. We have seen ministers losing positions in their constituencies, not because they are bad people but because people expect a lot from them. They think that once you become a minister, you have become a –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude, please. 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: If ministers are to deliver adequately, they should not be members of Parliament. That way, they will serve without fear or favour. 

Finally, the issue of presidential term limits is a good idea because we need them. We talked about it last time but some wrong people denied us that opportunity. 

Concerning the seven-year term, when you go back to a voter today, they will change the person they have voted before he even starts working.  We may not understand what voters want. We may have to understand here for them because that is why they sent us here. Seven years is a good time in Uganda for people to sit down and work. Whether we admit it or not, it is the adequate time, according to Ugandan times. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take the opportunity to congratulate you on your re-election. 

I will start with the simplest issue. The ministers should be ex officio Members and term limits should not even be debated; we must reinstate them. The Speaker’s panel is a must. We need to be consistent with other East African countries and we should relieve you of that big workload.

About the seven years, for the few years I have been in Parliament, I can tell you that we are dealing with smugglers. (Laughter) This thing has been smuggled in several times and I do not know why. It is always not in the original proposals but people just bring it up and want us to debate it and pass it.

People would relax too much if we agreed to the seven years and you are aware efficiency deteriorates as one goes on. As an economist, I will tell you that where there is competition, there is life. Seriously speaking, if one cannot deliver in five years, one will never deliver even in 10 years. If you deliver in five years, then automatically, the electorate will bring you back for another five years; then you can take 10 instead of seven years.

Madam Speaker, about the army, you know the army representative who was speaking here made me happy. He said that whenever the army is deployed, people die. In fact, we almost died in Parliament here, if you remember. (Laughter) 

Therefore, I really do not buy the idea except on two issues: One, there should be equal representation. Everybody knows that the youth population of Uganda is the largest of all. The army is made up of thousands of people - not even millions - but we have only five Members of Parliament for the youth, the people with disabilities and the rest of the interest groups, yet there are 10 Members of Parliament for the army. I think that is tricky.

I suggest that we should have a two-tier legislature. Where we have the Lower House and the Upper House; those senior citizens could be in their Upper House and then we, the Commoners, come and debate the people’s issues here. That would solve the problem. Otherwise, we are going to have problems of equal representation in Parliament sooner than later. Since the youth are becoming more violent, we do not know what is going to happen to the economy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first congratulate and thank the sponsor of this Bill and the committee for processing it and presenting the report.

Just like many colleagues, I support the proposal of having the Speaker’s panel. It is not going to be a new thing in parliamentary practice. Honourable colleagues should support it because of the justifiable reasons advanced for it.

The issue of restoration of term limits is core. The day the term limits and the age limits were removed, the framers of the 1995 Constitution were in tears. I am happy that yesterday, when hon. Ogwal was presenting here, she reminded us of the preamble of the 1995 Constitution. 

Every time we tamper with the Constitution, there is need for us to first reflect on this preamble and why those words were specifically put in the Constitution. The restoration of the term limits is like patching a torn pair of trousers and indeed, every time we mutilate our Constitution - today is an opportunity for us to fix what was undone and yet, we had not yet tested that provision as it was put in the Constitution.

I support the proposal to hold elections on the same day, just like hon. Namuganza said. We only need to have the tally centres for the various levels of elections. For instance, from LC III downwards, we could have them at subcounty level. The one for mayors could be held at constituency level and for the presidential, parliamentary and for LC V, could be carried out at the district level. I agree with this proposal but what we need to specify is where the results of the various levels could be declared from.

Lastly, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude in one minute.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The proposal to have a deputy president with full powers is good. It is not the first of its kind. We learn from the best democracies. In America, it is working just like the case in Kenya, in our neighbourhood here. This gives us an opportunity to have a deputy president who builds capacity and gets acceptance of the masses on the ground rather than having someone appointed, who only comes to sit in the office to read newspapers. 

Of course, hon. Betty Amongi said that the different individuals who are appointed to that office exercise different authorities. However, to have a deputy president who also goes out to canvass for votes to get the acceptance of the masses is a better deal than us vesting all these powers in an individual. He could even choose the dullest from among the Members of Parliament or society to be the Vice-President. 

Therefore, I buy this idea and I propose that Members support it so that we have a deputy president who has powers and who commands authority. Indeed, in the absence of the President, should any natural occurrence happen, he or she should step in as the President of the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to report to you that Onyinge Christopher has been taken to court this evening. I also would like to extend my appreciation to the Minister of Internal Affairs who also played a leading role in ensuring that Onyinge gets justice.

I would like to start with the Speaker’s panel. I concur with the honourable members who endorse this panel. This will act as a training ground or institution for Members who could take over in the next. I am in total agreement with the Speaker’s panel. 

In relation to the army representatives, I want to concur with the many Members we spoke before me that army men are definitely good. Let us not look at one side only of beating and causing confusion once in a while. These army personnel are crucial in the security of this nation. The only thing is that we should regulate the number and scale it down to five as many Members have proposed. 

On the issue of term limits, this is one of the issues that world over, judges a country. In Uganda, when we reinstate this, it will bring us to a certain level in the world ranking. I support that term limits should be reinstated. 

Concerning the extension of the political term from five to seven years, recently, we were conversing for votes where we asked for a five-year term. Now, we come here and begin to sing a different song. The seven-year term of office has been smuggled in as many Members have put it. I support a five-year term of office where –(Member time out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude, please.

MR OCEN: I conclude by saying that the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission should be a public officer. People should compete and whoever qualifies is put in this position. If you are appointed by one person – even as we speak now, we do not know what may happen to our current Chairperson of Electoral Commission, because if you are appointed by one person, you can also be removed by one person. However, if you are appointed publicly in a competitive process, you would be having terms and conditions of your office and it would also save you in case of any inconveniences. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me take this opportunity to thank the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Obiga Kania, for acting expeditiously on the issue of our citizen, Onyinge. Thank you, honourable minister.

5.09
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for the Bill. I also thank the committee for the work well done. 

I would like to start on the note of repealing the office of the RDC. We realise that the office of the RDC is like a duplication of work. Recently, you heard about Cabinet discussing removing some offices, departments and agencies because there is duplication of work. The office of the RDC, according to the Local Governments Act, is a civil office, which is supposed to be apolitical but these people take sides when it comes to elections. That office should be scrapped and the DPC and the Chairman LCV and others should take charge of the district. 

On the issue of the Speaker’s panel, this House experienced a gap when you went on official duty together with the Deputy Speaker. There was indeed some vacuum. This is the time we feel we should get the Speaker’s panel. First of all, it shall create no gap and secondly, it shall give Members of Parliament an opportunity to build their capacity for bigger offices in future. We need to support this. 

I support the reinstating of the presidential term limits. Let us have two terms for the presidential office. It shall be good for this country.

The Office of the Vice-President should be replaced with the deputy president because it makes no difference. It could be a vice or a deputy president but we feel that office should also go to the population, together with the President. Let them go to converse for votes together. Let him support the President to be and also present himself so that we can see that he is a competent person who can replace the President in the event of anything happening. 

The Office of the Prime Minister should stay because I feel it is very crucial. He oversees the ministers. That office should not be scrapped. 

The change of the name of the Uganda Police Force to Uganda Police Service - This shall be the third time that they are changing it. It was Uganda Police, then they changed their name to Uganda Police Force and now, we want to change it to Uganda Police Service. Their actions are the ones that should be regulated. We see that police is taking sides, which is not right. Changing the name alone will not help us. Their attitude needs to be checked.

On the issue of the seven-year term, I propose that we should remain with five years. This will make the leaders accountable to their electorate. They will do what is expected of them. It has been smuggled into the Bill. You remember that it was also smuggled into the other Bill and court quashed it. If we allow it to get here when it was not in the original Bill, it will be a matter of court. 

Madam Speaker, please, allow us to remain with the five years. It will help us and we shall be accountable to our electorate. Thank you. 

5.13
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague, hon. Niwagaba, thank you for this. 

I would like to address myself to three things. First, we must begin from the philosophical principle that necessitates a law to be brought in place and the evil that is supposed to be cured. Look at Cabinet versus the Legislature. By design, they are supposed to have a functional relationship of checks and balances. But by virtue of the fact that a minister is also a Member of Parliament, there comes the problem of conflict of interest. How can a minister check himself if he is the minister and also the Member of Parliament? Ministers should be ministers and Members of Parliament should be Members of Parliament. That should be the principle of good democracy. Therefore, let us do it that way.

On the issue of RDCs, the President is the appointing authority.  When ambassadors are abroad, they represent Uganda and not the President. Where they speak, there is no Chairman LCV to compete with them. There is no CAO abroad there. But the President sends someone abroad and sends someone to the district. Does the President not have confidence in the LCV Chairpersons and the CAOs? Why does the President want to be represented in the villages? The RDC acts as a representative of the President politically. Does the President not have satisfactory happiness with the Chairman LCV and the CAO? The RDCs should be removed. 

The RDCs have problems with protocol; they do not respect Members of Parliament. They pose as if they are above the MPs because they were appointed by the President who is the Head of State and Commander-in-Chief, yet Members of Parliament are over and above Resident District Commissioners when it comes to protocol.

There is a bad example in Obongi. There is somebody called Gore Goffin, the Resident District Commissioner of Obongi, who behaves as if he is the President himself in Obongi. He does not know that a Member of Parliament and a minister are far above him in terms of protocol. Remove the RDCs.

Regarding the issue of the army, there is a fallacious argument advanced by my friends like Gen. Kulayigye, that the army is here to solve the historical problem of Uganda. These are the historical problems of Uganda: violence, bad governance, corruption, sectarianism. These things are happening today and are worse in this regime than they were in the past. Which historical problem has the army solved by virtue of them being in Parliament today?

The army is the constituency of the army MPs here. You hear people with disabilities talking about the problems of people with disabilities, youth taking about the problems of youth in their constituencies. We talk about problems of our constituencies and women MPs the same.  This is the third term I have been here and I am a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. We have always moved across the country and we have seen the welfare of the army in a sorry state, but members of the UPDF representing them in the House do not articulate issues of the soldiers in their constituencies. They do not visit the barracks in the region. 

Who are you representing here? You are only representing Museveni. You are just like the Resident District Commissioners. The army, therefore, serves no purpose because they do not represent the army. They do not visit the constituencies and they do not talk about the welfare of the army. 

I have talked about this in the Committee on Defence. I have been the shadow Minister of Defence and Security and I question the army MPs about their role in the House - (Interruption)

BRIG. GEN. KULAYIGYE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I ended 2020 and started 2021 in Karamoja region visiting military barracks and talking to our soldiers. My colleagues were in other regions. Therefore, it is not true that we do not visit our troops; we do. Thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: In conclusion, the issue of the army presence as Members of Parliament has not solved the historical problem of Uganda.

5.19
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Niwagaba for bringing these amendments. 

Madam Speaker, you have given us enough time to debate these amendments. I pray that through the Almighty God and the blessed virgin Mary and the Holy Spirit come upon us and we make good amendments.

I am a member of the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD); a lot of issues were raised concerning the way the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission is appointed. An amendment is key, other than just changing the name.

On ministers, I know that South Africa has 28 ministers, Tanzania reduced from 30 to 19, Kenya has 22 ministers, Burundi has 20 ministers, and Rwanda has 28. Uganda has 31 Cabinet ministers and 49 ministers of state. Some of them do not even know each other. If you are to put them into Uganda’s bombardier, it will crash because the sitting capacity is not adequate for them.

This business of looking for regional balance does not work. There is a Minister for Karamoja Affairs but the Members from Karamoja are always raising matters of national importance on the Floor of Parliament. Has it helped them? These are expenditures that are killing this country. 

The Minister of Finance is never here; it is only hon. Bahati around. I have seen hon. Hilary Onek, my fellow catholic, appearing today; for the last three years, he has not been attending House. Maybe he was incapacitated. They think that since the ministers of state are there, maybe they will attend; they are always speculating on who is coming to the House.

Brig. Gen. Kulayigye, we have read all the books that you mentioned here, but the issue of bringing the UPDF into Parliament does not solve insecurity and the issue of past history. These Members come to Parliament under the pretext of being impartial but when it comes to voting, they vote for one side. Let us agree that if we allow UPDF soldiers’ representatives here, we shall share them; the Opposition takes five and the Government takes five. (Laughter) That will be fair. The moment we agree on that in our amendment, that whenever they are voting, hon. Kulayigye - the others will come.

As we speak, the new UPDF Members who are coming here are all heads of departments in the army. The Chief of Defence Forces, land division head, Deputy Chief of Defence Forces - The crash that this country will get from these army representatives! One time, they will shoot themselves because they think people come here to get money. I am not in Parliament to get money but to legislate. 

Regarding the issue of five years, in Ghana they spend four years in Parliament and their democracy is growing. I am interested in knowing from the chairman of the committee why people come to the committee to give their views on those amendments. You find that 60 people supported an idea and 10 are against it. You take the 10 at the cost of the 60. That is very dangerous.

The issue of the Speaker’s panel is key and I support it. Members said that they want the Speaker’s panel but they do not want a deputy president. The President needs more people to help him in the same way we need the Speaker’s panel. It improves on the issues of changing of power and knowing the role someone is going to train in to become President.

As I conclude, I do not know why the committee never looked at the clawbacks that are in our Constitution which are bringing all these problems. You give the Constitution to the President; you limit him here but you give him rights to raise other issues that are against the Constitution. That is my submission regarding the amendment of the Constitution.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have had enough time to debate the Constitution amendment. Ministers should be reduced because they are becoming a forest in their own Cabinet. 

5.25
MR PATRICK OKABE (NRM, Serere County, Serere): Madam Speaker, allow me, on behalf of the people of Serere, to congratulate you upon your victory.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR OKABE: Now that you are back in the House, it is almost probable that you will make it back as the Speaker and continue leading us. I have been listening and we have almost made up our minds on some of these issues. Allow me to add my voice to what Members have already said.

First of all, on term limits, I support the proposal so that we can allow citizen participation in that top-most office of the country. Let us open it up for others to also contest and when your time is up, you quit. We have gone back and forth on this matter but I think this time we should entrench it in the Constitution.

Secondly, I do not see how useful the office of the RDC is, especially knowing how the RDCs interfered with the elections and made some of our colleagues lose. The office of the RDC may be maintained but let their roles be revised and also their recruitment process. They should actually fall under the public service and the recruitment should be competitive.

We also see that in their current state, the RDCs are not well facilitated. Most of the time, they beg for fuel from some politicians. So, if they fall under public service, then they can be paid according to the salary scales of this country.

The UPDF may be represented in the House but the number should be two or five; not more than five. Only two would be better –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving me way to give you information. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give information to the honourable member about the RDCs.

As I agree with your statement, honourable member, we can confirm it by the high level of participation of RDCs in elections. Whenever it is time for elections, most RDCs present themselves as NRM flagbearers or they compete for the position of Member of Parliament. If they were facilitated very well, they would not participate in elections for these kinds of positions. Thank you.

MR OKABE: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, still on the UPDF, we are soon going to have Parliament as the command centre for UPDF –(Laughter)– because we are seeing all these top commanders are coming here - the CDF, the Commander of Land Forces. I wonder whether we want to transfer the command centre here. That is why we must have only two or not more than five in the House.

The manner in which their elections are conducted is also not very transparent. I would have loved to see hon. Kulayigye back in the House. However, we do not know how all of them were thrown out. 

Regarding the Speaker’s panel, I do not support the proposal –(Interjection)­– Yes! I do not support the proposal because we shall have about 500 MPs soon and we want to add more Speakers in Parliament. Aren’t we not going to add even a heavier burden onto our taxpayers –(Interjections)– Even Parliament will have to purchase more and more Land Cruisers for the Speakers and the rest; please, no! We are the people who are saying we must not burden our taxpayers, yet we are creating more positions to burden our taxpayers. On that one, allow me –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are no new Speakers coming to the House. The arrangement would be that from within the Members of the House - maybe the chairpersons of committees or something within the House who are already there. There is no extra expenditure.

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, hon. Okabe. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The information I want to give is that once we have a panel of Speakers, we are going to utilise the 500 plus Members of Parliament better. If we do not have their leaders ready to work on them, then we shall not benefit from them. We shall spend a lot of money and they will not deliver. That is why I call upon you to rally with the majority view of having the panel of Speakers. Thank you.

MR OKABE: Well, Madam Speaker, I appreciate your clarification. That has probably helped me to understand more. However, I am simply careful about adding more burden on the taxpayers but that has been clarified to me. So, I will support it this time. That is helpful.

When it comes to other proposals, let us maintain the status quo; for example, ministers should be selected from Members of Parliament and we have some technical people also. Friends and Members, technocrats are very difficult to work with; I can assure you. We can work closely with our fellow ministers who are Members of Parliament because they are also politicians. 

Technocrats frustrate service delivery. So, if we say we push all the ministries to technocrats, I think we are going to make service delivery even worse. It is better to have a political head supervising that ministry and being responsible to the House. That is my position. Otherwise, for other proposals, I will support them and I want to thank the committee for the work well done. 

Madam Speaker, if we have a Speaker as industrious as you and a Deputy Speaker who is as good as you, I am sure this Parliament will do even better. Thank you very much.

5.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I also want to add my voice to thank hon. Niwagaba for bringing this amendment Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that we should leave the issue of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General the way it is. I say this because I have seen the Attorneys-General we have had in the past doing their best - the way it is supposed to be. I do not believe that getting the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General from outside this Parliament and having the process the way it is being suggested will make any big difference. We need to have them as part of us, as people who understand what politics is, so that things go well. 

Equally, about members of the public service, I also support the fact that we should have for them five years. In those five years, I think they can serve us well.

On the issue of RDCs, I have heard many Members say that we should do away with them. However, I believe the RDCs are good and we need them, much as when it comes to elections they are always disturbing. They do great work within that period. They have always provided good sensitisation services to our people and they really monitor for us.

I have heard some of them say things which politicians actually cannot tell the public because they want votes from the public. So, we need these RDCs. Of course, they are also human beings like us; if we do not agree on political positions, that is very normal. 

I heard a majority of Members basing their arguments on the fact that when we have functions or when there are elections, they want to take themselves in a special way. That is true, because I have seen this happen in Kanungu all these times I have been elected. Other than that, they do a good job. 

The fact that our civil servants like the CAOs and others are permanent and pensionable, sometimes they do not bother to go and do the monitoring and follow-up or to talk to the people so that they listen to their views. They do not even bother to make sure people follow what they are saying. So, we need the office of the RDCs even though they disturb us during elections. 

I would like to support the issue of term limits. Actually, two terms are enough if we are going to give good services to our people. 

On the appointment of ministers, if we have ministers who are Members of Parliament, it is very good. It can be unfortunate if you went to the office of a minister, like now after the elections when some have gone through and some have lost, and you may want something from the minister but he or she does not appreciate what politics is all about.

So, we need ministers who are both politicians and Members of Parliament. After all, the Government spends less on the ministers because they are Members of Parliament who are just extending their offices. It is better than picking all the ministers from outside Parliament, who will actually burden the taxpayers the more. We need to leave it the way it is because it has been the best. 

I have also been wondering about the presence of the UPDF in Parliament. I have never heard them talk about the wives of the UPDF soldiers who have died. We have so many widows who are suffering with their children. Instead of going to the UPDF representatives in Parliament, they come to us. The UPDF representatives never mind about the plight of those widows. So, I do not know their job description in this House. Therefore, I also support the proposal that they get out because their work is not much in the House. 

If the wives of the deceased soldiers have suffered so much when they have representation in this House, then what is the work of the UPDF representatives in Parliament really? We are here to represent our people but when we also carry the burden of the wives of the deceased UPDF soldiers when they have their representatives here, it is unfortunate. 

I have gone to many of the UPDF Members of Parliament to tell them that the wives of the UPDF soldiers have gone to Mbuya and Bombo barracks but have not been paid. We also have the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. If the Members of Parliament representing the UPDF were taking these matters very seriously, the children of your deceased soldiers would not be dropping out of school. Most of them do not study after their parents die, yet their money is lying there. So, do we really need you here? We do not at all. 

Actually, I was waiting to talk about this matter because it hurts. I have many UPDF people in my district whose children no longer go to school, yet we have UPDF representatives in Parliament. Why do we have them? There is no job description for them. We are happy they have kept our security very well. They can continue serving the country from outside and not from the House. 

On the Electoral Commission, we need to have the chairperson appointed in this way because this will serve the country better. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS KARUNGI: The presidential, parliamentary and local government elections should be done on the same day. In my district, after the presidential and parliamentary elections, people did not go for the local council elections. I went to vote and I was surprised to learn that people were not voting. However, at the end of it, when they were announcing the results, they announced the results as if many people had voted. Anyway, that is Uganda. My opinion is that we should have all these elections on the same day, with different tallying offices. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Karungi. Indeed, she has raised a very important point. I have often had to deal with the wives of soldiers in my office. It is true that they need real support. 

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start from where hon. Karungi ended. It has been said that history is more than the path left by the past; it influences the present and can shape the future. 

The presence of the army in this temple of democracy called Parliament, and their daily participation together with the representatives of the people in articulating the aspirations of the people of Uganda have contributed towards the stability of our country. It has deepened and widened our democracy. I support that we should not remove them from this House. 

In 2005, as hon. Betty Amongi said, and in 2019, this House was presented with a question of whether we should remove the term limits. Both in 2005 and 2019, this very Parliament made an argument, which carried the day, that the idea of removing rigidities and restrictions on the rights of the people of Uganda to choose their leaders was good. 

I pray, depending on how this debate ends, that this Parliament maintains that putting limits on the people of Uganda to choose their leaders is actually a question that was answered by the Constitution in 1995 when it provided for us to elect our leaders after every five years. That is enough restriction. It does not require any other restriction.

I would like to inform this House that it is very good that the Constitution allows Members of Parliament to also be appointed to serve as ministers. As Members of Parliament, we know the pain our people go through; we represent them. Therefore, if you are a Member of Parliament and a member of Cabinet at the same time, when you are making policies, you feel those policies because you know what you are talking about. 

Madam Speaker, I have also heard good ideas from this House, but I do not know – probably you will guide us. The committee said that the Speaker’s panel can strengthen and consolidate efficiency in terms of administration of this House. There is the issue of cost implications, given the ruling that we had and how we have been debating in this House. That is the reason the committee said that this good idea cannot pass the test because it would have financial implications. Therefore, the limitation of a private Member to move any Bill or motion that has financial implications comes into play. Madam Speaker, how will you guide us on this? 

I would like to thank my colleagues who have contributed, and also the Member of Parliament from Ndorwa County East for bringing this motion. I pray that this marks the end of the debate on term limits because it is not a good idea. The Constitution cured it. Let the people of Uganda elect their leaders every five years. That is enough restriction. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I find it interesting that we are happy to give more money to other bodies, we are happy to create more districts, we are happy to create more RDCs offices, and we are happy to create more presidential advisors to support one office, but when Parliament says “give us an opportunity to have one or two more people”, we say no. 

There are no new people coming into Parliament. The Speaker’s panel is from within Parliament. So, please stop confusing this with Article 93; it does not apply. We are dealing with the principle. The Rules of Procedure will guide on how we will do it. So, please stop using Article 93, and do not use it selectively. 

5.45
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, from where you stopped, I would like to know how many presidential advisors we have and how many junior presidential advisers we have. We would like to know because when Members of Parliament want to appoint one of their own to do special duties, it is a burden on the Treasury, yet we have a multitude of presidential advisers. 

The ministry in charge of presidential affairs must come to Parliament with details of how much this country is spending on presidential advisers. We would like to know where they are and what their roles are - What do they do? We have to be serious. We are not going to be bullied as if we are school children –(Interruption)

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, I would like to give hon. Cecilia Ogwal information. Parliament is always ridiculed, that it is too expensive. I happen to have been a member of the Parliamentary Commission and I would like to say that the budget of the Legislature is 1.2 per cent of the total budget. Is that too much for people to start talking about Article 93? Thank you.

5.47
Ms syda bbumba (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have spoken before me in congratulating you and colleagues who have made it to the Eleventh Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS BBUMBA: For those who were hit by the tsunami like me, it is an opportunity to divert our energy to other areas. I would also like to thank hon. Niwagaba and the committee for the job well done. 

Madam Speaker, I will start with the issue of term limits. When we were arguing for the lifting of the age limits, we relied on Article 1 of the Constitution, which states that all power belongs to the people who shall choose how to be governed and who to govern them. If we are going by that, we should not reinstate the term limits. If at all it has to be done, it should apply to all elective offices, not only one office.

On the issue of the military staying in the House, this is very important, and it is one of the greatest innovations of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government. The military are the custodians of our property and life. If a situation goes ugly, they are the first victims. Having them in the House helps them to forestall any likely coups. For that matter, I support the military’s stay in the House.

On the issue of ministers being ex officio Members, I do not think this would be good. First of all, it is an added cost because when we have ministers who are also Members of Parliament, they are paid as MPs. However, if we have all of them as ex officio Members, it means that our budget for the Executive is almost going to double. Therefore, I would suggest that the status quo remains. 

I think it is a good idea to have the Speaker’s panel, but the important thing is to have coordination. We could have a deputy, first deputy and Speaker or Speaker’s panel, but what is crucial is coordination in that office so that we do not have a vacuum at any one time – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please conclude. 

Ms bbumba: Thank you. The RDCs are needed as overseers of the implementation of Government projects. However, what is lacking, which we need to emphasise, is facilitation. They are under-facilitated. Regarding their qualifications, they should not be appointed purely as political consolation. They should have qualifications and be properly facilitated to do their job. Thank you.

5.51
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, thank everybody who has contributed to this debate because it cut across, as if it were not a Bill brought by the Opposition. 

I would like to thank the committee as well as hon. Niwagaba. The spirit of this Bill is for us to strengthen our institutions and let life be a little better for Ugandans, instead of us going backwards. 

When we talk about electoral reforms, we all got to know about the citizens’ compact. At least we are here in the interest of the population of Uganda. They expressed their views very clearly in the citizens’ compact about how we can put in place an independent Electoral Commission. This was in 2014. To date, we have not implemented what the citizens asked for. 

We want an independent Electoral Commission. It should not be appointed by one person but maybe by a committee. The President should just come in at the tail end. Otherwise, there will always be patronage and we will continue to suffer. We see that they have to wait for orders from the President, which is not right. 

Even in the Judiciary, we have had the Amama Mbabazi v. Museveni & Ors (Presidential Election Petition No. 1 of 2016) which guided that there was need for electoral reforms. Therefore, we needed this yesterday and it is for the good of Ugandans. We all know how people died on the streets. They were very innocent people who should have been protected by all, yet we could not protect them because we decided to turn a deaf ear to the cry of our people. Therefore, the country’s electoral process is very important. 

To me, elections should be held on one day and it is only the tally centres that should be at different locations. We can do it. You can vote for the President, Members of Parliament and then you go to – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Use two minutes to conclude.

Ms Aol: Madam Speaker, I wish you could give me a little more time as the Leader of the Opposition because this is our Bill. 

I would like to talk about the removal of army representation in Parliament. We know that the army can still serve us outside this Parliament. Why should they be here? We are already in a multiparty dispensation. It was possible those days when we were under the National Resistance Movement system. Why do we have the army in Parliament? When it comes to the scorecard, they score zero. 

I think the best thing to do is to have army representation out of this Parliament. If an army officer wants to join Parliament, let them resign. If you are a teacher or civil servant, you have to resign your position and contest. The soldiers should also resign their positions and contest to come and represent everybody. Those of us who are in Parliament should represent even the army and we should visit their places. Otherwise, it becomes very ugly for the army to be in a multiparty Parliament. 

About the ministers, we have this principle of separation of powers. We cannot only think about savings when we are not doing well for our people. We are faced with corruption and sometimes we just say, “that is a colleague, what can we do?” No, I think we must be serious. We should reduce the number of ministers and they must not be Members of Parliament because if they are, we will become very lenient. They have not been doing their work here. A few of them come and we just keep burying our faces in the sand. This is not right. 

In the National Development Plan II and III, there was a recommendation made on advocacy to promote an independent and functional Parliament. Parliament should stand strong and it can only do so if we try to also rectify a few things that are not right. An amendment should be adopted – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude. 

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Speaker, I still have three points to make. The Prime Minister is important but he should not be a Member of Parliament because we also want the principle of separation of powers to apply. You cannot be a Member of Parliament and again speak for the Executive. The principle of separation of powers then becomes a problem. 

Everybody has spoken about the reinstatement of the term limits, which was needed as soon as yesterday. 

We also need to empower the second-in-command. At the moment, our Vice-President is ceremonial. Let us accept that there must be something done to strengthen that position. 

Appointment of the Clerk should be done by Parliament because the Clerk works in Parliament, which is an arm of Government. So, appointment should be done by the Parliamentary Commission. We strongly recommend that. 

Establishment of a Speaker’s panel is not something to be debated. It was needed yesterday. So, we should take it on. 

In the interest of time, I would like to thank everybody and say that we are doing all this to see that we strengthen institutions. We would like to do away with the murder of people, the brutality we see on the streets and the rampant corruption. We are struggling; so, let us continue to struggle and do our work in the interest of the people who sent us here and not the interest of one person. That person should also serve the interest of the people who sent him to serve up there. Thank you. 

5.59
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard what has been said and I would like to copy what many colleagues have done, by thanking the Speaker for going through the elections. On behalf of the people of Adjumani West, I would like to recognise your success. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I would also like to congratulate all those who went through. To those that did not make it, I would like to share their problem with them. (Laughter) Nonetheless, I do not think there is anything we can do. We are very happy that you are back in the House for these few days and we are happy that you are contributing to our future. Thank you very much. 

Elections mean that you either fail or succeed. If you fail, you do not need to become very special. You do not need to be a security risk so that you need the whole country to look after you. If everybody that fails is assigned police to look after them, where shall we get the money? Who will fail instead of you, anyway? You must also learn how to fail and be with your people who failed you. You cannot bring problems to the rest of Uganda because you have failed and are insecure. What insecurity are you trying to disturb people - 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister, a very respectable man and a General, to come before this House and make those remarks while this House is discussing very important matters regarding the Constitution of this country? 

Why is he complaining and attacking losers like us who are very peaceful in the House, yet we have not advanced any request to him? We have not expressed any interest in his constituency. Is it in order for him to complain without substantiating what he means when he says that some Members are talking about insecurity? Is he in order to express how we should behave and feel when we are out of this House? Does he want to substantiate his remarks? 

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thought you were coming to address the Bill, especially the proposals made. I do not know where you got this idea that the people who lost are afraid for their lives.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I also picked it from this House – that some Members expressed fear about their lives being in danger. If I did not hear well, then I am sorry. 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, it was in a different session and it had nothing to do with the Constitution. It was not about the Constitution.

GEN. (Rtd) ALI MOSES: This is a preamble, Madam – 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please – 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, with due respect, the problems of insecurity expressed by people of Uganda, including Members of Parliament, are not necessarily expressed by people who have lost elections. 

There are people outside Parliament who have expressed fear for their security and they were kidnapped. Some of them expressed fear and they were killed after that. There was a police officer called Kirumira, for example, and some Ugandan Sheiks that feared for their lives. Kirumira told people his life was in danger; Sheik Kirya also talked about his life being in danger. Later on, they were both killed. Did they first lose elections? There was our brother, the late hon. Abiriga. His life was in danger and he ended up being killed; he did not lose elections. 

Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda, a former rebel of Uganda National Rescue Front II (UNRF II), a commander of a rebel group, in order to misdirect this country and trivialise these serious issues of security? These security issues are very serious and you even ordered the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring a list here of people who have been kidnapped. 

Is the Prime Minister in order to be off topic, yet he has been given the opportunity to talk about the Constitution? Is he in order? Shouldn’t this opportunity be withdrawn? Should people who were part of the problems of the past mislead this country? Do you want to be part of the problem of today when you were part of the problem of Amin? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, stop. That is enough. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please address the proposals in the Constitution (Amendment) Bill.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I oblige to your directive. However, nothing will change on the ground. If you have failed, you have failed. (Laughter)

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity and for allowing me to contribute to this healthy debate. Hon. Niwagaba and his team have called for some amendments to our Constitution. However, I believe that this committee did not have enough time, and whatever their proposals are, we cannot say that they are all the amendments we need in this Constitution. However, I appreciate their work. It is good work, taking us in the right direction.

We all remember the origin of this Constitution. Justice Benjamin Odoki and his team went around the country collecting ideas from different groups of people and from some Ugandans in the Diaspora. It took them some time but finally, the Constituent Assembly was elected to come and pass this Constitution.

If it was not for the short time, I would have wanted hon. Niwagaba and his team to have enough time to go around the entire country, but they do not have that time. Therefore, what they have brought here may not be representative of what Ugandans want to be amended. Who will then take care of the wishes of the people, which have not been covered in the proposals of hon. Niwagaba? Are we doing a complete job or we are doing a half-baked one? (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. This particular Bill has been in the House for the last two years or so and Ugandans know about it. 

Secondly, you are here and we are here as representatives of the people. It is our role to make decisions for and on their behalf. 
Are you trying to impute that you, Rt Hon. Moses Ali, the Member of Parliament for Adjumani West County, are not competent enough to make a decision for and on behalf of the people who elected you? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI:  No, this is diversionary. I said that you have made proposals, but are you satisfied that all the amendments required in the Constitution are covered here? Can you say that? That is my question, Madam Speaker. I am not playing ping pong, and I am not going to exchange views as if we are in a debate. No, I think this is too much. Can somebody stand here and say all the amendments required from the country are covered? Is it true?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, there is no prohibition for the Government to bring their proposals, but they have not brought their proposals. If you have got views from the people, bring them; the House is here.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the benefit to listen to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – I do not know if he is the Second or Third Deputy Prime Minister. 

The point I would like to make, Madam Speaker, is that in the Ninth Parliament, I wrote a minority report on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill and the Prime Minister stood here and promised that in a period of six months, Government was going to appoint a constitutional review commission to address all the issues which we had raised in the minority report. To my recollection, he was still in Government at that time and they had just won an election. 

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to stand on the Floor of Parliament and raise something akin to what he said almost five years back? I seek your indulgence on that.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please address the proposals. If you have your own amendments to the Constitution or proposals from Government, bring them; you cannot stop Members from bringing proposals.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I have not opposed the proposals. I have even supported them. In my opening remarks, I supported hon. Niwagaba’s proposals; it is there in the Hansard. (Laughter) I will again say, if many of you did not hear, that I support them. However, my fear is: do the proposals made make the amendment complete? That is my fear.  That is all, and this does not stop this House from proceeding. I did not say that; did I? 

Madam Speaker, if you allow me to proceed, I was saying that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Ephraim Kamuntu, mentioned in this House the intention of Government to appoint a constitutional review commission. Supposing it happens tomorrow or the day after - hypothetically - what happens?

I am proposing that whatever comes out of this House could be part of the Constitution amendment but when Government appoints a constitutional review commission, it should discuss the rest. Where do we merge the two amendments - this one and the one that is going to be made by the constitutional review commission? Where will the two proposed amendments meet in amending the same Constitution? That is my question, but I have no objection. 

Therefore, I cannot go through the proposals one by one. However, when it comes to the army, I am a General and I am not going to support the proposal of removing the army from Parliament, even if I were not the First Deputy Prime Minister. The fact that I am a General is enough for me to reject that idea. (Laughter) In addition, I am also a Member of Parliament with my own ideas, whether I am the First Deputy Prime Minister or not. I am a Member of Parliament and no one can stop me from saying what I want to say. 

I believe that hon. Niwagaba should have proposed a new idea or amendment stating that when voting comes, this House should adopt the secret ballot. That way, we would not vote by show of hands where people see us and say, “that is the one who voted like this”. (Laughter) Eventually, nobody will be haunted. That is a serious omission that hon. Niwagaba should have thought about.

The second one is that the RDCs should not be removed. They should remove those who are seriously involved in environmental degradation. Instead of helping to protect the environment, they are actually worsening the situation.

I also thought hon. Niwagaba’s amendment should have apprised us on how useful this Constitution that we are trying to amend today has been. How has it helped us as a country? That was missing and should have been there as their preamble. They should have highlighted the successes of this Constitution and its shortcomings, hence the need for amendments. 

I have already said that we believe Government will appoint a constitutional review commission. So, together, we shall find a way of merging what will come out of these proposals and what is still out there, and this will be taken for further discussion by the constitutional review commission, which we believe will be put in place. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Members of Parliament. Sixty-five Members have contributed to this motion. The vote on the motion for the second reading will be taken on notice. We shall give you notice to which day the vote will take place. 

For the record, Prime Minister, if these amendments are passed, they will go into the Constitution. The reviews you are proposing will meet them there. They will be in the Constitution. Let us finish this Bill; you will bring your Bill and it will also be handled by this House. Thank you. We shall give notice for the next phase. 

6.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I thank you and I also thank everyone who has contributed to this debate. My gratitude goes to you, specifically, for granting three days of debate. They do not allow us to clap but just know that I have acknowledged that. (Applause) You have given great importance to the constitutional amendment process. 

Allow me to thank the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, beginning with hon. Veronica Eragu, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Silwany, hon. Paul Mwiru, hon. Niwagaba and all the other members who I cannot see but are here. I thank them entirely for the commitment and for braving the bashing that we had at the beginning of the debate on this report. 

For the report that was misunderstood, for a committee that handled two constitutional amendments, that is unprecedented sometimes, it is not easy. The one element that I want to make a correction about is that the seven years was not a matter that we inquired during the handling of this constitutional process. We just carried – 

If somebody asks me to apologise, as a committee we shall apologise because we knew this was the same House that unanimously supported the seven years. I also have to apologise for believing that this was the same House that supported the restoration of term limits. I was wrong in some aspects, but the only thing which does not change is time; people can change and some Members here changed. Madam Speaker, you are unique in your own way of handling this matter. 

The issue of the qualifications for Resident District Commissioners was raised by some Members. I refer them to Article 203(2) of the Constitution; it is the equivalent of Senior 6 - advanced level - just like for Members of Parliament. That is the qualification.

I want to thank the few Members who did not only boost our ego but they were candid. Hon. Elotu yesterday spoke; he challenged us and he was honest. What should have been noted is that because of COVID-19, we were not able to have exclusive consultations on this matter. Somebody said that we only spoke to seven parties. We only took the representative figure of political parties here.

This Bill and report were ready by May. I never knew I would discuss it after elections when some Members who could have supported it, now do not want to. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, you are aware that when you present a report, it is supposed to be commented on.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this is not the first report we have presented. The bad intentions imputed on the chairperson of the committee called by my name, Jacob Oboth - I thought for once, on the first day, that I was the target, and I was not far from the truth. I do not personalise reports. Madam Speaker, you do not personalise the proceedings. Those of you who mentioned my name as a smuggler, I will forgive you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable mover, do you want to say something?

6.28
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I want to join my chairperson in expressing my sincere gratitude to you, not only for making this occasion come to this particular point, but for the way you chaired the House since you became a Speaker. Some of us will eternally be grateful to you for taking the decisions you take to ensure that Parliament is independent and does its work. (Applause) 

If I were still in NRM, I would have done something in the caucus. 

That notwithstanding, I also want to thank the chairperson and committee members for coming up with the two reports - the majority and minority reports - which have helped the Members to enrich their debate. 

There are three areas I feel some Members debated on without adequate information and one of them is the Speaker’s panel. If you read the proposal in the Bill, it is very clear. Maybe I will read it for my brother, hon. Bahati, to appreciate it better. Article 82B, which we are trying to insert, states as follows: “There shall be, in Parliament, a Speaker’s Panel consisting of three members nominated by the Speaker from among the members…”

This innocent proposed amendment is to only establish that office of the Speaker’s panel, but the way they will be nominated, elected and how they will handle their business is a matter to be considered in the Rules of Procedure. If we come to that stage of the Rules of Procedure and you feel that Members are proposing a function that may have a charge on the Consolidated Fund, that is when you can raise your Article 93 of the Constitution. But the provision as is now, meets the conditions in the Constitution.

The majority of you, save for a few, have supported this proposal because it is good not only for this House but for our democratic governance. 

On the issue of term limits, I have heard Members mention the issue of limitation in terms of voting at every electoral period, and one of them quoted Article 1. However, Article 1 says, “Power belongs to the people who shall exercise it in accordance with this Constitution.”

Term limits were part of this Constitution but they were removed. Trying to reinstate them is a question of meeting the condition in Article 1. It is in good faith and it will help this country especially, as hon. Ngabirano said, “as it goes to the next stage of development from recovery.”

We will discuss other issues at committee stage. I thank the Members who braved the three days debating this motion. I implore you, Members, that when we come to the committee stage, support the proposals in the Bill for the good of this country. 

We will be in a position to reach some agreement on some points where I saw Members very strong. However, one of the issues I would want Members to consider is the issue of the army. The committee report finds a predicament on this institution called the army in a multiparty dispensation. When you consider all those, let us come up with a sober proposal and make this country move forward. 

I implore Members not to bring up matters that are not within the Bill. First of all, the issue of seven years is not in the Bill. Some of us were talking about constituencies being re-designated and created; it is not in the Bill. Let us consider strictly matters that are within the Bill. Those outside are what lawyers would call obiter dictum. Ignore them with the contempt they deserve. Thank you very much, Members. I implore you to support the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me thank the honourable Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable members. 

This week, we have done quite a lot. We are not able to go to item No.4 because it is late. However, I want to give notice to honourable members that more Bills, which are ready, are coming to the Floor from the different committees. I appeal to you to be present next week and the weeks after so that we can get them out of our docket. 

House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 March 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)

