Wednesday, 26 February 2014

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome H.E the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and all the other Members to this afternoon sitting. 

I am also requesting that we welcome the senior staff from the Peoples’ House of the Republic of Somalia who are here under the Parliamentary Studies Institute for two weeks. As you will appreciate, we contributed to their democracy and stability and so, we are also happy to assist them to stabilise as Parliament – I am advised that the Somalis are not yet here; if they come, I will announce them again.

There are also leaders from Kyenjojo Local Government represented by hon. Kajara and hon. Timbigamba. You are welcome. (Applause) I thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, there were some issues raised and the Prime Minister directed that the ministers do answer. I invite the Minister for Works on Soroti Flying School.

REMUNERATION OF STAFF OF SOROTI FLYING SCHOOL AND THE STEPS BEING TAKEN TO ADDRESS ISSUES IN THE SCHOOL

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Dr Stephen Chebrot): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. On the issue of Soroti Flying School, I would like to inform Parliament that the academy has a dual reporting relationship: with the Ministry of Works on administrative matters and it also reports to Civil Aviation Authority on technical matters.

Presently, the Soroti Flying School has no legal status and has no administrative, financial or management autonomy. This constitutes a critical challenge to its function and operations.


The academy is presently used by Uganda and neighbouring countries to train pilots, aircraft maintenance engineers and other civil aviation related training. 

It was recognised by the East African Community as a Centre of Excellence in aviation training and it remains so.

What is the status or certification of the school? The academy operates with an approved training organisation certificate issued by the Civil Aviation Authority of Uganda. As of now, the Soroti Flying School has a certificate to operate for people to train in Soroti and that certificate will end in October this year.

Student enrolment at the school

Presently, the academy has a total enrolment of 110 students, of whom 17 are female and 93 male. At regional level, Ugandans stand at 105, two Kenyans, two Tanzanians and one Indian. They are 89 on pilot training, six pilot operators and 15 engineers.

Major training equipment for the school

Currently, the school has a total of four single engine aircraft. They were six but one of them crashed and one had its propeller broken or damaged. 

Currently, we do not have a twin engine. The twin engine that we have has been flown to Nairobi for maintenance and I wish to report that this twin engine is over 35 years old. However, we did receive a directive from H. E the President to purchase one twin engine aircraft. 

When we received that directive, we wrote to the Minister of Finance for the approval to purchase one twin engine aircraft. As of now, the Ministry of Finance does not have funds but they suggested that we reallocate funds from other programmes. As of now, Shs 5.7 billion of funds have been reallocated to purchase a twin engine aircraft and we are hoping that we should be able to get this aircraft within the next two months. It will enable a good exit of a number of students who have not yet received enough training using the twin engine, which acted as a constraint for the output of engineers who are training at Soroti Flying School. 

Madam Speaker, the remuneration of professional staff is very low. When Uganda took over the Soroti Flying School, they continued to be paid as civil servants and this was not enough. I went and toured to the school, we listened to the students and staff and it was recognised that there was urgent need to improve the remuneration of engineers and pilots to a level that was equivalent to the payments in other regions.

We received a directive from the President that we should do this and when we received that directive, we immediately wrote to the Ministry of Public Service to scale up the payments of pilots and engineers. 

When we did that, the Ministry of Public Service also wrote to the Ministry of Finance for these payments to be effected in the next financial year. 

As I speak now, we received a letter from the Ministry of Public Service agreeing with our proposal to pay pilots and engineers a figure that is not less than Shs 15 million per month per pilot. This has been approved by the Ministry of Public Service and I will be asking my colleague, the Minister of State for Public Service to give us more details on how much they are going to pay. 

We realise that there has been a problem with staff. Originally, we only had three engineers – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, in the last few minutes I have just got a document from the minister and it is reading “Internal Memo”. Is it procedurally right for a whole Minister of Works to come and give us an internal memo instead of giving us a ministerial statement? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, our interest is to get information; I do not think the form matters.

MR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Public Service is now working on ensuring that there are funds for pilots and pilot instructors to be put on the budget.

We do realise that last year and the years before, we have been operating with only three instructors in Soroti Flying School. The optimum number that we expect is about 20 but now, because of these promises that we have been making, currently, we are now retaining almost 30 who are going to be instructors in the school. This will mean now that once we have 30 people training, the output will be able to exceed what we have been having. That means that we can be able to exceed what used to be done before. 

We have also been facing a number of challenges. One of the greatest challenges has been fuel because of the inadequate funding, which we have been receiving from Finance. As of last week, we released Shs 261 million for fuel so that the students do not lack fuel for training.

Funds are being reallocated from the ministry budget to cater for basic operations. About three months ago, we allocated about Shs 2 billion to Soroti Flying School.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you know, there is a strike at present in Soroti Flying School. Yesterday, the Guild President was here with the Guild Council. The strike has been on for three weeks, so, it does not relate to what you are saying that you have sent money. They were here yesterday; they are on strike.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. The information you have given is not connected to the current problem but it is good only that it is inadequate. If we are to settle the problem today, can you tell us the arrangements on -
    1. payments of the salaries of lecturers and instructors;
    2. reorganising and assuring the students that now they can go to class;
    3. partnership with other relevant institutions? 

I am glad that you are sitting together with the Ministry of Defence. Airforce has been undergoing a lot of professionalisation in terms of equipment. We purchase aircrafts -

THE SPEAKER: You are diverting the debate; the question is, there is a strike by the lecturers and the students are not studying. That is what the Members from Soroti wanted the Government to explain. What is the Government going to do in the meantime?

MR FUNGAROO: In that line, Madam Speaker, what I was saying was, why don’t you work with airforce to get support from there because they also use that facility for training. Can’t you ask for money from Ministry of Defence to help you there?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to thank the minister for his effort, though it is not useful now. When they talk about a strike that means that there are issues in an institution. Where there is a strike, either the students are not satisfied or they do not have adequate funding.

What we are seeing here, the minister is not aware of what took place yesterday in the House. But I think somebody alerted him to come with something and he is trying. You are not answering the question.

When you read this internal memo, it shows you what is used in the institute. When you talk about the aircraft, they are all not working and this might be the cause of the strike. So, take time, we are not going to blame you here just say, “Sincerely, give me more time and I bring a better report.”

It is better than us continuing to look at you and others are telling you funny things. Let us allow him to go back and bring something better.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, look at the Hansard of yesterday, pick up the issues that were raised because they are not what you are answering.

MR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, it is not that I do not know what happened yesterday; I actually know. What happened was that -

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, you have just guided the minister that before he continues with his internal memo, he actually needs to understand what happened in Parliament yesterday, such that he gives very precise answers to the questions that were raised yesterday. Instead of taking your advice, the minister is actually challenging the chair.

Is the minister, therefore, in order to defy the chair and continue to waste the time of this Parliament by dwelling on an internal memo that is not answering one per cent of the questions asked yesterday?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, study the Hansard of yesterday and come tomorrow and answer the questions raised in yesterday’s meeting.

MR CHEBROT: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The compensation of people along Mpigi-Butambala road by Energo.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMPENSATION OF PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE CONSTRUCTION OF ROAD BY THE ENERGO PROJECT ON BUTAMBALA, MPIGI AND GOMBA ROAD

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Stephen Chebrot): Madam Speaker, I have learnt about what I should do in the last two minutes. There is a document, which I have circulated to all of you giving you the status of land acquisition or compensation payment for Mpigi-Maddu and Ssembabule road.

There is no internal memo on it and I hope you will be able to read. I have also sent a soft copy to your e-mail.

So, what is the current position regarding land acquisition or compensation of Mpigi-Maddu- Ssembabule road? I wish to report that survey and valuation for the affected properties along the project corridor was conducted by the design consultants in association with Prom consultants.

The valuation report was approved by the Chief Government Valuer in March 2012 and updated in February 2014.

The report has a total of 6,322 project affected persons, perhaps, with project compensation value of Shs 29, 674, 67535.

The survey was done by Ugserve; it was procured to handle survey and compensation payments and exploration of land for road reserve. This contract was signed in November 2013.

The consultant conducted reconnaissance through the project corridor and presented an inception report in December 2013.

Mobilisation for compensation payments was conducted from 3rd January to 17th January 2014. Verification and payment exercise is expected to commence mid next month.  I wish to report. Thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I am hesitant to ask the minister. I am aware of the dictates of Article 26 (2)(b) (i) which are very clear. The words are “Prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property.” 

I was on that road this morning because I was attending a workshop for the Ministry of Education in Gombe. Construction is going on, demolition of people’s property is on-going along the road and that is contrary to the law. Article 26 is very clear, hon. Minister. Not a single person has been compensated and the dictates of that Article I have read are very clear. It must be “prior and prompt” but construction is on-going. To that extent, that is an illegal activity. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, the real problem is that the Energo project has started construction of the road and no one has been compensated.

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I am aware of that report but the response that I got from Uganda National Roads Authority this afternoon is that normally, when they start a road, they do not have enough funds to pay for compensation but – (Interjections) - Let me finish. They do not normally have enough money to pay all the people who are along the corridor but there are people who normally go to UNRA and hand in their certificates of title and they request that the work goes ahead even without payment. 

This is the report I have but the road is constructed when the people themselves have accepted that they will be paid later.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you suggesting that individuals negotiate with Energo project? Is that what you are saying; that individuals go and say, “You can start on my land and I will wait for payment later?” This is a government project. How can ordinary peasants negotiate with UNRA to start using their land while they wait?

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The august House and the country can see what is happening across the board. We have had such problems whenever we are undertaking Government projects and the citizens of this country are not considered a priority.

In this case, Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that having noted that the procedure the minister and those concerned have taken has not followed the law to the letter, to halt the activities in that place and we first make sure that the citizens who are around the project are catered for under the law before the project can take off? Wouldn’t that be procedurally right, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the information, which came to the House yesterday was that surveys were done in 2010 and the citizens have been waiting to be paid and now suddenly, they see Energo project has started and they have not been paid. I do not know what the Prime Minister is saying about this. Mr Prime Minister, this is a government project.

3.21
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, this is a situation that I was not aware of. I am also hearing the response here. I would like to seek the indulgence of the House to let us go back and look at it in detail so that we come up with something concrete. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Statement No.3 Ministry of Public Service on salaries of health workers in Kisoro.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON SALARIES OF HEALTH WORKERS IN KISORO

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I have not been able to put this in a statement because I was sick in bed. But I have come to make this statement although I have not been able to produce the copies. However, I want to explain because I heard the question, which I am going to respond to.

I would like to say that the issue of management of the payroll currently has been affected by the changes that we are undertaking - (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, it is the practice of this House that ministerial statements are distributed to the entire membership of this House. I am sure this is meant to enhance our understanding of submissions by ministers. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for the Minister of Public Service to proceed with her statement and yet, this statement is not circulated. 

I would like to propose that since the other responses have been deferred to tomorrow, this also be deferred to tomorrow or until such a time when we Members of Parliament have got copies of the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, either you send the answer to our parliamentary website so that we can use the iPads or you come with 300 copies tomorrow.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we shall do the needful.

THE SPEAKER: So, the statement will come tomorrow.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 34 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.24
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): I would like to ask the Prime Minister if he is aware that swamps around Kampala are being cleared in the name of investors? For example, as you are going near Kabaka’s area, towards Kireka, Banda and Kinawataka; are you aware that that swamp has been cleared and that the swamp below Kyambogo University between Ntinda and Kyambogo University is also being cleared in the name of investors?

Secondly, Mr Prime Minister, are you the one who authorised somebody to clear a road reserve between the road going to Kyambogo University and Ministry of Works as you are going to Banda? It is on your left where there are heavy caterpillar earth-moving equipment, which are there to clear a road reserve for construction of either a petrol station or something else, yet, these are areas reserved and are under high-power tension cables. Tomorrow, if we need to expand the road, we will have a problem of compensating such people. 

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, if I may begin with the last question, I am not aware of that activity and I, therefore, did not authorise it. But we will take the necessary steps to find out what is happening there.

On the swamps near Kinawataka or Banda, I will get the details but I was informed by the minister that some parts of that area had been cleared by the National Environment Management Authority for some activity. But again, we will be able to get the details and inform the House. Thank you.

3.28
MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister where guns are kept during the time these professional UPDF – 

THE SPEAKER: What is that question again?

MRS AOL: Where guns are kept, and circumstances which allow the professional UPDF to go and get guns. Why am I asking this question? On 7th of this month, a private soldier called Alfred Adrani shot five people in Opit – one called Richard Obongonyinge, 32, died immediately and we buried another one last week, called Stephen Odokonyero, 19. And the three people who are still alive are Geoffrey Ochwo, 20, Denis Odongo, 23 and Nighty Adong, 27. The incident could have been caused by the struggle for Nighty Adong – 

THE SPEAKER: But now you are providing the answers; are you asking the Prime Minister or you are providing the answers about the incident?

MRS AOL: I just wanted to know where guns are kept. (Laughter) And again, for this private soldier to go and get a gun to shoot people -

Secondly, the follow-up question is about this: In circumstances where people are shot by a UPDF soldier, who takes care of them in hospital? The PC was very cooperative but the Division Commander gave a lot of threatening messages, especially to the LCIII chairperson of Lakwana where Opit is situated. I think this is all I want to know.

THE SPEAKER: As the Prime Minister comes, the staff from the National Assembly of Somalia are now here. (Applause) You are welcome. 

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, UPDF guns are kept in an armoury. Those who are shot by UPDF in war situations – because that is where UPDF shoots people –are taken care of by the UPDF. As to private Adrani and his activities in Opit and the people he shot, I do not have information. We will find out if this Adrani is indeed a UPDF soldier and if he carried out this action. 

As always UPDF does, we will take an appropriate action. But right now, I cannot confirm that Adrani is a UPDF soldier or not.

MRS AOL: Further information and clarification, Madam Speaker. If guns are kept in an armoury – 

THE SPEAKER: No, no. That is not how we do “Question Time”.

MRS AOL: But how did this Adrani get the gun to shoot our people?

THE SPEAKER: I think he has said that he is going to find out if he is a UPDF soldier and he will let us know.

3.33
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the government project in Tororo in Osukuru. What effort are you taking to ensure that the people are not deprived of their land and that they acquire free-hold titles instead of the customary certificate of title as directed by the President?

3.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, as hon. Ekanya knows, the rights of ownership of property, and particularly of land, are fully protected by the Constitution. This is the point that was being made earlier in relation to the road in Butambala, which was accurate. Government will not take any land except strictly in accordance with the Constitutional provision in Article 26.

In Osukuru, in the project that is on-going, as the honourable member knows very well because we have been in constant contact over it, all agencies of state have been involved. Initially, the question was: Is it public land or private land? That was resolved in favour of the occupants of that land – that it belongs to private people. And that was the main question. Now that it has been resolved, the management of that project will, therefore, be in accordance with the law and in the interest of the people because that is what Government has all along – that is why this project has taken very long; to make sure that the people’s rights are fully protected. Thank you.

3.35
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Mbarara University of Science and Technology has more than 150 employees. But the Ministry of Public Service, in the month of January, submitted names of only 72 people, meaning that the rest never received any salaries at all. I want to ask you: Is it government policy, through the Ministry of Public Service, to keep some people in public srvice that keep withholding people’s salaries? As a result, people do not get their money, which is not even enough. And you, as Prime Minister, what have you done to penalise those civil servants with the ministers whom you oversee?
Thank you.

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I would like to assure my honourable colleague, the Member of Parliament representing Mbarara Municipality, Dr Bitekyerezo that this is a matter Government is very much aware of. Only this morning, I held a meeting over the same matter. The question, which is also going to be coming in the Minister of Public Service’s response in relation to the health workers in Kisoro and other places is answered by the fact that there has been – as has been announced publicly – a change of systems. The change of systems has meant that IFMS (Integrated Finance Management System) is now the preferred system. There has been a shift from the IPPS (Integrated Personnel and Pension Payroll System) – (Interjections) - Let me finish my sentence – which the government is shifting from and in the process, there are some teething problems because IFMS is a fully computerised system and there has been an issue of input of names and rejection of names. And this has caused some delays and some problems in some places. 

So, my expectation is that the Minister of Public Service, when she is responding to the question about health workers and others, tomorrow, she will cover this as well so that hon. Bitekyerezo knows exactly what is happening. Thank you.

3.38
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the government’s way forward in improving rural performance; rural schools have once again performed badly and I believe this is because of lack of equipment. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You mean the UCE performance?

MS TIMBIGAMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, hon. Anywar needs to know that the Minister of Education is my kalamu. (Laughter) You took our cows. (Laughter) It is true that the quality of education in the country has not been equal; the schools in urban centres have been performing much better than those in rural schools for obvious reasons. They have more teachers because one of the issues we have been having is that teachers in rural teachers should get more facilities. And what Government has been trying to do in order to achieve some level of equalisation is to invest in the rural schools in terms of infrastructure – where we have done a great job – but also in terms of remuneration of teachers because you know in rural schools, especially in hard-to-reach areas, there is a top-up allowance that is paid to make sure we have teachers in place. 

We have, especially in secondary schools in areas where rural electrification has reached, a comprehensive programme of the Ministry of Education together with that of ICT of distributing as many computers as we can so that our children in rural schools have as much access to information as they can. Thank you. 

3.42
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister whether he is aware that the graduates that are being produced to the job market are not only irrelevant to themselves – because they cannot change their lives – but they are also irrelevant to the community because they cannot improve the communities they come from. They are also irrelevant to the country because they cannot change Uganda and above all they are irrelevant to the global market.

The Prime Minister should inform this House about what Cabinet is doing in terms of improving the curriculum, especially at the secondary level and university level, which continues to offer courses which are no longer necessary in this economy. Thank you.

3.43
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, this is a very critical question and one, which Government has obviously been addressing over and over again. Allow me to quickly say that the education we have now is a continuation of the colonial era education that we inherited at independence. And this education had aimed to have Government workers as the output; they were training people to serve the government structure then and this has not changed much. But we have decided – because of the problems hon. Amoding is talking about; the mismatch between the output of our education system and the labour market demand – we have taken on a change in the direction of our education. This is because we have resolved that our education must conform to the demands of the labour market and the economy.

As a consequence, Members may of course know – I think it was in December 2012 when we launched a new programme called “Skilling Uganda”. This programme is meant to change the orientation of our education generally to change the students’ attitude so that we emphasise imparting skills to our children. About the same time, for the first time in the history of Uganda, we did launch, after a long study with the help of the Belgian Government, an Education Careers Guide. This is very important. That Education Careers Guide is supposed to help in the orientation of our education from what it has been to one that is based on the demands of our needs as a nation and of the labour market. We intend to invest as much in this as we can. I thank you.

3.47
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wanted to know whether the Government is aware that Uganda is one of the countries in East Africa that has fake goods on the market: fake TVs, phones – everything is almost fake - (Laughter) - and they are supposed to be protecting the consumers from all those fake goods that come in and in case they are not aware, they should be aware. In case they are aware, what are they doing or planning to do about it because we are really tired? You buy a TV and after one week, you cannot watch anything on that TV. Even iPads – almost everything! What are they thinking about it?  

Secondly, Madam Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not know –

THE SPEAKER: One question, please.

3.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, it is again true that our market has been inundated by fake goods and that is why this Parliament, as you know, has had the counterfeit Bill, which we enacted. We re-established a system called Pre-Shipment Inspection and Verification of Imports. (PIVoC) In the past, it used to be called – anyway, pre inspection. Pre-inspection was done by a company called SGS but what this means is that for goods coming from outside, they must be inspected before they are brought in just to make sure that they conform to the standards. 

So, we have a unit, which is responsible for this –the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, which has been doing a good job but obviously, had a few challenges and we are attending to those. So, we look forward to building. The Police force has also been doing a good job in this area and they have been training even the public. We have been raising public awareness on how, for example, to try and help in stopping the repackaging of impure water in mineral water bottles because this is very dangerous to our health and yet they can do it so skilfully that it becomes difficult to notice. 

So, I hope Members have been engaged in raising the awareness of the general public on how to help in combating counterfeit goods. I thank you.

3.50
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere):  I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime minister; Government went into partnership with private secondary schools and also community secondary schools on the implementation of USE and in especially helping those sub-counties that do not have government-aided schools like in my district, we have Atiira Sub-county, Olio and Labor sub-counties without any government-aided secondary schools. 

But of recent, we were reading in the media that Government has chosen to cut short that alliance with the private schools. I want to know whether he is aware of that. If it is true, what is going to happen to those students who have been benefiting from those private schools and community secondary schools? What plans do we have for them? I thank you.

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Of course, hon. Ochola, this is Government policy and so, naturally, I am aware of it. It is true that Government is in partnership with private secondary schools for those schools to cater for Universal Secondary Education where there is no seed or government school in a sub-county to provide that service. 

We are spending Shs 53 billion every year on the private schools in order for them to run that programme.

We announced a long time ago that our plan was to build a seed school in every sub-county and now, what we have decided is that the money, which we were giving to private schools is going to be added to the money we have in the budget to build seed schools in the remaining 200 plus sub-counties in the country that do not have these seed secondary school. 

What this will mean is that it is going to be phased out over a period of five years and at the end of five years, all the sub-counties in Uganda will have government seed schools and then we will, each year, be withdrawing from this arrangement with the private secondary schools. That is the plan. 

Thank you.

3.54
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, at the beginning of this month, Parliament ratified the decision by the President to take the UPDF to Southern Sudan. When will the Prime Minister explain to Parliament the human and financial cost so far of this engagement as well as explaining arrangements for compensation of the victims on our side? So far, how many of our troops are being held as prisoners of war? And if you will, the arrangements for withdrawal - when are the boys returning home? 

3.54
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, Uganda does not have troops in Southern Sudan. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Southern Sudan is the other big Sudan and I have been telling Members not to say “Southern.” (Laughter)
 
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kafeero –

3.56
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (Indep, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, does Government still have plans of organising and holding LC 1 elections before 2016 or not? And if not, what steps is government taking to legitimise the existing councils? Thank you.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam speaker, as the hon. Kafeero knows very well, we have covered this subject in this House many times. The reason why the LC 1 elections were not held at the time they were supposed to be held was because one of our colleague parties in this Parliament challenged those elections in court. So we went to court, it took a very long time for court to resolve this issue, court resolved in favour of the petition and it was decided. We couldn’t use the existing laws then to hold LC 1 elections. 

So, we came back to Parliament, you know we went through again the normal passage of enactment of laws until we had the relevant laws in place. So what remains now is a suggestion which was prompted by the cost of elections at LC 1 level if the laws remained as they are because we require more than Shs 120 billion to hold those elections, to see whether we can revise the laws, the Electoral Commission and others have made proposals so we are in the process of revising these laws in order to reduce the costs. As soon as that is done and the cost of holding those elections is within reach, certainly we will hold them. Thank you.

3.58
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Kawolo Hospital is one of the high way hospitals we have in this country and it was nicknamed “accident hospital” but this hospital has taken four years without water. For all of us who use the eastern route, we are all candidates. I want to know from Government, what they are doing to make sure that at least water is put in this hospital?

3.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, it is a bad situation, and I know. I was discussing this with the Minister of Health. We have agreed, I did even visit the referral hospital in Kiboga on account of similar problem of water, and we are going to hold a meeting. We agreed with the Minister of Health to hold a meeting with Ministry of Water, to make sure that all hospitals are supplied constantly with water, because when I went to Kiboga, I ordered - I rang the Minister of Health and said if the water was not in place the following day the hospital had to be closed because that is what it is. So it is not only Kawolo, it is even Iganga, Bugiri, and others. So this is a matter that we are going to sit a find a solution for. Thank you.

4.00
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister, during disarmament exercise in Karamoja which was by an Act of parliament, Government had pledged to support the disarmed youths, rehabilitate them and get some other alternative sources of livelihood. But up to now these youths have been abandoned and we have the fear that they might go back to cattle rustling. What is the government’s turn on this particular issue? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There were commitments made by the government after disarmament regarding the youths but nothing has happened.

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon Namoe Stella, the problem of Karamoja obviously is very well known to Government and that is why we established a whole ministry to handle Karamoja. The youths in Karamoja are engaged in the general activities that are taking place in hon. Namoe’s area in Karamoja generally and of course they also benefit from the special programmes for Karamoja but they also in addition share in the benefits of the country as a whole. My expectation therefore is that these youths who are engaged in many of the programmes in Karamoja will in addition be beneficiaries of the youth livelihood programmes that we have started and other programmes like that. Should there be any special need to attend to them further, of course as always, we will do so.

4.03
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask our Rt Hon. Prime Minister if he is aware that our national agricultural research sites, the major ones, have been sold. These include: Kawanda, Namulonge, Jinja, Mukono and others. And that the buyers have already started clearing the sites in favour of housing estates. Are you aware? And who sold them?

4.04 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMEMNT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi):
Well, I am not aware that these sites have been sold. I heard a rumour in Cabinet. Anything that is not verified is not a fact so we are yet to verify this; there was a report that there was and may be an attempt is on going to allocate a piece of land of Namulonge Research Station but now that this has come to our attention, we are following it up. Thank you.

4.05
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister should be aware that for an endless number of times, Government has pledged to resolve the border disputes between Katakwi District and Napak District in relation to a 25 kilometre strip of land.
 
I would like to inform the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that the situation especially in Ongongoja sub county has escalated to the extent that mid January this year, residents of Ongongoja sub county were kidnapped by people from Karamoja and taken to the Karamoja side.

The last promise that was given by Government to resolve this problem was a pledge from the First Lady on the Floor of this House. She said that as a Minister for Karamoja, the matter would be resolved. To date, this matter has not been resolved.

I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether the government even thinks about the people of Katakwi and two, what plans the government has in resolving these land disputes once and for all.

4.07
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I am aware and Government is indeed aware of this border dispute and we did set up an inter-ministerial committee to handle it. They have been trying to do so but because they failed to raise a consensus, it has now been decided that a private independent surveyor is going to be employed to go and survey the land and give a report so that facts become the basis of the resolution. 

Thank you.

4.08
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister one serious question; Why do the Police continue to recklessly misuse tear gas in public? Recently, an incident happened in Kamuli where tear gas was used. Unfortunately, a canister blew somebody’s hand off and another one got his eye terribly injured. Is this a culture that continues to take place in our country or is it simply reckless misuse of tear gas? Thank you.

4.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Allen, I was not aware of that incident. Now that you have raised it, I will take it up and find out whether it happened and if it did, under what circumstances. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I am a neighbour of hon. Allen and it happened so please follow up.

4.11
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to tell this House and the country at large about Government measures to safeguard Ugandans who remained in South Sudan because we hear that they are being hunted and killed by one of the warring groups. This is taking into account that Ugandans have been asked to leave Sudan because the original reason of going to Sudan was to safeguard and bring out Ugandans.

The second question I would like to ask the Prime Minister -

THE SPEAKER: No, one question.

4.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Whereas the honourable colleague knows and as this whole House and the entire public know, we did deploy UPDF to the Republic of South Sudan first and foremost, to rescue the Ugandans who happened to be in that country. You know our force performed an excellent job and they rescued many.

What we have been trying to do is to have centres where they can collect so that they are evacuated to safer areas and we try and encourage them to get out of areas, which are still problematic. Of course, in areas, which are fully peaceful like Juba and the surroundings, we have encouraged them to go back and indeed, many Ugandans go to these areas and they are protected because both the Government of South Sudan and the UPDF itself, which is still deployed, have been providing that protection. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have used 47 minutes. Let us go to item five.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON FINANCIAL IMPROPRIETY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, yesterday, identified the last 14 Members to contribute. I invite hon. Bitekyerezo.

4.14
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Today, I want to be very honest with myself and debate very objectively as far as this report regarding the embezzlement of money from the Office of the Prime Minister is concerned.

I have got a problem with three individuals. I looked at this report and found that when money is going to be transferred, some phone calls are made to confirm whether the accounting officer is in agreement but for the case of the Office of the Prime Minister, I saw some scenarios where 74 per cent of the people were actually consulting Kazinda to make sure that the money is transferred but not Pius Bigirimana.

To me - 

THE SPEAKER: Why are the ministers leaving? Hon. Ministers, you are expected to be here for the sitting. Shall I name you: Minister of Justice, Minister of State for Environment, Minister of State for Agriculture. Can you imagine?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Once again, thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am in pain because I happen to have studied with Kazinda in St Henry’s College Kitovu when I was a very young man. The man looked very humble and he could not kill a fly but I am very hurt to see that this old boy of mine can steal all this Government money and forge signatures.

There are some individuals who should be properly pinned. There is this man called Mr Bwoch. I heard that Bwoch in his language means impotence; so, there is a problem. I do not understand how this man could just sign these things and Government money goes like that. 

I also heard of this man called Onywu. I hear Onywu means a very small person; small, but with a very dangerous resolve to steal Government money. I have a conviction that Mrs Kigundu of Ministry of Finance who transferred Shs 6.9 billion saying she was prevailed upon by Mr David Mugisha who again is an economist in Ministry of Finance - There is this man called Isaac Mpooza in Bank of Uganda, who okayed transfer of money to National Policy Disaster Management account in OPM with no questions at all; he did not even ask for the origin of the transfer. 

Look at the Acting Commissioner, Aid Liaison Department Ms Jennifer Muwuliza; there is also this man called Bright Atwine – some of them have even died and I do not know what killed them; I hope they did not commit suicide. We must investigate the cause of death of these fellows that stole money and died. How can you steal money and then die immediately? Why should you die when you have the money; that is my problem!  (Laughter)  I expected people to die due to poverty. 

The only problem with the Prime Minister is driving a car from money that was diverted; but he is not cited anywhere as diverting money to his account. By the way, Shs 34 billion was transferred to personal accounts without even receipt books yet these fellows are still enjoying themselves. I do not know why these fellows are still in office. If these people are not apprehended, then anybody can steal. By the way, I am reliably informed that there is one who even retired –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from hon. Yaguma. I am looking for the Members who stayed here up to late last night and they are only 14. 

4.18
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When a fish is to rot, it starts from the head. I have read this report and analysed it and I have some knowledge in financial management and accounting. The accounting officer was actually responsible for this mess due to the following factors: 

First, he ignored the joint financing agreement; this agreement has positions and procedures on how this money was to move from donors through Bank of Uganda holding account to the Consolidated Fund – he ignored it. I do not think a junior officer can be in charge of this. 

Secondly, he authorised the transfer of Shs 34 billion in writing to people’s personal accounts. 

Thirdly, he did not want an audit. First of all, he frustrated the Internal Auditor and when the Assistant Commissioner Audit tried to intervene, this man was adamant. As a result, we lost money. There was no reconciliation at all. What was he up to?

Madam Speaker, actually the committee should have asked the Rt Hon. Nsibambi to appear because if the problem started in 2009 – this business of hiding under the law that, “I am a politician, I do not touch money; therefore, I am clean” is not right because you can influence officers. This should stop. Ministers are there to ensure that Government programmes are implemented. 

The money was supposed to implement programmes in the North. Two years passed and there were no programmes in the North – actually, I sympathise with our current Prime Minister, the Rt hon. Mbabazi; he found this problem in existence. If Mbabazi was the Prime Minister by that time, maybe we would not have reached this far. This business of sitting in office and speaking very good English when things are going wrong must stop. 

Finally, we have a minister in charge of Northern Uganda. This minister sits here in Kampala. The money is supposed to be transferred to local governments in the North and the programmes are in the North. The minister enjoys a vehicle bought from the money meant to implement programmes in the North –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. The information I want to give is that much as the ministers bought cars from our money, I am also reliably informed that they were not given fuel; so, they had to fuel their own vehicles. So, you can imagine how our money was going. 

MR YAGUMA: Thank you very much. Finally, this is not the first report from PAC we are handling. We handled a report on compensation and billions of money were lost. One of our recommendations was that the money be refunded –(Member timed out_)

4.23
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I would like the public servants to draw lessons from this report. One, there is need for us to strengthen the role of internal audit in our offices. On page 23, you notice that there was negligence in the Internal Audit Department. 

You can also see that there was no bank reconciliations made. May be, if this had been done, the country would have saved a lot of money. There are no cameras in these offices, which are also good for our security and for the officers who work in those places. 

I also observe that there was irregular transfer of funds from budget support to projects. But when you look at some of these projects, those of us who have been to Kiryandongo Resettlement Camp in Panyandora Hills, we could see that there is no value for money. The houses have no doors. Much as the funds are being diverted, we do not see value for money as noted on page 80. On page 81, the same is again highlighted. 

I would like to use this opportunity to ask the Office of the Prime Minister to highlight the status of resettlement for our people especially in the Elgon Zone. Our people have gone back to the risky places and some who were affected by the second land slide in Bududa are still in these areas. The urbanisation policy has not yet taken off. So, we need to know how far Government has gone in resettling our people. 

Lastly, we would like to know the status of recovery of funds; what have we recovered so far as a nation from what had been stolen? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.24
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about PRDP Fund, the people of Northern Uganda mourn. Since the investigations started, the people of Northern Uganda are not happy. When we talk of stolen funds, consider the widows who are suffering with their families; consider the orphans whose both parents were killed during the war in the North; consider those whose arms, nose and ears were cut off by the insurgencies. 

The money, which was meant to help our people recover was misused by a few thieves. The report indicated clearly that part of the money was used to buy vehicles for the Prime Minister. I request the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda – the only gift you can give to the people of Northern Uganda is tendering in your resignation letter to the Office of the President. Since you are aware that the vehicle you are driving was bought using money meant for PRDP, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. We request you to resign to show that you care for our suffering people in Northern Uganda.

Madam Speaker, if you look at page 77, the way accountability for the money for ploughing gardens for the people of Northern Uganda was being collected, you wonder whether there are other people who care for them. It was the offices of the RDCs, the soldiers, the security operatives collecting accountabilities for the gardens ploughed. Now, my question to Government is: What was the role of the soldiers in moving from village to village in Amuru, asking our people to sign on the document to prove that their gardens were ploughed for them?

Madam Speaker, as people who come from Northern Uganda, we are not happy. I would like to say that those ones who stole the money, which was meant for PRDP are inviting curses to their families. As leaders, we need to leave a very good legacy for the future; do not let your children regret being fathered by a man who stole PRDP funds. Do not let your children regret staying in certain parts of the country _ (Member timed out_)

4.28
MS BETTY AOL OCAN (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let us also reflect on the Eighth Parliament because it was during then that this whole thing started. And the way PRDP started, it originated from the Juba Peace process. I was there when we were discussing the Juba Peace process and we needed something for Northern Uganda. But in the process, I remember quarrelling with Mr Bigirimana, the PS. We quarrelled about this tractor-hire scheme and today, it has caught up with him. The time we were quarrelling and I was asking how women would benefit from the tractor-hire scheme, which they were doing here in Central Uganda and taking them upcountry for only two weeks. Moreover, at the time people were just returning home and the roads were very bad. 

Therefore, that scheme only benefited them and today, his game has caught up with him; he must respond and actually account for that. When we first had about the theft in PRDP last year, we, as Acholi Parliamentary Group, decided to move to our people in the North. The President summoned us and when we told him that the former PS was actually not a whistleblower but a thief – he worked together with many others and it was a difficult racket to break. Is this what we are teaching Ugandan children, that it is important to steal? (Interjections) Yes, our children are getting this information. 

And to you, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, H. E the President visits the North and you, if at all PRDP was not there, were you not going to get an official vehicle? Why would you take special funds for your benefit? And moreover, you have never stepped in the North – I have never seen you there. If you ever came there, maybe you came those days before I came to Parliament. It is a big shame that you are riding in that vehicle when you cannot go there physically to see accountability. 

I will go by what the rest of the Members are saying that you should resign because you are driving blood-money. If the people who go to the North to see for themselves the people who are suffering, the widows and orphans - and when you go to Odek Sub County, most of the boreholes are not working and perhaps, PRDP would have responded to this - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one minute to wind up.

MS AOL: Look at water; if you went to Gulu District, people are living on very unsafe water. There are very many community schools and yet, our people are too poor to maintain teachers in these schools. All these would have been supported by the PRDP funding. Employment opportunity for the youth – all these are not there because of the PRDP thieves; all of them must be brought to book – right from the Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance and OPM. Thank you.

4.29
MRS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we are actually doing post-mortem because I understand that when this saga started, Police did their work in investigating it. My interest is to find out from Government what they have done since the investigations were done and what the outcome of those investigations was. 

Secondly, the report keeps on mentioning a few individuals but I do not see any recommendation the committee came up with in regard to Chris Lubega, who actually assigned the responsibility to the former Principal Accountant, Kazinda, to handle all the payments. Where is Lubega? And he actually did a lot of harm in mishandling the whole project but the committee has not come out with any recommendation regarding him.

Madam Speaker, Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda have been implicated several times and I believe there are personnel in those institutions who have been conniving with the Principal Accountant and Chris Lubega. But there are no harsh recommendations made for these people; they are only talking about Bigirimana, the Prime Minister – I mean didn’t those people contribute in stealing Government money? Why do you leave out the “small fish” and go for “bigger fish” who even sometimes do not know what is happening?

We are talking about the Prime Minister – 

MS BOONA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of this committee and there is a recommendation on page 23 concerning Mr Chris Lubega. And as a committee, we recommended that “Chris Lubega be held responsible for fraudulently assigning access privileges beyond what was required, which enabled Mr Kazinda to authorise payments and Mr Lubega be prosecuted for this fraudulent act.”
That is a recommendation that PAC produced. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I am not satisfied with that recommendation because when you look at what Chris Lubega did; to defraud the nation of all these funds and you keep on rotating on a few individuals without bringing out this one, it means there is a very big problem.

Secondly, what was wrong with the line ministers in the Prime Minister’s Office? Was the PS working in isolation of the many line ministers? Was the Prime Minister working alone? What was the role of the different line ministers? You mean they just sit and watch and then implement what they do not know? I am interested in knowing the responsibility of the different line ministers in the OPM when the money was being stolen –(Member timed out_)

4.35
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. From what the report is showing, a lot of rot is going on, not only in the Prime Minister’s Office but in all Government departments.

On Page 83, when the Prime Minister interfaced with the committee, he admits that there is a lot of criminality going in in his office under his supervision. I am even wondering when the Prime Minister suggested that time that a consultant be hired to rectify the problems going on. Why did it take so long for this to happen because these were donor funds intended to do services in Government? How can we receive all these funds without monitoring and without somebody supervising? I am sure that the Prime Minister takes responsibility on this. If you were aware that there was a lot of criminality and a vehicle was purchased for your purpose, why don’t you give us that vehicle because it did not come from the right hand – give it in so that we see that the Prime Minister is clean and even the other vehicles because some of these have been identified?

Shs 38 billion was refunded from the Consolidated Fund and each of one of us the tax payer is affected because this is money that was meant to do other programmes in Government and this explains why the teachers’ salaries are not paid, there is no medicine, we have dusty roads – for instance, in my constituency, there is no single tarmac road and yet it is near the city. It is only 80 kilometres from here. So, all this money that has been diverted would have been put to proper use.

I think that it is high time that people swallowed a bitter pill and resign from those offices that they are sitting in, notably, the Prime Minister –(Member timed out_)

4.39
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have perused through this report and I want to congratulate Members who have submitted.

One, this report brings out a very complex level of fraud especially in government ministries, agencies and departments. To me, the best description to what we are witnessing in this report is what should be termed legally as organised crime and nothing else. This is just a team of technocrats who are very organised and they have their own system of how their events are flowing from the Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda to mention but a few.

I want to advise that now that  the names of the suspects with their respective portfolios have been mentioned in this report, one, I would like to request the Prime Minister to give us a comprehensive status report because I know that ever since we started investigations, some arrests were made. How far have we gone? Have we secured some convictions? There must be case undergoing investigation, there must be suspects mentioned here who are still at large. I think that we need that comprehensive status report.

Two, as a victim, survivor, beneficiary whether directly or indirectly of PRDP which came as a result of the 20-year LRA insurgency in Northern Uganda, I would like to get an assurance that the new Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister will not do what the then Permanent Secretary, Pius Bigirimana did on our money by diverting the PRDP. 

We would like to put her on notice not to repeat the same mistake otherwise as leaders from the Greater North, we shall be left with no option but to do what we may not expect. We shall do the unexpected. Our funds must be ring-fenced for Northern Uganda and we need nobody to even ensure that something is diverted into activities that are not planned for.

Three, Madam Speaker, I have seen that there is a new wave of crime which is slowly but surely taking shape in Uganda. In certain jurisdictions, this is an offence – it’s a criminal offence. This new wave of crime is what I am terming as black mail. You are all aware – (Member timed out_)

HON. MEMBERS: One minute. Add more –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to tell us the black mail.

MR HAMSON OBUA: I am saying this because at the start of this report, there was an allegation that took the country by surprise; that the Minister for Karamoja allegedly travelled to Israel nine times in one month. This was a discussion on radio – I do not know the kind of psychological torture she might have gone through, I do not know the kind of pain she may have gone through but looking at the report, the report is very clear that the minister indeed travelled and adduced evidence to the effect that she travelled to Israel only once. 

I think we should be looking at amending our Penal Code Act. People must not make allegations and just go by them like that. This is blackmail and in certain jurisdictions, it is criminal offence that is punishable by law. Today it is the Minister for Karamoja and tomorrow it might be the Speaker, the other day, it may be me. So, I think we need to criminalise black mail and make a criminal offence in our jurisdiction as a country. 

THE SPEAKER: But, hon. Members, is it feasible to travel nine times in one month? Obviously it is not. Hon. Oketayot. It is not feasible unless you go in the night and return in the morning and then go in the night and return in the morning.

4.44
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to believe or even tend to believe in any way that any person in his or her right senses can say anything here or anywhere to try and defend the people implicated in this report.

Even if the law will not get these people, the curse of the people who have suffered and are suffering will get them. And the curse from these people who have suffered will even get all those people who will try to defend these people who are implicated. It should even get all those who have benefitted from the actions of these people. 
I want to understand from the committee; the report indicates that two of these people who are implicated in the report have died. Does the committee have evidence that these people have really died? Recently, I read in the papers about somebody going to get a death certificate for himself. Does the committee have evidence that these people have died? I want that assurance.

Then on the issue of Pius Bigirimana -Madam Speaker, even if he did not do the actual stealing, what was his duty and responsibility as an accounting officer? The fact that he failed to control these funds and money was stolen day in day out, he must be held culpable. In my culture, a liar is thief. He lied to the whole country and so, he must really be held culpable.

My biggest concern goes to the Leader of Government Business, Rt Hon. Prime Minister; this issue of OPM clinging on the money meant for the implementation of programmes, is a big problem.

Madam Speaker, you are aware we recently allocated money for restocking programme – Shs 20 billion: Shs 5 billion to Acholi sub-region, Shs 5 billion to Lango, Shs 5 billion to West Nile and Shs 5 billion to Teso. I came back from the constituency over the weekend and there is a big complaint from several districts in Acholi sub region; the OPM has sent only seven percent of this money to the districts and they are clinging on the money meant for the procurement of animals. And what is annoying people the more is that money meant for buying one animal, according to what has been indicated, can buy two animals –(Member timed out_)

4.47
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. I will begin by giving credit where it is due; under PRDP funds, we had dams constructed in Karamoja and I would like to thank the government for that. However, I am shocked by the Shs 3 billion office imprest for Karamoja. 

Madam Speaker, we have a number of sub-regions that fall under PRDP – there is Teso, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja. But it is only Karamoja that the committee says that it had office imprest of Shs 3 billion. I do not know whether this House has ever appropriated Shs 3 billion for office imprest for any ministry. And so since these funds were diverted and somebody somewhere must have eaten it, we need to make them refund that money so that we can utilise it for other projects in Karamoja.

On the Farm Engineering Limited, they were supposed to plough gardens in Karamoja; yes they did but the work was shoddy. For example, they would plough and leave patches and the farmers were forced to go and dig those patches later and yet they were fully paid. So that money needs to be refunded also.

The committee also talks of some people who I feel were very honest Ugandans; they have mentioned Shaban Wejjula. And this gentleman tried his best to protect public funds. And so, as we recommend punishments for those who diverted funds, I suggest that such honest people need to be rewarded.

4.50
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say “bravo” to the committee because what is written here shows that the committee tried. Though there were some gaps – because I attended some sessions and saw the work which is being dealt with here. But I would like to say that corruption must be dealt with scientifically with fact otherwise we shall lose the fight legally. This is because – I would like to inform even my colleagues on the frontbench – the system we have in the civil service has made these people entrench themselves to the extent that they know the tricks to steal money. You remember that in Seventh Parliament we were always arguing about the whole Budget – I think it is hon. Betty Amongi who said that the Northern Region was always taking money. But these guys knew that the money being sent to the North would have nobody monitor or supervise and that is how we lost it.

One time, while I was still in the Ministry of Health, I asked for the inventory in the system of health centres. And one health centre was given Shs 1.2 million and they gave me a book whereby one health centre was on Kampala Road, the second one was in Hotel Equatoria and the third one was around Queensway. You can imagine that each health centre was getting Shs 1.2 million per month. I decided to go to the DHO because I thought maybe my eyes were not seeing properly. When I got to the DHO, I asked him to accompany me to Kampala Road; when we reached there, he told me, “You see, they have demolished the structure.” I took him to Hotel Equatoria and he said, “This is another street; maybe they have restructured.” Then we continued to Queensway; when we reached there and I opened the door, the doctor took off with my bodyguard pursuing him. The following day I went to the PS and told him what to do to the culprits in the ministry; if some people are stealing money meant for the drugs, we should change the arrangement such that the National Medical Stores does the distribution. This is because the trick these thieves were using was to get money from the DHO in the district to the Ministry and then to the Ministry of Finance.

And from this report, it was a scientific and deliberate stealing of this money. This is because a group strategised itself in the OPM, the Treasury and Bank of Uganda –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one minute to conclude.

MR KAKOOZA: When you look at this report, 80 percent of the money released, even if the PS was clever, he could not have managed these thieves. (Interjection) Yes, for 80 percent, the signatures were forged. The signatures were forged because the IT guy in the Ministry of Finance had a password. And when you look at Document No. 8, where the committee recommended that Mr Lubega – he knew what he was doing. When the PS wrote that “Please transfer this PRDP money to go to a certain activity,” it did not; instead it went to a personal account. So this is the way we can treat and I think it is good that these reports are coming. And Madam Speaker, I suggest that when these reports come out – from the local governments and PAC – we should quickly debate and find a solution. This is because as we speak now, the thieves are quaking because we are almost there. Thank you. 

4.54
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I became very suspicious when my brother, hon. Wadri, gave an explanation that they did not name the officers in Bank of Uganda because the central bank is an entity that can be sued. Aware of what is going on in Uganda today, where officers are conniving from the Ministry of Finance, OPM and Bank of Uganda, it leaves a very big gap to say that these people in Bank of Uganda must not be named. When a name was mentioned – that of Opio – it showed me that there is a way this Opio is being protected. I have continuously said that even if you are my brother and you are in the wrong, I cannot come and protect you but rather give you advice. 

Madam Speaker, I will not be happy - and I am sure even the rest of Ugandans will not be happy – if the individuals in Bank of Uganda are not mentioned. This is because even if they are not sorted out but we name them and they face what others are facing, this means they are going to remain there and they will multiply their mistakes because they will know that the Parliament of Uganda is protecting them.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, Afande Katirima brought an idea and said that if, for instance, we follow it, we can cure this disease. We have come to understand that it is not the Prime Minister’s Office only that is engaged in corruption. What was mentioned in Public Service could be the reason health officers and teachers are not getting their salaries –(Interruption)

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for giving me the opportunity to give him this information. The disease that has attacked the civil service for quite some time now is a chronic disease called kleptomania. (Laughter) From the experiences I have, kleptomania is an irresistible tendency to steal anything small or big. In this case, and particularly concerning Government money, it can only be cured in two ways: one, through immunisation and two, through deep and drastic surgery.

Immunisation could involve beginning with the young ones who are not yet heavily infected and then the bigger surgery could go for the big ones; the senior people who are already suffering too much from that disease.

MR KAMARA: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, beginning from where he has stopped, we can get the younger generation to make less mistakes in operations but for those who are senior, these people have been planning and they know how they go through –(Member timed out_)

4.59
REV. JACINTO OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Madam Speaker, I have read and heard about this report with a very heavy heart. All the narratives we have read and that we are seeing prove to me only one thing; that in this country there is very deeply entrenched corruption and impunity in unproportional magnitude.

What we are dealing with in this report is, I believe, only a tip of the ice berg. Our colleagues on the other side of the bench are not in control of Government resources and funds anymore. They have lost their grip on monitoring and controlling our civil servants. If they claim that they have not lost this control, then, logically, it must follow that they are conniving with them.

Madam Speaker, before you cut me off - because I know the minutes are limited - I am proposing to this august House that we should move towards one direction and establish an independent and non-political anti-corruption commission so that all these cases of corruption that we are hearing of from the Public Service, from the Prime Minister’s Office - the list is almost interminable. We urgently need an independent and non-political anti-corruption commission to see all this.

To the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, he was very truthful. He said his office did not have the structure and capacity to implement the programmes in his office but I was amazed that it is the Office of the Prime Minister, which carries out the actual construction of teachers’ houses, of nurses’ houses and of houses of chiefs in Acholi. All of these houses in Acholi, Lango and Karamoja were constructed by this office and they were done in a very shoddy way.

All this, including the ploughing done in Karamoja, shows that the funds were actually being syphoned in a very refined and professional manner and I think, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that you have to take the responsibility. In any accounting country, when such a thing happens under your docket, the only decent thing to do is to resign. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I am in a very difficult situation and I hope that at the end of this debate, we shall have a resolution on the way forward.

The Constitution is categorical. The President is the Minister of Finance and he is the one who appoints accounting officers. I have read in the media of the President defending the accounting officer and saying that he is a whistleblower and a star performer. I am in a difficult situation. I see police officers driving vehicles of PRDP. I see we are getting diverted to the Prime Minister who is appointed by the President, because he has driven a vehicle. He is culpable but the person whom we should hold culpable is the person who hides a thief. If, in a village, the villagers are looking for a chicken thief and they find that thief in your house, you are also a thief.

How come all of us are focusing on the Prime Minister, focusing on small people and yet, the person who appoints the accounting officer, the President, is calling the person a star performer? How come and we are keeping quiet, that it is okay?

Madam Speaker, my election for 2016 is threatened because of the theft of PRDP money. We were called to Hotel Africana and we were told that under BUDS, we were all going to get money; from Busoga, Busia to West Nile. We moved in the villages and told villagers that there was a grant coming from Office of the Prime Minister. The villagers are now asking us where the money is, as if we are also part of the thieves.

I would like us to amend this report and cause the President to address Parliament. He does not need to wait for the report of the Auditor-General. People have been named and money is lost. We want all those officials who have been named to recover the money because Article 164 (2) is categorical that anybody who concurs in the use of public funds contrary to the established procedure shall make good the loss.

In this case, people have been named but they are being protected by the President and all of us are focusing on the Prime Minister for driving a vehicle; policemen are driving vehicles too. Why don’t we name them also? We should deal with the fish which is rotting from the head. 

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that for us to make good for the people of East Uganda and the people of Northern Uganda, we should have a supplementary budget to refund the money of the people of Eastern Uganda and those of Northern Uganda - the Shs 50 billion which was lost – (Member timed out.)

5.07
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee and the committee members at large. From the debate made before me by hon. Obua, hon. Ekanya and others, I would like to say that such a large sum of money cannot move an inch without the permission of the people responsible. This is therefore an arrangement of the entire Government. 

According to what is indicated on page 9; the observations made on pages 7 and 8 indicate the amount of money taken and diverted to a dormant account in the OPM is so big - Shs 27 billion! Where did the money go and what was the money used for? Individual thieves cannot take this amount of money and use it for local government programmes. Local government programmes are Government programmes; a thief cannot use this money to buy an official car for the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister is an officer of Government and these are official government programmes. Therefore, I conclude that the Government of the Republic of Uganda needed this money for their programmes. Why don’t we give it to them since they need it? If this PRDP money is no longer relevant to the North, let us give it to the Government to use it the way they want. But the people of Northern Uganda must know that we need a separate fund which is ring-fenced outside the control of the Prime Minister. 

With due respect, the programme should not be under the OPM the way it is now. In a meeting chaired by the Prime Minister which I attended, in the speech made by the chairman Greater North Parliamentary Forum, hon. Dr Okuonzi, the Prime Minister gave a very bad response. I did not have the opportunity to tell him there. Let me use this opportunity to tell him. 

The chairman made a comment that we need the fund for Northern Uganda ring-fenced and protected so that Government officers cannot put their hands into it. The remark of the Prime Minister was – it must be on his video – he said, “We thought the people who are speaking here are civilised people,” implying that the chairman, together with all of us people from the North are not civilized – (Interjections) – when we told you that we needed another Northern Uganda Fund, you told us that we are not civilized. So, if you need the money as Government, take it but we must create the Northern Uganda Fund because this malicious Government will not take us anywhere. The people of the North must wake up and wake up now. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.11
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence to add me a few minutes to deal with this problem. The former Governor of Virginia got gifts worth about $140 million, which is about Shs 300 million. He is going to prison for 30 years for it. But in Uganda, if you take Shs 1 trillion, you can walk away scot-free or serve only five years. 

I want to structure my debate this way. I want to start with Bank of Uganda first. I agree with Members who said that Bank of Uganda as an institution cannot be held liable; it is the individuals who should be held liable. I believe the Governor and his team should be brought to book. 

It is clear that in one of the emails which bounced, the Bank of Uganda said they could not transfer that money unless they confirm. Immediately, after 15 minutes, the email was sent back saying, “Confirm transfer.” 

Each car took Shs 200 million. And if those cars are diesel cars, it means that one litre could cover a minimum of six kilometres. So Shs 200 million divided by 3,000 will give you 67,000 litres. If you multiply 67,000 litres by six kilometres covered by one litre, it will give you 402,000 kilometres. It therefore means that those cars travelled 402,000 kilometres and yet from here to London, it is 6,000 kilometres. That means that going and coming back is 12,000 kilometres. So, if you divide 402,000 by 12,000, it would mean these cars have travelled over 36 times to and from London. Now let us assume it takes a week or two to go and come back, in a month, they will have gone once. And so it would take more than three years for that car to go to London and come back. That means as we speak now, the OPM cars are still travelling to and from London. (Laughter) That shows you how dangerous this institution is. 

So clearly, it demonstrates that money was taken in the name of Caltex Ntinda and the cars are still travelling and we know the mileage of cars in the OPM is not more than 100,000 because the moment it makes 200,000 they are scrapped. So, this is a clear demonstration of public theft of money. So how do we do it? I am sure that even the Prime Minister’s car is still travelling to London up to now.

Madam Speaker, cash was withdrawn and deposited on people’s accounts to the tune of Shs 34 billion. The moment government money hits your account, it means that that account is open to the Auditor-General to audit. But these accounts were never audited; they were being given money to do construction as though they were engineering firms. They were being given money to do activities – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi for giving way. The information I wish to give you and the House is that the capacity of those tanks in Ntinda was 22,000 litres but the money paid was for 57,000 litres. Can you imagine that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. And there is no car with that capacity that is more than 200 litres. So, Madam Speaker, the moment money hits your account, it is open to the Auditor-General. But if the Auditor-General has not audited that account, it means the money is still there. So, it is a clear indicator that all those who got Shs 34 billion on their accounts should refund it with interest. There is no question on that because they are not engineers to have performed some work. And they were not given tasks to do which they even never performed. That is a clear indication that – and I also fault my brother, the PS for not having enforced this collection.

Madam Speaker, cash was returned, as raised by my brother from Bukedea. On average, the cash that was being returned was Shs 600 million. Hon. Members, you remember recently when the President was in Kamuli, he was carrying only Shs 250 million but you saw how big the sack was. What about if it is Shs 1 billion, how many sacks are those? And every ministry has a machine which checks people who come in because they could be carrying bombs. I want them to confirm to us that on the day people were returning money to the tune of Shs 9 billion, the machine identified sacks with cash. This is because they are saying that the money was brought and placed in people’s offices. I want to demonstrate a simple example: If you have Shs 50,000 notes, you will need 20 bundles to make Shs 1 billion. When you pack Shs 10 billion, the whole of this room will fill up. I would like to ask the Prime Minister if he has a bank in his office where the returned cash was kept. 

Simple accounting principles state that if money hits my account accidently, it must go back to the account which sent it. How did you accept Shs 550 million 20 times to come to your office and no action was taken. I am sure there were guards who would have alerted you that there was money coming in.

Madam Speaker, there are people who died and do you know why they died? So, that we kill evidence. One of them was the one who worked on the money meant for the First Lady. (Interjection) You need this information so that you go and tell your village mates what is happening. (Laughter) Why did a cashier, aged 32, die and yet hon. Kajura who is 80 years did not die? Why did those in the Ministry of Finance and were involved in the transaction die? There must be something fishy. By the way, thieves do not die. When the cashier died, it is a clear indication – (Interjections) - I know he does not want to talk about death –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wafula, take to the Floor. So, have you donated your time? Okay, if he has done that, I now invite the Prime Minister.

5.24
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi was giving us vital information and he was cut off at a very interesting moment. A lot of evidence has been given and a lot of details about the theft of public resources have been given. We have had similar reports like this one before in this House and they excited Ugandans. There was the one on CHOGM – which was very elaborate; there was also one on Temangalo and the public got excited. Today, as we talk here, the public is excited about this report, particularly the people in Northern Uganda; they think something will be done to those who caused a lot of pain to them. Huge sums of money were misused – or stolen – that is a better word.

I want to appeal to Government to prove to the country that this time we are serious about fighting corruption – that we are fighting impunity - (Interjection) - it is your choice and I am looking at the fact that you are in Government. Of course, we are happy when you steal and soil your name but we also gain pain because you cause a lot of pain to many families. 

The thefts we read about in the report are a syndicate of people in the OPM, Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance. There is no doubt about it as it was all calculated, planned nicely and this means that the Government has failed. In a normal democracy, you would have resigned, especially the Prime Minister.

I think Gen. Katirima talked yesterday and I agree with him; we need to overhaul some of these departments. There is no way you can leave the finance department of the OPM and officials in Bank of Uganda and Finance who handle transactions. Definitely, we must overhaul it as there is no way you are going to have the same people.

I think that the PM’s office should get out of implementing projects and programmes. It should supervise. You cannot supervise yourself when you are the implementer. It is difficult because when you have committed a crime against yourself, you cannot supervise yourself like these ones.
  
We have also seen that when it became the turn of the PS, Bigirimana - the famous Bigirimana, the President said that he is a “star performer”. The President should stop supporting suspects. He does this very often and there is a time, actually twice, where he has even sworn affidavits for suspects. What type of President is this? Why can’t he let the system work? He biases those who are investigating because he is the President or Fountain of Honour. It has been on and on and on but why? 

So, we are asking His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda that when there are investigations, he should not open his mouth in support of any suspect as it is immoral and criminal.

People have been named in this report, both small and big. We hope that this time, something will be done and we also hope that the politicians who have been named will respect themselves and take political responsibility right from the First Lady who ploughed no gardens. It is unfortunate that she is not here. We need to have something done. Really, you are in charge of something as the supervisor and something goes wrong and you take no responsibility. You are not accountable. I come from the corporate world where you are definitely accountable. Otherwise, we are pretending when we come here and talk and talk. Nothing will move on. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, 60 members have contributed. Let us now invite the Prime Minister to respond.

5.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, you will recall that financial impropriety, as we have heard in the last two days of debate, was unearthed within the Office of the Prime Minister and other Government entities stretching from financial years 2010/2011 to 2011/2102. 

The Office of the Auditor-General conducted special audits and accordingly, he should report. The Public Accounts Committee of Parliament considered the Auditor-General’s report and through a number of meetings or hearings and other forms of investigations as put before this House its report for consideration.

On behalf of Government, I would like to thank Parliament and all the agencies of Government that have supported this process. I have carefully studied the Public Accounts Committee Report on the Special Audit Investigation into Allegations of Financial Impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister and its recommendations, the majority of which call for further investigations or actions by the responsible agencies of Government. I want to repeat this; the majority of the recommendations of the committee call for further investigations or actions by the responsible agencies of Government. 

I would like to reassure you and the country at large that shocking as these events were to all of us, satisfactory measures have already been put into place to ensure that the due process is followed to bring all suspects in this impropriety to book and that the Government has put into place safeguards against reoccurrence.

Madam Speaker, colleagues may wish to note the following progress with regards to addressing some of the recommendations of the Auditor-General and PAC’s report first that Government undertook the development of a high level government Financial Management Reform Action Plan Matrix to remedy the financial impropriety in the OPM and other ministries, departments and agencies.

Under this matrix, seven key result areas were agreed notably:
    a) Provide from December 2012 monthly written updates on specific satisfactory administrative sanctions taken against the Bank of Uganda, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Prime Minister official’s names in the Auditor-General’s report into financial impropriety in a bid to ensure repayment or recovery of public funds lost.

    b) Provide satisfactory progress on investigations and prosecutions of indicted public and private persons and firms for fraud and corruption in the OPM case. 

    c) Agree on amounts, timing and methods of repayment of all misappropriated funds with Denmark, Ireland, Norway, Sweden and the United Kingdom. 

    d) Implement key recommendations of previous EFMTs (Integrated Financial Management Systems/IT Security) audits and fix known weaknesses detected by the Office of the Auditor-General and recruit a security consultant for the issues.

    e) Submit for consideration by the relevant committee of Parliament proposed amendments to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 that include provisions on- 
        i. oil revenue management in line with international best practise;
        ii. a strengthened system of sanctions for breach of the public finance management regulations;
        iii. commitment controls;
        iv. legal creation of an independent directorate of internal audit. 

    f) Complete migration and fully operationalize the recruitment, payroll and pension modules processing on integrated pay roll and personnel systems including interface with EFMS.

    g) Fully constitute the Inspectorate of Government by appointing the second Deputy IGG and presents a firm commitment for the timely replacement of the first Deputy IGG. I want you to note that under each of the seven result areas mentioned above, there are agreed upon actions for which specific responsible agencies and or persons regularly report progress on implementation. 

Madam Speaker, on the key issue of investigations and or prosecutions of the persons named on the reports on the impropriety under the OPM, updates from the Director of CID and the DPP indicate that - 
    a) three convictions namely; Geoffrey Kazinda, Wandera Francis and Kasirabo Norbert have already been secured;
    b) while files under process include persons before court namely, Owor John Martin, Kezaabu Beatrice, Okello Wilbert, Mugisha David, Nawuggwe Racheal and Atwine Bright;
    c) fifty-two files are with the DPP for sanctioning for prosecution;
    d) thirty-one files have been referred back by the DPP to the CID for further investigations; and 
    e) one hundred and fifty-nine files meaning of 159 suspects are still under inquiry. In addition, two suspects have voluntarily paid back Shs 152 million. One suspect paid back the entire Shs 122 million that had been lost while the other has so far paid back Shs 30 million out of the Shs 55 million that had been lost. 

Madam Speaker, you may wish to note that the Director of Public Prosecutions has prioritised the cases for prosecution according to those cases that would yield the highest impact in terms of convictions leading to high recoveries of the misappropriated funds and two, whether subsequent cases will have a negative impact on the cases that are already in court where key suspects in subsequent cases are also key witnesses in other cases that are already in court.

Madam Speaker, you may also wish to appreciate that delay in prosecution of these cases was partly be a result of the non-functionality of the Anti-Corruption Court for six months because of a constitutional petition and absence of a substantive Director of Public Prosecutions. I am however pleased to inform you that the Anti-Corruption Court is now fully functional because the Constitutional Court has finally resolved that issue and a substantive Director of Public Prosecutions in the names of Justice Mike Chibita is in place; and in addition, the Office of the Inspectorate of Government and the Inspector General of Government is fully constituted because the second Deputy IGG was appointed and the replacement of the first Deputy IGG has also been appointed by December 2012.

This provides needed assurances that these cases will be handled expeditiously. 

Madam Speaker, in a bid to strengthen public financial management processes, a number of measures have been undertaken including the following:

1. Introduction of the Treasury Single Account (TSA) where working with the Bank of Uganda, Government closed a total of 380 accounts in addition to another 165 dormant accounts and transferred Shs 14.9 billion from the latter accounts to the Consolidated Fund Account.

With the Treasury Single Account, all resources of Government for ministries, departments and agencies are controlled on a single account in Bank of Uganda. Consequently, Government has strengthened capacity to monitor day today cash and day management, eliminate the need for cash rationing and also tackle the issue of low absorption of funds, among others. Subsequently, the TSA will be extended to cover more public resources including all local government votes.

(2)	Review of the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. This is to strengthen banking arrangements and operations of government accounts including limiting of cash withdrawals to the maximum of Shs 40 million in a month in order to reduce the amount of public funds exposed to abuse. And effecting the mandatory cross-checking with the principal signatories prior to making cash payments of high value.

(3)	Count IT security audits by the Police and Ernst and Young to plug any system loopholes.


(4) Upgrade and strengthen the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) with in-built additional security features. The features will be extended to cover donor-funded projects and other remaining government agencies.

(5) 	Strengthening budget monitoring through the intensification of the monitoring of implementation of the various government programmes by the Budget Monitoring and Accountability Unit. Emphasis has been placed on the major sectors of Works and Transport, Energy, Health, Education, Agriculture, Water, Trade and Industry, Local Government, Judiciary, Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Mulago Hospital, Public Service, Office of the Prime Minister and UNRA. All these will, if they have not already undergone, undergo forensic audit. These are the major expenditure centres in Government.

(6) Strengthening budget transparency through quarterly media briefings as well as publication in major newspapers of releases by Vote, programme and project for Central Government institutions and by Vote and grant for local government.

A budget information website www.budget.go.ug which I request all Members, including members of the public to take note of, was also developed to provide all Ugandans with access to detailed and easy to understand information on how public funds are being spent.

Towards this same objective, my office has, in addition, intensified the conduct of public barazas, which provide an opportunity for the political and bureaucratic leadership from both the central and local government levels to clarify on implementation of government programmes at grassroot levels.

(7) 	Improving wage bill and payroll management by rolling out the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). This is interfaced with IFMS to enable payments of salaries and pensions through the IFMS and transferring the responsibility for processing of the payroll, and approval of the salary payments to the respective accounting officers.

In line with the presidential directive, accounting officers and heads of cost centres are required to print and display monthly payrolls on public notice boards for scrutiny.

So what has happened is that now, the payroll is going to be handled by this single system called Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), which is a computerised system that will enable the managers to monitor whatever may be going on at any given time. If money is spent, they can see this and if money is not spent according to the plan that will clearly show as well.

(8) 	Proposed amendment to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 among others. Madam Speaker, arising out of these efforts and to express their support and confidence in the measures Government has so far undertaken, development partners were unanimous in expressing their readiness to resume continued support and co-operation with Government.

In a joint statement issued on 3 October 2013 after the Government Development Partner Review of Performance in Financial Year 2011-2012, the Danish Ambassador, Mr Dan Fredrickson, who is co-chairperson of the Joint Budget Support Group stated that, “We appreciate the Government of Uganda efforts since November 2012 to re-establish confidence in government systems by addressing public finance management witnesses. In this regard, development partners would like to reaffirm our commitment to supporting reform efforts of the Government of Uganda; reforms that strive to strengthen systems and institutions for a better way of life for the people of Uganda. It is my firm belief that our collective ambition of supporting the Government of Uganda’s reform agenda is best advanced through a mutual dialogue.”

Madam Speaker, I would like to reiterate the government’s commitment to the continued implementation of government wide reforms in line with the high level metrics and the recommendations in the Special Audit Report and Public Accounts Committee report, which is under discussion now. 

Of course, I cannot conclude my submission. However, what I had intended to say yesterday was up to that time. I did not intend to talk about myself, I simply intended to inform the House and the public of the actions Government had taken in response both to the Special Audit Report by the Auditor-General and to what the Public Accounts Committee has recommended.

But I have added this last bit where I say that I would like to comment on the minority report issued by hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga and signed and therefore owned by him alone – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I one time went to the Prime Minister’s Office with other members of the education committee. By then it was called the Committee on Social Services. The Prime Minister told us that he was a life Member of Parliament and I disagreed with him.

Rule 194 reads as follows: “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.” Actually, I do not need to go further; you just have to come back to my class, hon. Prime Minister. Minority means minor. There is no rule here saying that a minority report must be signed by more than two people. It is me. So, is the hon. Prime Minister in order to say that it is owned by me yet I am the one who signed the minority report? Does he understand the meaning of the word ‘minority’? And many members supported me in the House. So is he in order or he deserves to come back to my class?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Prime Minister was confirming that you are the only one who signed that report.

MR MBABAZI: Actually before I do that, Madam Speaker, allow me to give some information in response to some of the points that were made in the course of the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Are you not finishing with the minority report? Are you leaving it?

MR MBABAZI: The minority report will be my last because I have just been listing what has been done and I think this logically fits there.

Yesterday, a very important question was raised by hon. Rose Akol and others. I would like to say that this is a question I have since framed myself but arising out of what was said. And the question is, “Has Northern Region lost funds as a result of the impropriety?” The impression given is that the money which was diverted was taken away and therefore Northern Uganda, which was supposed to benefit from the usage of that money, suffered to the extent of the diversion. I just want to state that Government actually re-adjusted its allocation and got funding from alternative sources; alternative to the money that was supposed to come from the donors, which of course was stolen. 

So the PRDP fillings have not been reduced but maintained at the same level – (Interjections) – I cannot take clarification and then a point of order; that is abuse of rules. So, Madam Speaker, I would like your protection to give this information. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Prime Minister sat here for two days without saying anything while Members contributed. Why don’t you listen? Let him finish his statement. 

MR MBABAZI: So, PRDP fillings have not been reduced but maintained at the same levels and I can give you the PRDP releases to local government just to give you an idea. In the financial year 2009/10, the release was Shs 79.87 billion. In 2010/11, it was Shs 78.88 billion; in 2011/12 it was 71.39 billion; in 2012/13 it was 65.36 billion and the fourth quarter development had no release in all ministries that year. So, this is the reflection here. When it came down to 65 in the year 2012/13, this figure reflects the no release of the fourth quarter in that year, for all ministries, departments and agencies partly as Government tried to control inflation – if you recollect. 

In this year, 2013/14, so far 62.8 billion representing 65 percent has been released by third quarter and the remaining 15 percent is to be release in the fourth quarter. This is information from me; it is true. Anyone who has reason to dispute it can bring contrary information. 

On Bududa resettlement –(Interjections)– in Kiryandongo

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you first listen and then you can take issue after listening? Let him complete his statement then you can identify the areas you do not agree with.

MR MBABAZI: On Bududa resettlement in Kiryandongo, it is true that only 20 houses were built by Habitat - this was Muwanga Kivumbi’s point. Twenty houses were built by Habitat; the OPM built 100 incomplete houses, 600 households relocated but 500 without housing. There are 500 people without housing and the rainy season is approaching but these 500 people will be resettled according to recommendations in the engineering audit. 
We have a contractor in place to complete the 50 unfinished houses. The contract for the construction of 50 houses has been signed – these are additional houses and the engineering audit is complete. 

On Bududa settlement, a question raised by hon. Jack Wamai, yes, the African Union donated half a million dollars to Bududa. He said there was no trace of the funds. Now, I was informed that the funds were received in July, 2010 and they were expended on relief related activities to support the Bududa victims. They were not used to build houses but to help the victims in a general way.

Hon. Tonny Ayoo said there was a new fraud which was taking place with regard to purchase of land for Bududa displaced people. He said land being purchased in Bulambuli was over-valued and 85 percent was wetland. He said this was mentioned in the Odwel Report and that the same staff who were involved in financial impropriety were still overseeing the land purchase. 

The response I got when I took up that question was that, the procurement was still ongoing. No land has even been selected let alone being purchased. Financial proposals have not yet been called for. So, no cost has been attached to any land yet. 

On the ferry between Busoga and Serere, which was raised by hon. Ochola – I think he said letters were written to the OPM to provide funds for the ferry but the OPM continuously replied saying that funding was available but this money was lost under this impropriety. 

Again, I got a response to this and the response is that the funds for the ferry were released to the Ministry of Works and Transport to the tune of Shs 6.2 billion. 

Hon. Okupa Elijah, whom I listen to always without interruption, listed 72 staff from the OPM who had been listed by the CID for investigation. He said no action has been taken and he presented the list here. Well, when I cross-checked, I found that seven staff have already been interdicted, 15 staff have been transferred and all those other cases of investigations that I read earlier – I have the list here - are on-going. 
We act on the cardinal presumption of innocence; even if someone is suspected, we carry out investigations but they are innocent until they are proven guilty. So that is the additional information that I wanted to give about some of the points that were raised in the course of this debate.

To conclude, may I, Madam Speaker, refer to the minority report by hon. Ssewungu. Madam Speaker, you may wish to note that I did submit comprehensively to the committee as the report itself says, on all the matters raised in this minority report. And I find the recommendations of the minority report not based on facts. Yesterday, we were told and that confirmed my feeling that hon. Ssewungu may have been absent from the committee when I submitted on these matters or he could have been distracted by some other engagements. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, there is a Nile English Course book we used to use in primary five where Mr Hare went to marry the king’s daughter and the condition was for him to drink hot water. But Mr Hare played tricks by telling a lot of stories while the water cooled. Eventually he drank it and married the king’s daughter. I am now seeing a similar situation here. 

I was in the committee and records can bear me out; I sent my questions to the Prime Minister and the minority report is not derived out of the blue – you hear what someone is submitting and the evidence submitted. So, is the Prime Minister in order to behave like Mr Hare by creating different situations that are not clear so that he runs away? And you can see that when he is talking he is a bit shaky; I am waiting for him to conclude his submission and I defend my minority report but he is now trying to take us astray as the “water cools.” Is he really in order to do what he is doing? Let him respond. He wrote this statement himself; let him read it and then we shall stand up and respond and we see if people will find merit in our additional submissions. Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I have not seen any water, hot or cold. Please, conclude.

MR MBABAZI: And he did not follow my submission; and that could be the reason why it is only him and him alone who disagrees with the rest of the committee. And he disagreed only on those two points.

I have a duty to repeat these reasons I gave to PAC for hon. Ssewungu, my dear friend, and for all those who could have been misdirected by his submission on this Floor. The nature of the fraud we witnessed was a complex one and involved an array of actors across institutions that are key in the function of the financial systems in Government – that is the Ministry of Finance, the Accountant-General’s Office, Treasury, Bank of Uganda and the OPM. Indeed, as a person constitutionally mandated to coordinate the implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and agencies, it is actually the OPM – not any of the government oversight institutions. Let me repeat this: It is the OPM and not any of the government oversight institutions that requested for a special audit whose report PAC and CID are using in their investigations. I should hasten to add that this action afforded hon. Ssewungu to submit a minority opinion. He should thank us for the action we took for him to be in a position to submit that opinion. 

Now, on my alleged influence in the management of financial and human resources under Vote 3: OPM, I find the submissions of the then accounting officer/PS then and the Accountant-General, respectively and indeed the comprehensive analysis by the PAC very instructive. You will recall that I assumed the post of Prime Minister in May 2011 and when I did – I think I told the PAC this – there was only one vehicle. The Prime Minister then, the Rt Hon. Apolo Nsibambi had had that vehicle, a Mercedes Benz, for eight years and then a Land Cruiser, which was newer. According to Government regulations, the lifespan of a car is four or five years but this car was eight years. As you all know – because it is this Parliament that passed that law – a Prime Minister on retirement is entitled to a government vehicle. And I was informed by both my predecessor and accounting officer that they did not have money to buy a new vehicle for Prof. Nsibambi. Could I, therefore, until they buy a new one, allow him to keep one of these vehicles? Of course I agreed and being what I am – because Prof. Nsibambi is older than me; he was my predecessor – I decided to give him the newer vehicle - the Land Cruiser - and I kept the eight-year old Mercedes Benz and that is what I used for one year. That Benz was more in the garage than on the road and most of that time, for your information, I was using my private vehicle. 

So, this was my situation as Prime Minister. The same situation applied to the other ministers – those who were new – they did not have vehicles. So it is a fact that we talked to the accounting officer, we also talked to the Minister of Public Service, the now First Deputy Prime Minister about providing vehicles for the OPM. Now, if someone says that to tell the accounting officer or chairman of a committee in Government, who handles provision of vehicles for ministers – the Minister of Public Service – that these people do not have vehicles and so get for them is pressure obviously to do what is expected to be done. But it is a fact that I did not put any pressure on anyone to buy for me a vehicle other than that general pressure to provide ministers with vehicles.  

On allegations of the source of funds to purchase my vehicles, it is critical – (hon. Nzoghu rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, please take your seat. (Applause)

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I thought he was sitting. (Laughter) On allegations of the source of funds to purchase the Prime Minister’s vehicle – incidentally when these vehicles are bought, they are bought for the office. They are not my personal vehicles. That is why when I came in, I found a vehicle that had been there for eight years and if I was to leave that office today, that vehicle will be there for my successor –(Interjections)- even next week, I can go. You know, hon. Ssemujju does not know that the world moves round –(Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Order please.

MR MBABAZI: So, on the allegations of the source of funds to purchase this Prime Minister’s vehicle, it is crystal clear that the Prime Minister who has an accounting officer, administrative officers and so on cannot in anyway get involved in financial sourcing. No minister ever gets involved in financial sourcing as it would be against the state financial regulations.

The issues of virement where funds are reallocated from one programme to another in the same ministry or department is not always irregular in the first place but how it is done is not the responsibility of a political leader. This is a bureaucratic function.

I wish therefore to reiterate that the Prime Minister is not anywhere involved in the financial management and human resource management of the ministry. If hon. Ssewungu missed this point in PAC, he should get it now. 

Madam Speaker, another contention that arose in PAC was whether the vehicle that was purchased fell within the prescribed regulations or not. I wish to state that in PAC, the document concerning the vehicle were submitted and there was no dispute as to the nature, colour, appearance, capacity and so of this vehicle.

So, the Prime Minister had to have a vehicle, the organs of state responsible procured a vehicle for the Prime Minister and the vehicle that was procured is an appropriate vehicle. You know that sometimes for some people, I have to –(Laughter)

Now there was a question of transfer of Kazinda. Again, hon. Ssewungu misdirected himself and tried to mislead this House that my intervention in the transfer of the Principal Accountant led to mismanagement of funds.

Madam Speaker, my submission in PAC which was obviously missed by hon. Ssewungu was as follows: That by the time the Principal Accountant was being transferred the issue of financial impropriety had not yet come to the surface. That does not mean that the scam had not yet been committed. Indeed, as everyone who spoke before on this point pointed out, this had started long before I became Prime Minister. I invite hon. Ssewungu to read the Auditor-General’s report in order for him to discover that. 

I received information, however, that there was a very serious financial scam in the Office of the Prime Minister and that was the reason why the Principal Accountant was being transferred. There were two issues at stake: one, it was at the closure of a financial year and remember I had just become Prime Minister and the financial year was ending. I imagined at that time that in a system where you close off your books every year, the Principal Accountant plays a vital role in that exercise. The Principal Accountant had not closed his account books and had not made his accountability. 

In a system that was already suspect, this would give him defence to say that he had been transferred so as to meddle with his accounts. It is not true that I ordered anyone to arrest the Accountant-General. I just wanted to inform hon. Ssewungu that I am closed with sufficient authority to invite the Accountant-General and he comes. I do not need to arrest him.        

I had also learnt that he was being transferred – this is Kazinda - without allowing him to do the proper handover. Actually, he was told in the morning that he was transferred and he had to go without entering his office. There was suspicion.

My argument to the Accountant-General was why do you transfer a person without allowing him time to handover yet it was financial closure time? I still believe that had Mr Kazinda been transferred at that time, the revelations and discoveries maybe that were made subsequently may possibly have not been made. My line was that, I have no problem of transferring this gentleman and it is okay to transfer him but give him time to handover.

Finally, I wish to register my personal appreciation and well as that of Government to the Public Accounts Committee, its chairperson and all the members including hon. Ssewungu, as well as all the other agencies that have contributed to the tedious process of unearthing weaknesses in the financial management system of Government which specifically gave room to fraud of such unprecedented magnitude in the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of the Public Service. 

You have my assurance though that having drawn invaluable lessons from these experiences, these kinds of slippages have been effectively put behind us and Government will do everything in its means to not only recover lost funds but also eliminate any chance of recurrence. I thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Now I have seen a document from the Ministry of Finance and I do not know whether there is anything the Prime Minister - 

MR MBABAZI: Yes, I hope that they distributed it because the summary I have given is for the entire Government. Some of these actually give some of the details which I did not give – yes, like this one, which I referred to. So, I have covered all these in my statement. So, this is for further information to the Members.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the Chairperson of the committee briefly.

6.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank my colleagues, honourable members of Parliament, for having given this report the due consideration that it deserved.

However, there are have been a few spiking issues that have been raised and which I will believe have come up one, as a result of Members not having had copies of this report; two, the ipads having let them down; and three, that they didn’t have time to read the entire report. This is because there have been a lot of misgivings, which I want to correct for the record of this House. I know that they are many. So, I want to request that I respond to them in the order in which they were raised.

Madam Speaker, whereas the rest were compliments, the first concern as raised my colleagues by hon. Freedom Kwiyucwiny from Zombo was about the hydraform machines. I would like to report that when the committee went to the field – yes, we appreciated that these machines were very useful and that youths in all those areas had been trained on their usage. But the most unfortunate thing we found on ground was that the machines had been left unattended to and many had been vandalized yet Government had spent a lot on money on them. That is the reason – if you read this report – we are recommending that they be retrieved by the Office of the Prime Minister so that if there emerges any organised group of people that wants to use them, the Office of the Prime Minister can issue them out appropriately.

The second issue raised by hon. John Mulimba related to the email that he laid on Table. I would like to report that the committee did not, in any way, ignore the content of that email. I refer you to page 9 of the committee’s report. There is something on the email that talked about Shs6.9 billion. It is clearly captured at page 9 of our report. I hope we will be able to convince my brother, hon. John Mulimba, that we didn’t lose sight of these important issues as he has raised it.

There was another issue that came to my attention and was raised by two colleagues, hon. Evelyn Anite and hon. Kamara. I want to say that the Public Accounts Committee was very judicious in carrying out its duties. It was judicious in the sense that it had no preference for colour, height, religion and looks. We went out strictly on the basis of the evidence that had been adduced from either the witnesses or the documents that had been laid before us. So, it will be a very big mistake for my young sister and even daughter at that, hon. Evelyn Anite, to insinuate that because the names were starting with letter “O” the owners of the names were saved.

I want to tell you – go to recommendation 33, pages 28, 17 and 19 of our report. Nobody, by virtue of their name whether starting with letter “O” or not was saved where they soiled their hands. Mr Okello was recommended against; Mr Opio was also recommended against; Mr Ounyu, the same thing; and Mr Oboch, the same thing. So, please take it that we were very judicious in the manner in which we executed our duties. We had no tribal or religious considerations as we looked into these matters.

The other issue which was also raised was how much was given in form of advances. Madam Speaker, this has been a very complex probe. If we were to bring on to this Table all the documents that we had, I can assure you this Table would not be enough but we had the daunting task of making sure that out of the various documents that we had, we had to synthesise, come up with those that we considered very valuable that considered issues where we would find evidence that somebody has misappropriated government resources and in that light, I want to refer you to the Auditor-General’s report which is from pages 17 to 27 which report I laid on Table among other documents.  You will find a long list of officers to whom advances were given; some satisfactorily accounted for and others not accounted for at all. But otherwise that information has been availed to this Parliament.

The other issue which was raised was by my fellow ex-seminarian, hon. Remigio Achia. Hon. Achia insinuated and very clearly stated that Mr Kazinda was ignoring positions from the PS – I want to be very clear on this that that was not the case. We have attachments that we have laid on Table which are even part of this report. If you cared to look at this report, there is document 29 which clearly indicates the correspondences between the principal accountant and the Permanent Secretary in terms of how to procure resources. The issue of imprest of Shs3.5 billion is well documented; I have a copy here which of course is also attached to this report. This was a loose minute originated by the principal accountant, addressed to the Permanent Secretary and the Permanent Secretary approved it with his stamp. So, you cannot come up and say all these other things were done at the back of the Permanent Secretary.

There is even yet another document, a loose minute originated by the principal accountant seeking for the approval of the Permanent Secretary and it is all here. They were all laid on Table. So, please I want to tell you this so that the idea or the thinking that probably we have been sectarian, we have been trying to cushion other people adversely intended to be reported in this report is not correct.

Madam Speaker, there was also another question as to why the Commissioner Treasury Services is not mentioned. I am happy I am talking to an academician who knows that when you are writing a thesis, once you have come up with the content and abbreviations and names of people with their titles, you don’t have to repeat it elsewhere on every other pages that you write. I tendered on Table here the minutes of our sittings where all the 90 witnesses were mentioned by name and their titles and this document is now in possession of Parliament. Why else would we have to repeat it in every page that “Mr Mpoza, commissioner” – no, it is already there. That is what I wanted you to take into account. 

There was also another issues raised by my colleague, hon. Nyakikongoro that there were no harsh recommendations on the staff of the Bank of Uganda and that the rest of the recommendations are weak. Honourable colleagues, we are Parliament. When a committee of Parliament makes its recommendations, we should not be seen to step on the toes or to usurp the powers of other institutions. We should not be seen to be the Director Public Prosecutions; we make our recommendations to the other Arms of Government to swing into action. So, when we say so and so be found liable and that they be referred to the appointing authority for appropriate action or be further investigated with a view of prosecution and recovery, what more lethal recommendation can you expect from a committee of Parliament? So, all these recommendations we have made are within our powers. That is the reason why many times when we go out, the public comes out to say, “Yes, you have investigated, yes you have made the recommendations. So what?” We must know that Parliament is only one Arm of Government. There is the Judiciary and the Executive as well.

Probably at this stage, we will want to appeal to the Executive that let these recommendations that we have made not be in vain. I have seen and I will come to it, where the Prime Minister says they have swung into action. I appreciate and I am grateful that you have swung into action but let it be to the letter. Let it not be selective, let us make sure that where somebody has got any hint of honey on his lips as it were, let the bees go and sting those lips that have taken the honey.

Madam Speaker, there was also the issue from my sister the MP for Pader, hon. Lowila. She asked why we did not make mention of the other ministers? Honourable colleagues, it was not just a matter of saying there are 13 ministers in OPM and that all of them must come. I want to share with you that there were only three politicians whom we invited to appear before the committee. There was the Prime Minister, my friend hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi, who came in person. There was also hon. Janet Kataha Museveni, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. She came and appeared in person. There was the third –(Interruption)

MS LOWILA: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson on whether what he is trying to clarify really came from my submission. I do not remember making any such statement or inquiring on that. So I want to be sure for purposes of the record.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, if time permitted; we would just ask for the Hansard and print that page. I sat here to take note of whoever said something that required a response. I even had to ask hon. Beatrice Anywar for information because I used to be mistaken that you were probably from Agago until she said no, that one is from Pader. My sister, I cannot apportion statements to those who have not made them.

MS LOWILA: I think what I wanted to understand from the committee in my statement, because I directed my submission to the committee, was whether the people indicated as dead are really dead. That was the only submission I directed to the committee.

MR WADRI: Honourable colleague, you asked two things: have the two witnesses died? You said that and I am coming to it. I took note of everybody’s statements that required a response. In any case, I think it would be useful for the entire House to know the politicians or our colleagues whom we interfaced with.

The third person was hon. Musa Ecweru and indeed we collectively agreed that actually there was no need for him to be questioned any further because what was reflected against him was per diem and money for fuel to take him to Bududa, the landslide site. We found it a genuine payment put on his account - I think it was around Shs 200,000. Yes, because we got the bank slip for the money that was put on his account because he was coming from Karamoja and he was to withdraw the money from Soroti and proceed to Bududa. Those were the only politicians who made appearances before us.

The other issue was, did those two witnesses really die? By the time we swung into action, Mr Obbo the cashier then had long died because we also got documents from the bereaved family asking for processing of gratuity. These were all tendered to confirm that actually this man had left this world and gone to the next one.

Mr Takwenda from Kasese appeared before us and died afterwards. Yes, he appeared before us. So it is true that the two transcended, left this world and they are in the next world where we shall also join them.

The other issue, which was raised by my colleague hon. Ekanya –(Interruption)

MR BIHANDE: I am a Member of the committee and in the committee I informed the chairman and the Members that I attended Takwenda’s burial in Bukonzo West constituency in Karambi Sub County, Kyambogo parish.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we are not pathologists to come up with the cause of death but as a lay man, all I know is that Mr Takwenda left this world after having given testimony.

The other issue was raised by hon. Ekanya concerning the Police and the Judiciary driving PRDP vehicles. If you look at the PRDP framework, there is a provision for support to the Police and the Judiciary to establish law and order in the war ravaged areas where all the systems had broken down. It is there and that did not come through the Office of the Prime Minister. They received support from PRDP sources through their own right. It was direct and not from the OPM.

I want to turn to the issues, which were raised by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in his response. Honourable colleagues, this has been a very unique probe; unique in the sense that under normal circumstances, when a probe of such a nature comes, Parliament is given time to finish its probe, present the report and adopt or come up with resolutions for the Executive and other Arms of Government to implement. Here was a situation where the three Arms of Government swung into action at the same time.

Whereas we were busy probing into this financial impropriety, the Police were busy arresting and the courts were also busy trying suspects. That was how the issue of sub judice came in when we asked that we wanted to interface with Mr Kazinda. Madam Speaker, you will agree with me that it was a long battle. Actually at one point, they did not want us to probe anything associated with financial impropriety in the OPM until we said, “No, we will steer clear and make sure we do not touch what is before courts of law.”

Another unique thing is the fact that this report has taken long. No wonder some of the recommendations are already being implemented and we regard them as being stale. This is because by the time we made the recommendations, they were of relevance but now that arrests have been made and others are already appearing before courts of law, you may think that our recommendations are frivolous but at the time we made them, they were valid –(Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the committee and I know many Members would wonder why Kazinda did not appear in our committee. The committee invited Kazinda who was sleeping in Luzira through the Commissioner General of Prisons. The Commissioner General of Prisons wrote to the Attorney-General who advised that it is illegal to interface with Kazinda. I thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, chairman and my brother for giving way. I would like to find out -

THE SPEAKER: No, was it illegal or impracticable?

MR KWIZERA: They said it was subjudice.

THE SPEAKER: Then it is not illegal. But the chairperson has explained. Actually I remember the Members of the committee were angry with me for responding to the DPC’s complaint because he said, “You are interfering in my work. I am already prosecuting.”

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification. Partly it is this issue of Kazinda. Now that he never appeared before your committee and also given the background of a very useful suspect dying, I would like to ask this question. Is Kazinda alive and safe there in prison?

MR WADRI: Hon. Fungaroo, you have asked a very pertinent question but you asked the wrong man. I do not think I can answer that. I will leave it to the appropriate organs of Government to answer. 

I was commenting on the responses raised by the Prime Minister. Hon. Prime Minister, I sat here listening to you attentively and you sounded convincing in some of the aspects but there is something I want to say; if we are really committed to fighting corruption in this country, we should walk the talk. 

It is one thing for us to say this and do the other and that is causing anxiety in many of our people. I want to give an example of the utterances made by H.E the President; it lowers our esteem in doing this work. A person whom we have judged as culpable, how can you come up and say he is a “star performer?” What does that mean; that statement means, “You can waste your time there, but I am the appointing authority, I can do anything?” Are we serious about fighting corruption? Couldn’t there be a better way of handling such issues administratively rather than going to the media? Everybody watched it on TV; it was broadcast live on FM stations and in the print media. If we are committed to fighting corruption then let us be seen to fight it. 

On the same issue, you remember that at the beginning of this financial year, this Parliament came up with a resolution and this resolution is still binding as far as I am concerned because I am a Member of Parliament and I was in this Parliament when it was passed. There were three permanent secretaries who were adjudged by Parliament to be incompetent as accounting officers under Article 164. We appealed to the Executive saying, “Look, have them as permanent secretaries but do not give them responsibilities as accounting officers.” Hon. Prime Minister, I am sorry to say that you refused to co-operate with us. The same permanent secretaries come and appear before committees of Parliament. So what do you expect us to do?

I pray to you to be proactive; do not wait for things to get this bad before you swing into action because the signs were loud and clear and I am sure if we had been proactive as a Government and you as the Leader of Government Business, this mess would have been detected and everything would be averted to ensure we do not lose this money. 

You responded to the question as to whether Northern Uganda lost to the same degree of impropriety as reported in the Auditor-General’s report. You were trying to convince us here but I want to disagree with the information you gave us. Last financial year, the fourth quarter of lease was zero both recurrent and development. It was so because the money which should have gone to the districts was spent in making peace with donors; that was the reason. So the districts did not receive anything and PRDP suffered to the same degree. These are facts and if I knew that such a thing was coming up, I would have come up with the release sheet from the Treasury to show that we suffered double injury. We had to pay back to the donors yet we know the people who are responsible for all this mess – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you for giving way. The Prime Minister was saying that releases were replaced and that there was no effect in any way. But I want to assure this House that the quarter release for that financial year was not effected. Projects and programmes that were planned in that financial year were not finished; we have many contracts that are not complete up to now. I have just been talking to the CAO of my district; he said that projects and programmes were rolled out. This financial year, they are going to pay debts and new projects will never be done. That is the effect we have. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you chairman of PAC and Madam Speaker. When the Prime Minister says that “we identified alternative sources” and yet it is Parliament which is supposed to pass the budget, then I am worried because it would seem we have more than one source of appropriation. As you are all aware, Uganda runs a deficit budget – Mr Prime Minister, a deficit means you do not have enough resources. So we have to borrow from the public to run some of the programmes. So, you have no surplus where you can get that alternative. So the information I am giving is that it looks like Uganda has what we call “off balance-sheet” items and one of those items is where the Prime Minister gets his alternative funding. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, there is the issue of $500,000 from AU –(Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: As I said, these are the responses I got, Madam Speaker, from my technical people. But I hear what you are saying and what my brother Nandala-Mafabi is saying. I cannot respond to it now but I think it is something we can think we can settle because we can come up with these figures and then inform Parliament what actually it was. 

MR WADRI: As I said, the other issue is the $500,000 from AU which was released in 2010. That money has not been captured in the Auditor-General’s report; so, we do not know whether it was put to proper use. Much as we have got the write-up of the account number as per the documents which were laid before us yesterday, we do not know whether this money reached there and how it was withdrawn and utilised because it was not captured in the Auditor-General’s report. Lastly, is transfer of staff –  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, for which year?

MR WADRI: This is a forensic report; it is not there. Even in the most current because as I leave Public Accounts Committee, we are up to date with the OPM. The next report that will come will be in March this year. So, there is no reflection whatsoever of the $500,000 in all those two financial year reports that we have considered. 

The issue that I want to conclude with is that of transfer of staff. Transferring a staff member with soiled hands with Government money from one ministry to another at the same rank to perform the same function is no penance at all. Let Government come up with a better method of following up. If I am an undersecretary or a commissioner and you transfer me to another ministry to perform the same roles and responsibilities, what chances are there that I will not go with the same traits that I was involved in previously –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Chairman. That point is very pertinent and Parliament needs to focus on it and even the Prime Minister. Currently, what is happening in the local government where we sent money - you will find a CAO has been interdicted somewhere because of a court case and he is transferred to another district. Let us give the example of Kasese. When he makes another mistake, he is again transferred to a different district and what happens in local government is that huge connivance because of recycling of interdicted officers who are brought back to the system. And it may take Parliament to look at the law so that people who are operating now as acting – because the law is stringent and most of the accounting officers running the local government are doing so as though they were in acting capacity – 70 to 80 percent! This is because the people who are fully appointed are being recycled but they are the same people who steal this money. I thought I should bring this out clearly.

MR WADRI: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would like to make this special appeal to colleagues. This is just one report out of many; sooner than later, I believe PAC will bring reports of similar nature – on Presidential Initiative on Markets, Presidential Initiative on Bananas, Value-for-money audit on fisheries and Lake Victoria and many others. They are actually being aligned as I prepare to leave office – about 17 reports. My appeal, honourable colleagues, is that when these reports come – like I am making this appeal for this particular one. This has been a complex probe; the committee may have been seen to have fallen short of expectations - that the recommendations are not strong - I appeal to you within the means as Parliament that let us improve on them as long as we can achieve the common objective that we want to achieve and we do pass these recommendations. 

That is my prayer as I leave the Floor – that we consider all these recommendations, which have been made in good faith, with supporting evidence that we have. If there is any ground on which you want to make suggestions to improve on it, we shall take it in good faith – as long as it answers our cries. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have made an extract of the recommendations and uploaded them on your iPads. I have not seen anyone present any amendment. So, I want to ask you to read them in the night so that tomorrow we can use 30 minutes to adopt them. If you have changes, you can come ready tomorrow. We will finish them altogether; we will deal with the recommendations first then go back to the report.

Hon. Members, House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow afternoon.
 
(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 February 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
