

Tuesday, 19 February 2019

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have Bills that we need to complete today; at least we should handle two Bills today. I said this last time but we were not able to. However, today, with your cooperation, we should be able to finish at least two Bills. For that reason, we will not have any further communication from the Chair. A Member wanted to raise an urgent matter.

2.10
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance from my constituency.

Gulu University opened a branch in Kitgum in 2011 and we had a very colourful graduation thereafter. Subsequently, over 2,000 vulnerable students have managed to benefit from this institution.

However, as we speak, there is a threat this academic year, not to admit students to Gulu University, Kitgum Branch and the students are quite stranded. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, this is one of the areas with vulnerable students unable to travel far. However, with the establishment of this branch, some students are able to commute from their villages and complete their courses.

Mr Speaker, for your information, Kitgum Branch started much earlier than the subsequent affirmative branches like the ones in Lira and Karamoja, which are already doing very well. This threat has caused anxiety among the population; parents and students. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports comes and affirms to this Parliament the continuity of admission of students. Indeed, I whispered this to her while she was attending the Tarehe Sita celebrations and she said that admissions should continue. However, we need this confirmation to assure parents and students that admissions for this academic year will take place.

Secondly, as a vulnerable area and for affirmative action, when we held the graduation there, this encouraged many students to go for university education. We pray that this affirmative action of graduations being held at the campuses should also continue to motivate many of our students to go for higher education.

Lastly, my prayer is that we, the people of Kitgum, be availed 100 acres of land free of charge for Gulu University to establish that branch. For the last four years, the land has been idle. We pray that the ministry finds funds to develop that piece of land so that it is not put to waste. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members from the Government, is there any response on this matter of Gulu University, Kitgum Branch? 

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Could you allow the Government, to inform the minister responsible to come up with a statement tomorrow about the concerns raised by the honourable member from Kitgum? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, notify the minister accordingly and we will have this response tomorrow afternoon. Thank you. Can we now go to the Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTION TAKEN TO REINSTATE MR APOLLO KAZUNGU, COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES AND MR GODFREY SASAGA WANZIRA, DIRECTOR, CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL, TO THEIR POSITIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministry of Public Service, this is about the fourth time this matter is coming up. Is there a response from the ministry? Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROGRESS OF ALLOWANCES GIVEN TO VILLAGE CHAIRPERSONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter was raised last week. I think it is supposed to be the Minister of Local Government. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister?

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -

MS RWAKOOJO: Mr Speaker, I raised a matter on the prevalence of Foot and Mouth Disease in the cattle corridor and in particular, in Gomba West; and the lack of vaccines and the numerous ticks that we have. Hon. Kabatsi did not answer the questions satisfactorily. We were supposed to have a debate as a House and I am just reminding the Clerk that I would be happy that this comes back for debate.

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Still on procedure?

MS RWAKOOJO: Yes. I am the Chairperson of the Select Committee on Sexual Violence. It is our desire that debate on the Sexual Offences Bill be deferred until we finish our report because it impacts a lot on the Sexual Offences Bill and we are finishing on 28th of this month. We were given up to the end of this month to submit a report and we are in the final stages. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this Bill has been here since 2015 and a select committee was created not too long ago. If the matters are substantial, they should have been brought to the attention of the House by now; at least in the preliminary form, especially knowing that this Bill has been on the Order Paper ready for processing. 

Given the fact that debate took place last week and a vote was taken on the motion for the second reading of this Bill, I do not know whether we should stay the proceedings of this Bill in anticipation, which the rules prohibit. 

This is something that is coming in the future and I do not know whether it would be the right way to process the business of the House. The amendments are not here and nobody has seen them. They are still probably being drafted and not completed. How can we stay business of the House awaiting something that is not in existence? I think we will proceed and if we fail to do so, we shall come and see how to handle it. 

Where is the mover of the Bill? The honourable member has just been to the Deputy Speaker’s office affirming that she will be here to process this Bill and she knew that we would start at 2.00 p.m. –

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. What hon. Rwakoojo has said is true. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development also submitted to the committee amendments to do with online sexual offences, which amendments they are still working on. Therefore, I request that you give a pronouncement on the stalling of the Bill as we wait for the committee. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we should adopt this ad hoc method of doing business. This Bill was formally before the House, it was sent to the committee, processed by the committee and brought back to the House. We debated the motion on Second Reading of the Bill and passed it.  

However, we are here still soliciting or processing amendments, which we have not seen and yet we are supposed to go to Committee Stage of the Bill. This is a very strange procedure that we are beginning to adopt. If the mover of this Bill has some reluctance on the progress of this Bill, she should formally withdraw this Bill from us so that we proceed with other business. 

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural point is on item No. 3(ii); progress of allowances given to village chairpersons. The minister is going to give a report on the allowances of LC1 chairpersons. However, last term, Government committed itself to give LC1 chairpersons bicycles. Some districts got these bicycles and others did not receive them because the bicycles were “eaten” by the permanent secretaries. 

Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did he start with the tyres? How do you eat a bicycle? (Laughter)

MR WAIRA: Mr Speaker, the money was swindled although Government had committed itself. Therefore, Government –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, is that a procedural matter? 

MR WAIRA: Yes, on item No. 3(ii).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let me give you a background to item No. 3(ii). It arose from a question from a Member about payments to Local Council 1 chairpersons. Therefore, this response was supposed to be specific on this matter that was raised as an urgent matter. I think it was raised by one of the members from Mubende. That is how the matter came here; so, it had nothing to do with bicycles “eaten” or “not eaten”.  We were dealing with the issue of payment because there are some challenges that they are facing. 

Therefore, if you are raising a procedural matter, you will have to wait and then do a supplementary question when this response is given. Thank you. 
 
Can we deal with the minister of finance now? Let us first handle his item. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Supplementary Schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2018/2019. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is accordingly referred to the Committee on Budget to look at and advise us on how to proceed with this matter. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE BILL, 2017

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we stay clause 1, which is the interpretation and come back to it later? Clause 1 is stood over. 

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 stands part of this Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I rise on a point of procedure. We have been passing provisions in the Bill from the Title up to clause 30. However, it is unprecedented that although the minister is seated here, I do not see the committee chairperson who processed this Bill.

I am sure that there could have been one or two issues that might be therein and he would guide us in the process of passing this Bill. Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to continue without the chairperson who interacted with very many stakeholders in the course of processing this Bill? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: First of all, we have not yet passed the Title of the Bill and clause 1; we have stayed those. 

Secondly, if there are any amendments from the committee, the minister or any Member, they should have been circulated by now so that we know what the amendments are. From the Chairperson’s desk, there are no proposed amendments that have been brought to my attention. Therefore, we are proceeding very well. (Laughter) 

Clause 31

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 stand part of this Bill.     

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Actually if it goes on like this, at the end of it I should give a lot of commendation to the people who drafted this law because it means that they captured the full spirit of what should have been done to regulate this sector.

Clause 32  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 stand part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, clause 35(1)(a) has drafting corrections that need to be done. It should read,

“(a) Class A wildlife use right which confers a right to hunt wildlife.” We should delete “in a wildlife protected area or a wildlife management area” because it is redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, that is the amendment from the minister. The proposal is that the next phrase is redundant. I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

PROF. KAMUNTU: In 35(1)(b) there is a drafting omission. “Class B wildlife use right which permits farming of wildlife.” The rest of the words should be deleted. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other amendment?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you finish with all of them?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes. The last one is clause 35(1)(c). “Class C wildlife use right which permits ranching of wildlife.” The rest should be deleted. 

“(d) Class D wildlife use right which permits trading in wildlife and the wildlife products.” The word “and” is missing. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In the place of the Article “the” we replace it with “and”. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, is that clear, honourable members? I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 35 as amended stand part of this Bill.

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59, agreed to.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75, agreed to.

Clause 76, agreed to.

Clause 77, agreed to.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Clause 84(4) gives the burden of proof to the person who is injured or whose property is destroyed or killed to prove that he or she was unable to protect himself or herself.

With wildlife moving outside the protected areas and the claimant is given the task to protect himself or herself, I feel this is unfair and I urge that sub clause (4) be deleted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, would a civilian be allowed to use spears, bows and arrows to show reasonable protection from attack by wild animals? Are you not trying to urge people to defend themselves against wildlife, in this case?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, if you read this clause in totality, it is dealing with compensation and it is a new introduction in this law. In a way, it addresses the previous inadequacy where we only provided what we called compassionate assistance to injured people. 

You also need to make sure that claims for compensation are not abused. Clause 84(4) reads, “Compensation shall not be paid where the claimant failed to take reasonable measures to protect himself or herself, to protect his or her property from damage from wildlife, where his or her land use practices are incompatible with the approved land use plans for the area.”

You can see that there is a big explanation, which in a way, gives fair leeway that before you can be compensated, at least you should have tried to avoid the accident happening - (Interjections) - No, I had not finished, Mr Chairperson. 

I was arguing that this clause is helpful in the sense that you need to show that you really tried to prevent any accident happening and in so doing – notice that there are two sides; there is the side of the Uganda Wildlife Authority to compensate and you do not want anyone to claim that he was injured. There must be some process of proof –(Interruption)

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I request the minister to accept and delete this clause because it is really redundant. 

I would like to give an example. I had an uncle who was in his garden when he was attacked by a leopard. If he was not strong enough to fight, he would have been killed. Do you expect a woman like me to fight a leopard? What strength do you expect me to have to fight with a leopard and yet my land is in a safe place? Mr Minister, please accept and delete this.

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, I will concede, with grace –(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Mr Chairperson, I would like to request the minister to listen to our plea because our people are suffering. Our people have died – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on clarification. 

MS AVUR: Yes, I would like to give clarification that to ask somebody already dead or somebody who has already lost somebody is asking for more than enough. 

Mr Chairperson, the minister knows that I approached him on how hippos have so far killed 14 people on the Albert Nile in Pakwach. The last were two children of nine and 10 years who were fishing by the lake shore and the hippos came and hit them. How would they defend themselves? 

There are situations in Pakwach – sub counties over 20 kilometres away from the national park, where elephants have crossed and gone to people’s gardens and homes. We do not have wall fences in our regions. How can we defend ourselves from these animals that go into our gardens and homes, destroying huts? Honourable minister, be realistic. You know the situation of Ugandans.

MR KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, I will allow the former shadow Minister of Wildlife and Tourism.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you very much, honourable minister. When we were drafting this law, we were trying to eliminate human-wildlife conflict and promote co-existence between humans and wildlife. There are cases where people live in wildlife sanctuaries like Hamukungu, for instance, where the committee went to do consultations. 

If you say, “unable to take reasonable measures to protect himself or herself or property from the damage of the wildlife”, it means that you are encouraging people to have a cover up for killing our wildlife. 

It is common practice that wildlife strays from the territorial boundaries of protected areas into people’s gardens. Initially, people would chase them back to the park or they would call the park authorities to come and sedate them, if it is maybe the cats and repatriate them to the protected areas. 

However, this time it means that the law is allowing the people to protect themselves and we are going to lose a lot of wildlife because of this clause. Therefore, in the good spirit of protecting our wildlife and the humans that are affected by this wildlife, I plead with the minister that we delete sub clause (4) because it is already catered for by the wildlife compensation verification committee. This committee is going to do the job, which this clause would do. I beg to move.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, if you read the whole section on compensation, I would concede, provided there is a sufficient mechanism for proving that indeed bodily injury or any crop damage has been verified by the committee. If it has been verified, I concede that we delete section sub clause (4). (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that – (Mr Jonathan Odur rose_) - Do you want to retain it?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I want consistency in the compensation. If you look at –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we deal with sub clause (4)?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: It will come to sub clause (4) as well.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: They are proposing to delete sub clause (4).

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is that clause 84(4) be deleted and there is agreement from the minister. I put the question for the deletion of clause 84(4).

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I was looking at compensation in clause 84(1)(b) where the restriction is to bodily injury, when one is killed and on crops or livestock. However, we have evidence, especially in Oyam, where even houses and other property have been destroyed by these animals. If we put this, we will be restricting the scope of compensation to only bodily injury, death and destruction of crops and livestock. 

I would like us to expand this so that we include other property. This will also be consistent with the provision in clause 85 where we are saying, “a person or property” so that the people who are going to sit can make pronouncements on whether other property was also destroyed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We had a standard rule on submitting requests for amendments so that they are shared and understood.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, I was looking at rule 133(5) of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament where if the committee chairperson is here and there is a minor amendment, it can be accepted at this stage. Now that the committee chairperson is not here, these proposals can be taken by the minister. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that a minor amendment, honourable minister?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, it is very rare for a wild animal to destroy a house – (Interjections) - if only you waited - I was going to agree with him because in any case, according to evidence, experience and frequency of occurrences, it is very rare to find wildlife destroying people’s houses.

Therefore, I do not regard it as a major amendment; it would not alter the substance of the Bill and I would accept any other that can be verified by the committee.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it is accepted but how do we phrase it? There are instances where elephants have stepped on cars and destroyed them completely. There are also instances where they have knocked down buildings. They may be rare but they are there. Who is helping with the drafting?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, clause 84(b) says “… suffers damage to his or her crops or livestock or any other valuable asset…”; that would include a house, clothing or any other thing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Would “properties” not be wider?

PROF. KAMUNTU: If he wants to confine it to a house –

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, if we use the word “property”, it would be consistent with the subsequent clauses. For example, in clause 85, they have stated that an action shall not lie against the authority for the recovery of a damage caused to a person or property by an animal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now deal with it in clause 84.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: I will agree with the minister that we can have it in clause 84(1)(b) saying “… suffers damage to his or her crops, livestock and property.”

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, I concede to the principle he is bringing in but maybe we can accommodate it if we draft it as follows: 

“Compensation where a person:-

    a) Suffers bodily injury or is killed;
    b)  Suffers damage to his property.”

If I say “property” it would have included crops, livestock and anything else.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: One word would capture all things. Therefore, it would now be “suffers damage to his or property”. Is that okay? We say “property” because in construction, it is both singular and plural so we do not have to say “property” or “properties”. Therefore, the proposal is to say in (b), “suffers damage to his or her property”. Can I put the question to this amendment?

MS KARUNGI: Mr Chairperson, I would like to move with the whole House. If I have my irrigation project and elephants come and destroy the whole project together with the machinery, will it be part of the “property” we are talking about here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It covers the whole perspective.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment in clause 84(1)(b).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87, agreed to.

Clause 88, agreed to.

The first schedule, agreed to.

The second schedule, agreed to.

The third schedule, agreed to.

The fourth schedule 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the fourth schedule stands part of the Bill.
	
MR GAFABUSA: Mr Chairperson, I have an issue with the fourth schedule. I am looking at the animals listed here and they have left out the most destructive ones - the monkeys - that destroy people’s crops. I think we should expand this Schedule to include monkeys.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, why are monkeys not on the list?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Chairperson, technically monkeys are not animals in classification; they are vermin. You can kill them without any problem. That is why they are not included here.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What can one do to them?

MR KAMUNTU: I am saying that if it is a vermin, it is not one of the protected animals and therefore, it is not listed in the compensable wildlife species whose damage creates liability on the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you can find the best way to deal with the monkeys.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to understand something. When you meet these monkeys on the way, they always eat crops and yet they stay in the forests. We have always encouraged our people not to kill them because we love them; they are beautiful and we like looking at them. I think it would be best that they are included so that we encourage our people not to kill them. Otherwise, if we are not going to consider them, we shall lose them.

I like monkeys because they are very interesting. If we lose all of them, it will be unfortunate.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The minister was clear; this is not a democratic process where we have to vote in favour of monkeys. The minister is very clear and he has presented a professional view on this matter.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to disagree with the minister. Recently, we returned from Apaa and on our way, we found some young men chasing a monkey. 
	
Mr Chairperson, in some parts of this country, people are feasting on them –(Interjection)– some species of monkeys cannot be found in some parts of the country. Indeed, they act as tourist attractions, leave alone hon. Kiwanda’s curvy things. (Laughter)

Therefore, it would be very important that we categorise monkeys in this particular Bill so that we can protect some of those endangered species. If we leave it open that monkeys are on their own and are not protected by any law, we risk –(Interruption)

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, for giving way. I think the spirit of the Fourth Schedule is to list the category of compensable wildlife species whose damage creates liability to compensation not protection of the other wildlife.

As the minister has said, baboons, velvet monkeys, the black and white colobus monkey are vermin. Sometimes people even domesticate them –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, baboons are in the law.

MR ATIKU: Mr Chairperson, before I rest my case, while I agree with hon. Centenary’s submission, it is important that we have it here in the Schedule. Some of these monkeys are causing a lot of havoc in the communities and because they are not categorised, you cannot go and seek redress. Therefore, I think there is need for us to have them categorised here since we have put a legal regime that can help someone to seek redress. I thank you.

MR JAMES BABA: Honourable minister, I request that you listen to the plea of members about monkeys. Monkeys are very destructive to people’s farms especially in the dry season. When there is scarcity of food and there are no fruits for them to feed on, they come and invade people’s farms of cassava, ground nuts, bananas, among others and in no time, everything is devastated and they run away very fast. This is causing a lot of damage to the communities. 

My special plea is, we request you to consider that monkeys be included as a special category. Otherwise, their numbers are large and they multiply very quickly. Mr Chairperson, this is my plea to the minister.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much. Mr Chairperson, if you listened to the former shadow Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, he deeply studied this subject in his previous engagements. Monkeys are vermin. 

If you read this Schedule, we are talking about compensable wildlife species. We are not talking about protection. If you look at the list of the animals here, there are animals, which in our evidence, frequently cause trouble and compensation has to be very easily verified.

Once monkeys leave their natural habitats, they can be killed. In fact, we give guidance on how they can be protected. However, outside their natural habitat, monkeys are not compensable animals in our classification. It will be practically impossible to compensate for monkeys because they run all over the place. You will almost wipe out the compensation fund. As a result of that, we will not include monkeys under the category of compensable wildlife species whose damage creates liability on the Uganda Wildlife Authority.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the fourth schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The fourth schedule, agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.06
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES	(Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House to report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.07
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES	(Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” and passed it with some amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.08
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE BILL, 2017

3.08
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” be read the third time and do pass. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITILED, “THE UGANDA WILDLIFE ACT, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister and Members. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for the efficiency with which you have conducted the House. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have Ms Juliana Obianuju Ekeocha, founder and President of Culture of Life Africa. She is accompanied by her assistant, Ms Emmanuela Ebuono Chinenye. They are here on the invitation of Parliament of Uganda, Prolife Caucus. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

We also have, in the public gallery this afternoon, a delegation of students’ executives of the Greater Arua Kyambogo University Students’ Association represented by hon. Benard Atiku and hon. Mourine Osoru. They are here to observe the proceedings. Join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over clause 1; Interpretation. We will deal with it once we have finished the text of the Bill. Clause 1 is stood over.

Clause 2

MS AMODING: Mr Chairperson, I beg your indulgence. We have some amendments and we –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You and who else? It is your Bill.

MS AMODING: I have some amendments and they were tabled with the Clerk. The Members have them uploaded on their iPads. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The presiding officer does not have it. 

MS AMODING: Clause 2 of the Bill is replaced with the following: 
sub clause (1) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, first wait. The amendments seem to be bigger than the Bill. If they are bigger than the Bill, they completely change the character of the original Bill presented for consideration. It is not easy to process because it is no longer the same Bill.

MS AMODING: Mr Chairperson, the issue we are discussing is very sensitive. It relates to sexual offences and every Ugandan would be concerned about it. Since this Bill was tabled, it has taken over three years and so there has been a lot of consultation on this matter. Our prayer is that we consider this Bill because of the nature of the offences that we are dealing with and the interest that the public has in the Bill.

A lot of consultations were done, which resulted in redrafting and rearranging the Bill. I beg to move, Mr Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I am just pointing out a procedural fact. Where the amendments to a proposed Bill are bigger than the Bill itself, is it still the same Bill? The purpose of gazetting a Bill is to alert the public that this is what we are going to discuss. Now, if what is coming out is completely different from what you gazetted, is it still the same process? 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. For the record, the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015 has been in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we also had those challenges. The mover and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were supposed to reconcile many issues, which touched on the existing legal provisions in the Penal Code and harmonise them with the Bill and other laws. 

The importance of this Bill cannot be overstated. We need this Bill and those are some challenges that the committee faced. We have a draft report. Now that the House decided to process it, we feel relieved because the mover of the Bill knows that we have done some work. We were going ahead to write a report because we never got a response from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the mover. The two were supposed to reconcile some issues and come back to tell us their agreed position. 

The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was opposed to some of the conflicting sections and certain amendments saying that they are not necessary because they are already in the Penal Code. The Bill is small but it has attracted a lot more, even from the committee as we were processing it. 

This Bill is now beyond our committee; it is with the Committee of the whole House and it is in safer hands to decide. (Laughter)

MS AMODING: Mr Chairperson, on the issue of harmonisation with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, may I inform the House that the ministry had proposed to amend other existing legislations. In essence, the issue of controversy arose on whether to amend the existing legislation or come up with a consolidated Bill that we have before us now. That was the main source of disagreement. 

As UWOPA and members of Parliament subscribing under that umbrella, we insisted that there is need to come up with a consolidated Act, given the nature of the crime and the many things that are not covered in the existing law. That is why we decided to come with a consolidated Bill and request that the House considers it. There were also many reasons which were justified when we moved seeking leave of the House to allow me bring this Bill and we jumped that stage.

Regarding the recommendations that the committee made, that we sit and agree, I would like to say that the ministry did not have many amendments. They permitted me, as the mover, to go forward with amendments in the committee. However, they were supposed to bring the amendments to the committee. Therefore, I do not know about that discussion between the chairperson of the committee and the ministry. However, we agreed, as a way forward, that these amendments be brought before the committee.

Having said that, the nature of the Bill that we are having and the circumstances before us now - We have not discussed the committee report, which has been a problem to even me, the mover of the Bill. However, we have considered many things; the amendments are basically redrafting and also introducing a few provisions, which were not in the Bill but are improving the draft of the Bill as it is. If you compare the original Bill and the one before us, you will realise they have the same clauses but the drafting language has been added to it.

I beg that the committee of the whole House looks into this matter and does not deny the women and men of Uganda this law based on technicalities that we can deal with as a House. Thank you very much. 

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Chairman, I request to inform hon. Amoding that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had requested for three weeks, in writing, to enable them reconcile the overlaps in the law. As the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we had informed the committee that the overlaps were particularly in the areas of the Penal Code Act where much of the repetition had been cited.

I request your guidance, Mr Chairman. I request that the Bill stays for only two weeks so that the committee and the ministry can reconcile, to avoid making more changes according to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Sometimes you make things very difficult for us. This Bill was first read in 2015. Honourable minister, are you saying that since that time Government is still trying to do something? Four years? Really! 

My technical challenge is this - and I say this in the spirit of processing this Bill – because of the way the amendments are, it will not be easy to process them. I would like to ask you, the mover of this Bill, because I can see your name on the amendments, do you agree with these amendments? If you agree with these amendments, it might make sense for you to withdraw this Bill and publish a new Bill with all these things incorporated. It would be smarter if you incorporated all these amendments. 

I say this because this Bill was first read in 2015 and you say it has generated a lot of interest; so incorporate in the new Bill all these. You still have the leave of Parliament. It is going to be difficult to process it the way it is; you will make mistakes. My advice is, and this is given in good faith, that you withdraw this one, incorporate all these and publish a new Bill - all these in one book – and then you bring it back to Parliament for first reading. (Applause) 

It is smarter, honourable members, because the amendments are bigger than the Bill. It might be smarter for you to do that. You have amended all the clauses and inserted new ones except only five, which you have spared. It might be in your interest to do that.

MS AMODING: Mr Chairman, I am at pains to even - I do not know how the House is guiding on this matter but I need to inform Members about the processes of legislation, especially when you are a private Member. It is such a struggle to reach this stage and you have to be taken back to stage one.

I would like to inform Members also that this Bill was brought to this House in the Eighth Parliament and we are in the Tenth Parliament. In the Ninth Parliament, it was not passed; it was saved up to this Tenth Parliament. I would like the House to record that there is a lot of pain associated with a private Member coming with a Bill to this House. Many of you perhaps will also go through that.

Secondly, Mr Chairperson, would it not be in order if the House then considered the provisions as they are? This is because according to your ruling in the last sitting, the committee reports were not produced before the House and as private Members, you guided that we proceed with the process - (Interjection) - You have copies, honourable members. I would like to suggest that we consider this, other than having to send the private Member back to stage one. 

I also remember that when the Speaker guided on this particular Bill, we did not have a certificate of financial implications and this was partly because of the laxity of the frontbench in bringing these kinds of legislations. If you deny me that chance and opportunity as a private Member, you will have entrenched the persecution of private Members in bringing Bills to the House. In many ways, although it is a quiet or silent communication among the Executive, it is a way of resisting private Members in bringing these Bills. It is very painful given the work we have invested.

Mr Chairperson, I beg that you skip some technicalities to allow this Bill be read. The provisions that can be saved should be saved and then Members and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs can bring their amendments on the Floor where we are, rather than going back to stage one. It has been a very long process, Mr Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have processed private Members Bills, the last one being the Human Rights Enforcement Bill. We did that. Therefore, it is not like anybody is trying to present an obstacle to this process. When this law is enacted, it is going to affect all the people in this country; we cannot afford to make mistakes. Your name will be on it, yes, but it is about the people of this country; we cannot make mistakes. 

These amendments which you have submitted have not been seen by anybody else except you. I am personally receiving a copy now and I have not looked at them yet they are bigger than the original Bill. For me to process this properly, I have to be confident that the text will not mislead me. Otherwise, I am going to be reading from here and processing at the same time because I have not read them before. 

My simple advice to you is that it would be better - Since they are your amendments and it is your Bill, we are not sending you back to the stage that you are suggesting; you already have leave of the House, which has not ended. We will maintain the same leave. All you need to do is to have the Bill redrafted by the technical people to incorporate all these things into one Bill - it will be even easier for you to process when you are at the dispatch box –(Applause)– and then bring it back. All this will be gazetted and it will be easier even for you to present.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I would like to share my experience as a private Member whose Bill was successfully processed here after going through hurdles and also as a member of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and somebody who keenly followed the processing of this Bill. The fears of the mover are related to the process of re-gazetting this Bill and also the issuance of a new certificate of financial implication. Those are the huddles a private Member has to find ways of manoeuvring. 

Mr Chairperson, maybe if your chair could give the private Member that guarantee for expeditious handling of the gazetting and issuance of a new certificate because this is now a new Bill, according to what we have seen, since the amendments and the old Bill of course do vary. Therefore, it would be very important for this House to offer protection to the mover on those two fronts.

I see the honourable Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs shaking her head but that is one ministry, which is against this particular Bill. Thank you.
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, all Members of Parliament are already heavily protected by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We have received Bills here where we have dispensed with the certificate of financial implications because the rules allow us to do that, including the one for the Member of Parliament for Bunya East; it was introduced without the certificate of financial implications. 

It is not a limitation anymore, and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should listen carefully. If you play about with the rights of private Members to present Bills here, we will proceed without your certificate because the rules allow us to do so. However, in the spirit of cooperation and support to the processes that are recognised by the Constitution, that private Members can initiate Bills, when they do and leave is granted to them by this House, it is incumbent upon you to give this certificate. 

What will the certificate state? It can state, “We do not have money to finance this Bill in this financial year but in the next financial year, it will be incorporated.” That is the implication we would like to understand. Is it capable of being implemented this year? If it is not, then you say it will be financed in the subsequent budget. That is all we require from you, instead of using it as a way of exercising executive powers over Parliament. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Chairman, I agree with your guidance on the way we should move on with this Bill. It is an important Bill that all of us should support. The certificate of financial implications had already been given. All that we would like to do is to incorporate the amendments of the Member so that we move smoothly.

Therefore, I can confirm that if she is ready, tomorrow we shall issue the certificate; so, that should not stand in the way of the private Member’s Bill. This is an important Bill that we should work on. We have looked at the amendments, even now, and we do not have any problem with them, but we need to move smoothly when all of them are incorporated.

I do not think that there is any hindrance concerning the issuance of the certificate of financial implications or even the gazetting. All we are saying is that can we be smart and neat so that when we are making amendments, at least everybody understands what we are amending in this important Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can we handle this Bill that way, honourable members? This law touches on so many others, so we need to handle it properly and we need to understand what we are doing.

MS AMODING: Mr Chairperson, I concede. I thank you and the House for your guidance on the way forward and for your goodwill. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.31
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.32
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015” and recommended that it be withdrawn and redrafted. 
 
MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.33
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I make the following directive to the Office of the Clerk: that our own in-house department of drafting incorporates these amendments that have been proposed into a new Bill and cause the Bill’s gazetting within a very short time, so that it is brought back for first reading and we process it expeditiously. The Clerk is accordingly directed to do this immediately and have this matter brought back to Parliament as soon as possible. Thank you. (Applause)

MR KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, there were concerns about some constituents who were not consulted yet they are important, for example, the religious institutions in this country. Would it not be procedurally right for them to also have an input in this Bill since they already have the amendments circulated?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When the new Bill is gazetted, it will be read here for the first time and the processes will continue.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

3.35
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion Seconded)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the honourable Members of Parliament for Jinja Municipality East, Ayivu County, Workers and Mbale Municipality. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 is to cure the following - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 2014 or 2015?

MR RWAKAJARA: It is 2015. I got leave in 2013 and had it read for the first time in 2015. Mr Speaker, you were in the Chair then. 

This Bill is to repeal the Act of 1957 and it is purposely to address setting a minimum wage in the sectors of our economy. It is also to help the minister in charge of the sector set minimum wages every year; to constitute a minimum wages board; constitute the committee; and appoint technical staff to ensure the board is advised technically from empirical evidence that shows the effect and impact of the minimum wage on our economy.

Mr Speaker, the Bill further provides for two different minimum wages determination mechanisms - public and private. Under public wages determination, the minimum wages are determined by the board and apply to a given sector while the private wages determination is by parties agreeing contractually to a minimum wage applicable to them, as long as the wage is reviewed every two years and is not lower than the minimum wage determined for the sector, if any.

Mr Speaker, before you is the Bill for discussion by the House so that we can have this Bill passed into law and the workers in this country can have minimum wages. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 be read for the second time. This matter was referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Before we kick off the debate, we will take a report from the committee as we process the Bill for the second reading. 

Where is the chairperson of the committee? Is the vice-chairperson present? Is there a member of the committee who can briefly present this report? Hon. Asamo, please proceed. This is the day that the Lord has made for you to proceed and we shall celebrate and rejoice in it. (Laughter)

3.42
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, People with Disability, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am going to read the report on behalf of the committee but I beg that I go to the observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, please.

MS ASAMO: Thank you. I will start with the advantages of a minimum wages:

1. Improve People's Welfare 

In a liberal economy like Uganda’s where free market and laissez-faire conditions limit the Government's role to provide support services, the welfare of citizens is largely neglected. The cost of labour, like all other costs of doing business, is solely moderated by the forces of demand and supply. The inevitable result is that workers, especially the unskilled, are forced to receive the least pay possible. A minimum wage will ensure that workers receive reasonable pay.

2. Poverty Reduction 

According to UNDP, about 19.7 per cent of the Ugandan workforce is considered poor. Over 6.7 million people in Uganda live below the poverty line and an additional 43 per cent is highly vulnerable to falling into poverty. Minimum wages could reduce poverty through wealth redistribution to curb income inequalities. 

In Uganda, the distribution of income is still notoriously unequal. There are significant disparities in poverty levels across regions and amongst persons. As a result of increasing incomes of Uganda's poorest, the higher spending power of Ugandans will boost aggregate demand and in turn, economic growth.

3. Protection from Exploitation 

Employers currently pay less than the value of the employee's efforts because they are able to lawfully pay a very low salary but retain very high profits or returns. With increasing globalisation, workers are continually sacrificed at the centre of competitive manufacturing and production where employers are looking for the cheapest possible labour for them to beat competitors with less prices while getting as much profit as possible. 

Given Uganda's dire poverty and the fact that personal financial means remain a fundamental ingredient for the social economic progress to which Uganda aspires, - middle income status -  there is need for legal intervention via minimum wage laws to ensure that Uganda’s labour force is fairly remunerated.

Mr Speaker, allow me to explain this one. We have seen incidences in some companies where the workers are given less money. When they are off duty, their money is deducted. They are not allowed to fall sick. When they fall sick, the money is again deducted. Hence, they end up having very little money and with no command of their remuneration.

4. Increased Productivity 

A minimum wage could increase productivity in two major ways: 

(i) 	More investment by employers in workers’ skills and capacity to make them worth the new higher wages and motivation of workers with more pay, thus concentrating on the job as a sufficient source of income which meets their needs; and 

(ii) Additionally, in the event of saving enough and investing in one's own venture, the sense of ownership and direct gain induces more work and productivity.

5. Reduced Corruption 

It is stated that wages are too low and out of sync with the standard of living, so citizens increasingly have to find additional sources of income to meet their basic needs and provide for their families. Many workers are demotivated and only do the bare minimum. The underlying need for additional income, in an environment of high bureaucracy and weak structures, has fostered a situation in which both public and private officials seek bribes to “make things faster” for clients.

Increased wages would meet more needs of workers, leave them savings to invest in their families’ farms and education, and generally dis-incentivise corruption and soliciting of bribes. It would slowly but surely undermine the culturally unwritten but persistent agreement to “pay something” or “charge something” for services that should otherwise be free or are already paid for through the doer's salary.

6. Prevention of Lock-Outs and Strikes 

Due to poor living conditions, Uganda has witnessed labour strikes from both skilled and unskilled labourers. A minimum wage will reduce strikes, increase morale, increase productivity and improve the country’s investment climate.

Disadvantages of a Minimum Wage

Mr Speaker, I need to look at them so that when we debate, we see both sides.

1. Reduced Investment and Growth

One of the most fundamental principles of economics is that people tend to buy more when the price is lower and less when the price is higher. A minimum wage, therefore, may increase the cost of labour, which in turn will increase the general cost of doing business thus reducing investments. 

However, evidence from other economies reveals that wage costs are only one of several factors influencing investment. Therefore, while reduced investments are possible, their extent and scope are indefinite and vary from time to time.

2. Increased Unemployment

Uganda’s high unemployment rates, which lower the value of any one worker, are feared to possibly increase when a minimum wage is instituted. Increases in minimum wages will increase unemployment of the least skilled - more people willing to work for the high wage than available jobs. 

In addition to small enterprises closing due to high costs (wages), since many unemployed, low skilled workers can do the same job, those demanding a higher wage will either have less chances of employment or be replaced by machines to save costs.

The high incidence of unemployment and bleak prospects for fresh graduates evokes resistance to any legislation that might initially make employers reluctant to hire. However, this obstructs the possibility that a more empowered workforce with high spending power can act as a catalyst for a growing economy with more opportunities.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that a large percentage of Uganda’s workforce is in the informal sector yet businesses within the informal sector are largely not documented, unregulated and experiencing deplorable working conditions for little pay. This is made possible because of the high unemployment rate in the country, which leaves the able population desperate and ready to work for as little as cannot meet their minimum needs.

The committee recommends that Uganda Bureau of Statistics conducts a survey on the number of businesses in the informal sector so as to inform future policy decisions.

Limited Labour Market Information

The committee noted that despite the need to adequately plan for the country and regulate employers and employees, information about the labour market is very scanty, outdated and in some cases, non-existent. The majority of Ugandans in the labour market have poor recordkeeping habits while the authorities have not developed a systematic way of collecting data. Absence of the relevant labour market information makes legislation difficult because some decisions have to be based on facts rather than speculation.

The committee recommends that the labour ministry, in conjunction with Uganda Bureau of Statistics, gathers the relevant market information so as to aid planning, legislation and enforcement.

Non-Wage Benefits

The committee noted that while some employers may not offer high wages, they provide a reasonable number of other benefits to employees, which if computed would raise the employees’ wage and enable the workers to live a decent life. The benefits include, but are not limited to, accommodation, feeding, transport, medical care, airtime and others. Provision of such benefits may lead to increased productivity in comparison with providing cash, which may not be used for the intended purpose.

The committee recommends that such benefits should be taken into consideration when settling a minimum wage.

Composition and Appointment of the Board

The committee observed that the composition of the board is not representative enough of the stakeholders at hand, including non-unionized workers. The committee also noted that there is no law making it a statutory duty of the minister to appoint the board to handle minimum wages issues.

The committee recommends that the composition of the board be expanded to cater for the interests of all stakeholders. The law should make it a statutory duty of the minister to appoint the board and specify duration of the appointment.

Changing Economy

The committee observed that economic times change from boom to recession and vice versa, thus affecting the relevance of a minimum wage. Poverty levels and the rate of inflation also affect a minimum wage. As already noted, the minimum wage in Uganda was last reviewed in 1984 and there is no law making it an obligation of the minister to review it periodically.

The committee recommends that there should be periodic revision of the minimum wage to match the economic climate.

The committee further recommends that there should be a provision for a transition period to enable employers adjust accordingly.

Compliance with Human Rights, Sustainable Development Goals, Gender and Equity Provisions 

Human Rights

Article 40 of the Constitution provides for economic rights. Article 40(1) requires that, “Parliament shall enact laws to provide for the right of persons to work under satisfactory, safe and healthy conditions; and to ensure equal payment for equal work without discrimination.”

The Bill aims at providing a basic minimum payment package for workers which shal1 be deemed as satisfactory according to the different sectors, thereby upholding their economic rights. Having a basic minimum pay is one of the ways of promoting workers’ economic rights, which shall be less discriminatory.

Sustainable Development Goals

Sustainable Development Goal No. 10 aims at reduction of inequality within and among countries. The first target of this goal is that by 2030, countries should progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40 per cent of the population at a rate higher than the national average. Having a minimum wage in place is one of the ways of sustaining income growth of the low level workers who largely constitute the bottom 40 per cent of the population and thus reducing income inequality within the country.

Gender and Equity Provisions

The committee noted that minimum wages are particularly relevant to the poor women, Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) and other vulnerable and marginalised groups who occupy the lowest paid position in the economy. The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 is compliant with gender and equity provisions in the following ways:

Setting of a minimum wage for all sectors including domestic workers: In Uganda, the majority of domestic workers are women, many of whom are uneducated. These uneducated women or girls are commonly subjected to harder working conditions, including working without rest for all days of the week and the year with little pay. Having a minimum wage determined for this category of workers will go a long way in empowering them. It is also a way of helping marginalised groups of people.

Providing for workers in the informal sector: The majority of Ugandans are employed in the informal private sector where they are subjected to various forms of abuse ranging from little pay to instant dismissal. The Minimum Wages Bi11, 2015 will address the issue of low pay by setting a minimum limit, which employers have to abide with.

Catering for illiterate and semi-illiterate employees: Many illiterate and semi-illiterate Ugandans are able to work but employers usually exploit them by paying them what is not commensurate with the efforts put into the work. A minimum wage will go a long way in solving this.

Vulnerable and marginalised employees usually lack a uniform voice to speak out for themselves or advocate for their rights. Having a minimum wage set is a way of promoting equity.

The committee noted that a lot of unpaid-for work (domestic labour) is done especially by women in this country. This work is rarely appreciated as it has no monetary value attached to it yet it is very important for the community - caring for the elderly, children and the family. Putting monetary value to this work will help more people to find work in homes/care centres and create more employment opportunities while at the same time enhancing the status of the care givers.

The committee recommends that the ministry responsible for labour issues embarks on the process of exploring the possibility of attaching monetary value to domestic or related work.

In conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed with the proposed amendments attached to this report. I beg to report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. Congratulations; on no notice, you have proceeded. That is the spirit that we should embrace as members of committees. We should be able to pick the report of the committee and run with it when need arises, the way hon. Asamo has just done. 

Honourable members, I have already proposed the question for your debate and debate starts now for the second reading of this Bill. Can we agree on three minutes each? Three minutes. 

4.00
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I stand to support the motion.

This Bill should have been passed yesterday. Ugandans have been suffering and working a number of hours in the private sector - in homes and for many people. When you see what they take home, it is a very miserable salary, which cannot even sustain them for one week. I proposed on this Floor sometime back that we should have a minimum wage.

On Labour Day, all workers of the world unite to fight against exploitation, and that day is celebrated on 1 May every year. One time in Tororo District when we were celebrating Labour Day, my name was read as one of those to get a medal. I asked, “Why should I get a medal?” A medal when there is no minimum wage for Ugandans! I said, “No, I will not take that medal.” However, I am now glad that the Bill has been brought. 

If the Bill is passed by this House, it is going to improve the livelihood of Ugandans. They will be able to live properly. Ugandans will be able to take their children to school. They will be able to rent presentable accommodation. It will reduce corruption in places of work. It will make people enjoy their work places. They will retain their jobs and it will reduce corruption because people will be living on a minimum wage.

One time, I proposed here that at least the lowest wage for a house keeper or a messenger should be about Shs 400,000. The Shs 400,000, which I proposed that time, cannot even be able to rent some accommodation and take the children of the lowest worker to school. Therefore, honourable members, it is important that we consider and pass this Bill to make Ugandans enjoy living in this country. Even a few of those employed, if we enabled them get a good salary, they would enjoy living in this country. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to support. 
   
4.03
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

The most important resource for production is the human resource, although often times we forget to critically remunerate this very important resource. A minimum wage is supposed to enable one to live a fairly decent life, assuming other factors are constant. In our communities, we have seen how we have exploited this very important labour - in our families and working environment. 

With our eyes, we have seen that the wages paid to these workers do not even enable them afford decent food for their children. Once we have a minimum wage, we will be working towards assuring our citizens that they should be able to live a decent life. Not only that, once we have a minimum wage, most producers fear it may increase the cost of production but my view is in the opposite direction; we will be working very hard to ensure that our production processes have the best efficiencies in order to attain the expected profit levels. 

Therefore, I stand here to strongly urge the House to support this Bill so that our fellow Ugandans can live a decent life. Thank you.

4.06
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a Bill to establish the minimum wage for the workers in this country. 

Honourable colleagues, and more so those from the NRM, you will recall that it has been a pledge by the President to establish a minimum wage in this country. Therefore, I would like to allay the fears of many who may have feared to support this Bill that this is actually the position of the President. 

Most importantly, we are talking about a bare minimum. When we talk about workers, we are speaking to a matter which is very close to my heart. I represent a constituency in a town which was formerly an industrial town with very many industries and workers. When you talk about a minimum wage, you are talking about the bare minimum to enable someone survive. We, therefore, look at the social economic aspect of it. 

With what the workers are earning, can they afford any form of medical care? When you look at the health budget, you will realise that if you divided the Ministry of Health budget among every Ugandan, each Ugandan will get Shs 600 as their share and yet a dose for malaria treatment costs more than Shs 5,000. This means that a casual labourer somewhere needs to have a bare minimum to take home. In most industries, casual labourers are earning less than Shs 5,000 a day. Others work for even less than Shs 1,000. With those challenges, it requires that Parliaments comes in to establish a minimum wage.

I would like to allay the fears of many who thought that when we have a minimum wage, we shall chase away investors. This is not correct. I have had the benefit of discussing with some investors and I do not feel shy to mention them; for example, Bidco in Jinja and MMI Steel industries. I told them that once you set a minimum wage for your workers, theft issues at your work place will actually reduce, and they even cut the cost of security at their work places. This is because workers will always find a way of enhancing their pay, usually by stealing from their places of work because they want to survive. 

I would like to thank the member of the committee, hon. Asamo, for rising up to present the report. When we pass this Bill, we will have saved many Ugandans because people have been asking me when the minimum wage –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion and welcome the Bill on the minimum wage.

As a country, we have largely not considered the plight of workers. I can give an example of a constituent of mine who was working as a security guard and being paid a very low salary, which forced him to take on a second job as a security guard as well. He would work during the day in one place and at night in another place to try and make ends meet. He could not even have a family life beyond work.

The way a minimum wage can work effectively is if the roles of the trade unions are enhanced. The concept as it existed involved the trade unions speaking on behalf of the workers within their domain. You cannot really have a minimum wage which cuts across board but one that applies sector by sector and where the trade unions are looking at the interests of their workers and speaking for those interests. That is when we can have a minimum wage that is functional. 

Investors who are not prepared to pay a wage which can sustain somebody are actually practicing exploitation. It cannot be called anything else but exploitation. If somebody is giving their labour and is being paid less than they can live on, at the end of the day they are suffering a loss because it is not sustainable. It reaches a level where you are actually impoverishing somebody but because of the desperation and the need for employment, somebody will accept a job at any possible wage.

Therefore, we need a safety net as a country and we need to work towards improving the quality and dignity of our workers. We cannot have workers who are exploited, under paid and who have no benefits in the course of work and yet we expect to develop our country. We may have good statistics but if we do not improve the quality and the expectations of the individual workers, I think we will have failed all together. 

On that basis, I support the private Member’s Bill and I hope that despite passing it, Government will take a keen interest and the trade unions will also be active and support the plight of their workers. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

If we increased the pay for workers, it would improve health and safety in work places. It would reduce accidents in factories because workers would be motivated. The honourable member mentioned that investors would not come. They will come because they would make more profit since there would be reduced accidents and reduced losses in their factories.

Secondly, one time I saw a clip where a house maid was stepping on the back of a baby. This is because these house helpers are not motivated. If we pass this Bill, it would reduce on the harassment of our children and reduce the thefts in our homes. It will reduce on our own insecurity because some of these people in our houses have become our security guards. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.13
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kagadi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the motion. 

We know that in this country, the issue of unemployment is very serious. A minimum wage will improve the working conditions especially for those people in the informal sector. We have seen very many employees go on strike and the biggest issue has been low wages. Therefore, if this law comes up, we hope workers employed in those sectors are going to be more comfortable. 

The second issue is about the distribution of resources. We are aware that today we have a lot of challenges to do with income inequalities. The moment there is a law that provides for a minimum wage, it will mean we are going to improve the capacity of all employees. Therefore, the purchasing power will be much higher and the economy will grow. The distribution of resources is very important; inequalities would reduce and therefore there would be more chances of moving on.

Thirdly, there is a situation where we have the biggest number of people employed in the informal sector failing to have standards. The moment they have –(Member timed out.)

4.15
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, People with Disability):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill giving us an opportunity to have a minimum wage in Uganda. When we pass this Bill, it will partly help us to domesticate Article 27 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which provides for work and employment and specifically employment of persons with disabilities. 

In this country and world over, there are few opportunities of employment for persons with disabilities and more so for young men and women with disabilities. We encounter situations whereby one can apply for a job and they are shortlisted to go for an interview but when they go to face the interview panel and they are seen to have a disability, they are asked, “Oh! What have you come for?” At that point, they can even deny you the opportunity to sit for the interview. 

We have also experienced situations where persons who acquire a disability at work are dismissed. A majority of persons with disabilities cannot also access equal pay for equal work, like their non-disabled counterparts. I would like to support this motion and in addition, I would like to call upon the framers of this Bill to take into consideration measures to ensure accessible and adapted work places in the open labour market, including provision of reasonable accommodation regardless of disability.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that the MPs representing workers in this country can also help us to review the tripartite structure of the International Labour Organisation. Actually, this structure does not give room for the ordinary employees to also raise their concerns to the highest levels. I thank you.

4.18
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, let me thank the committee chairperson for the report, which was very clear. I would also like to say that we are going to welcome the Bill.

Mr Speaker, when you look at Uganda’s economy in totality, you realise that we do not have any means of regulation; we are just in a free environment, making the forces of demand and supply determine how the country is run. I see this Bill being one of the ways in which we are going to regulate and protect the very vulnerable in our economy.

Mr Speaker, we even need to eventually consider protection against a lot of other exploitations that are coming up in the Ugandan economy. There is a lot of price discrimination, for example. Look at the legal fees being charged by lawyers, for example; there is no determinant. Lawyers are free to do whatever they want to do, charge fees they want to charge and pay whatever they want. Therefore, this Bill and our subsequent approval of it is one of the ways we are going to regulate this economy and protect workers so that we have meaningful welfare in this country. 

Mr Speaker, since the Government will allow us to start implementing laws that regulate, we should be able to receive more laws that will regulate other sectors in Uganda. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and I highly support this motion. Thank you very much.

4.20
MR SAMUEL OKWIR (Independent, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the honourable member for presenting this report.

Mr Speaker, as a country we really need a minimum wage. I recall when I left university and got my first job, I was offered Shs 60,000 per month. With that money, I had to rent in Kampala and feed myself; it was challenging.

Many of the workers in Uganda have been under the mercy of investors. I would like to agree with the Member for Lira Municipality that trade unions have not done their best in advocating for the plight of workers within their sectors. I would like to bring out an example. Recently, a cousin of mine lost a limb and he was working with a company that was paying him about Shs 120,000. Right now, this man is in the village and he had not saved anything. However, if the minimum wage had been set, at least the workers would be able to have savings and sustain life after such incidents. Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from my colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member’s time was up. (Laughter)

4.23
MR KASSIANO WADRI (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this motion. 

Uganda is one of those countries, which have never addressed their minds to the issue of a minimum wage for their workers. Indeed, it is not only because this offends Article 40 of our Constitution, but what attracts me to support this motion is more about the inhumane treatment of many of our workers, especially by the so called investors in the business sector. You will find one or two attendants in a shop but these people are abused. I remember a few years ago, there was a cry about an Indian businessman who, in the process of punishing a worker, asked the worker to lick the carpet; it is such inhuman treatment that cannot be found anywhere else except in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I come from a region which is the supplier, as it were, of security guards and sugarcane cutters in the sugarcane industry, especially in Lugazi and Kakira. When many of these youth come here, after a year or two, when they return home they would be lucky if they had a cheap phone of Shs 30,000, or a three-inch mattress, or a radio set that can accommodate three batteries. Otherwise, most of the time, they even come out to ask for transport money to take them back because of the poor pay they get.

Mr Speaker, the concern that I need to address to this committee is the issue of enforcement. Much as hon. Jimmy Akena of Lira Municipality talked about the issue of trade unions not being firm in their work, I am afraid that not all workers that we are clamouring for here are of the unionised nature. There are those workers who are looking after cows and goats; there are those fishing in the water and those in our homes, who by no chance have the opportunity to be unionised. What enforcement measures do we have in this law –(Member timed out.) 

4.26
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill.

I would like to support what hon. Wadri has said. In fact, I have friends from Arua who told me that towards the retirement of sugarcane cutters, they prepare to buy a bicycle and ride their belongings back to Arua. This is really a challenge. 
	
We need to look at competition for labour. I hope the Bill will not face challenges with labour competition.  Otherwise, if there is less labour competition, we might get these investors messing up our people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to experts. When you look at the construction of the dams, especially Karuma, we have 1,836 employees who are of Ugandan origin and 336 employees who are of Chinese origin. Those 336 are considered as experts and they end up taking all resources. Therefore, as we look at these elements, we should consider our people whose qualifications match with those of the experts and ensure that they earn the same salary.

I know trade unions are not very strong but for us to achieve this, we must emphasise that institutions should have strong trade unions and engage in negotiations with the boards to ensure that this enforcement is achieved. Otherwise, we will continue to have problems recycled, if the trade unions are not very strong and our people will continue to be exploited.
	
People may fear that there might be shift in technology. I think we should not fear this because technology will encourage people to study and appreciate it, as long as they are earning better salary.

Mr Speaker, I would like to give an example of myself. When I started working, I had been trained to earn –(Member timed out.)

4.29
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion and the chairperson for the report.

I stand to support this motion because the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 will improve the worker-employer relations and therefore, reduce the number of strikes that we have been experiencing in the country.
			
The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 will not only improve worker-employer relationship but improve productivity. As productivity increases because one is being paid well, the level of profitability for the firm where the worker is working will increase. As a result, many of our people will be able to save some money.

Like Members have said, most of these young people that come and work in these factories and homes - when they go back to their villages especially at the end of the year, a good number fail to come back and work because they have been earning very little and they have been remitting this money back home. The little that they go back home with is all consumed during the festive season. Therefore, in order to increase savings in this country, we need better pay for workers. 

Mr Speaker, my fear is how will the recruitment be done? If one is going to sneak to me and ask for a place to work with me like for a guard or house help, then I can as well negotiate with him or her outside the minimum wage. That needs to be borne in mind as we pass this law.

Once this Bill is passed, it will trigger other effects. For example, if I employ someone and the minimum wage is that I have to pay that person Shs 200,000, that means that my salary as well should go up. How prepared is Government to increase the salaries of other workers in this country? (Member timed out.)

4.32
MR DENIS OBUA HAMSON (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to express my support and at the same time, express my reservation on this Bill.

My support emanates from the fact that in Mark 12:17, “Then Jesus said to them, ‘Give back to Caesar what is Caesar's and to God what is God's’” In a nutshell, what this Parliament is doing is to ensure that companies give to their respective workers what is meant for the workers. That is my first point of support.

My second point of support is to the effect that once this Bill is passed into law, it will prevent companies from taking advantage of the labour market in Uganda. 

My points of reservation are food for thought. One, I have done research at a continental level to look at countries within the African Continent with minimum wage and I found that Angola, Cape Verde, Egypt, Mozambique and Kenya have minimum wage.

My second point of reservation is that we need to extract a commitment from the Executive arm of Government. I am not a prophet of doom but I can prophesy what will happen. At the start of this debate, we heard a minister from the ministry that is meant to house this legislation once passed into law. When we started the debate, the minister majestically walked out. To me, that was a clear indication that I, as Obua, representing Ajuri, doubt the commitment of the frontbench, in support of the Bill.
	
History will judge me at the point where they are supposed to act but I have put it on record that I support it and that I have reservation. It is only history that will judge me whether we shall extract that commitment from the Executive arm of Government. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

4.34
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise in support of the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015. It has come at a time when Uganda is moving towards industrialisation.

When the multinationals come here to industrialise, that means that there are two shifts to be done and two types of employees, which we should consider. The first is contract employees. When you look at contract employees, the employer contributes to National Social Security Fund (NSSF) 15 per cent and it means that they have got a saving.

When we make this Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 we should consider the causal employees; their minimum wage should be per hour. There should also be a clause that the causal employees will have some terminal benefits. They should also be considered for NSSF savings. It should not stop there. That would mean Uganda is moving towards development. Even the low-cost housing sector will definitely move. The commercial banks with their mortgage section will move to give a mortgage to employees who have got minimum wage, terminal benefits and they are saving with NSSF so that they can also own houses. 

I support the Bill. It is coming at the right time so that people can live a meaningful life. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you for the opportunity. This Bill should have come ten years ago. I have worked in the private sector almost all my life and the experience I have is not a good one. The majority of the people in our economy are geared towards the private sector, which is the largest employer of our young people.

Therefore, I support this Bill because I know the benefits. First of all, once you engage an employer, you know where to start from when negotiating your wages. This will be a step ahead in rectifying the exploitation mainly in the private sector. A lot of young people are suffering from the fear of losing their jobs. 

Even when they ask for the minimum amount of money they should earn in order to live a better life, they are exploited because of the absence of this. So, this law will drive this country to another level where even the lowest earners are recognised and would be able to contribute on some of these schemes that benefit the majority of the people. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.38
MS MARY BABIRYE (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also support the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015. If well managed, it will lead to an increase in the per capita income, which will lead to economic growth. Economic growth will transform our country from the traditional stage where we are now to the take-off stage. 

However, I have to caution the Government to create more jobs because if it remains that the private sector employs more of our population, they may sabotage the policy. I, therefore, request that we caution the Government to employ more people than the private sector, if the Bill is to successfully be implemented. Thank you.

4.40
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the representative of the chairperson of the committee for the work well done. I also would like to thank my colleague, hon. Rwakajara for coming up with a Private Member’s Bill. From the look of things, we can say that there is hope at the end of the tunnel. 

My issue concerns the workers because if we give the support I have seen today, then there is hope for the workers of this country. For a long time, the Kenyans have had a minimum wage and yet, we are both in the East African Community. 

I also want to allay the fears that investors will run away. They have not run away from Kenya. They have been there and many more are coming to invest in Kenya. Therefore, even in Uganda, we have to put our feet down and manage the issue of the minimum wage. I urge the Government to help us because, without a minimum wage, there is no hope of standardisation. Our people will continue languishing. 

We have factories where people are getting Shs 100,000 a month. With a wife and five children, a man is supposed to live on Shs 100,000 just because we do not want to disturb the investors. You know as much as I do that no one can survive on Shs 100,000 when they go to the same hospitals and markets. They face a lot of challenges. Some of them even have children who would wish to go to university but they failed and joined their parents.

Therefore, I believe that if we finalise and support this Bill, we will be able to raise our standards as a country because some of those people who are getting that little money work double shift. They work during the day and even at night. When they become so hungry; you know the repercussion. Sometimes, they burn the factories. It has happened before because they have no recourse to turn to. 

So, we need support. I know that the investors will also help us instead of bringing their own people. They are fond of –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a reservation for this Bill and I do not support it. I find the Bill misdirected. If the intention is to protect workers, what you need is a basic needs wage and not minimum wage. For as long as your concern is how to make the workers comfortable, the solution does not lie in the minimum wage. The solution is in the basic needs wage. 

I have heard from the Members contributing and they are all alluding to a basic needs wage. A colleague even referred to a living wage. So, I find myself unable to support a Bill, which is misdirected in the first place because it does not address the issue that is of concern to the workers.

Secondly, a wage is a driver of production cost and one of the determinants of wage is the ability to pay. Uganda is largely a private sector-led economy. You are not going to tell a person in the private sector to pay a wage, which he or she does not have the ability to pay. That is wishful thinking and it is not feasible.

Normally, it is somebody’s ability to pay a wage, which determines the amount of wage that the employer will set for his or her workers. 

In this report, we are talking about poverty. One of the major drivers of poverty is unemployment. You have already stated in the same report that 6.7 per cent of the people are living below poverty line and you projected that 43 per cent of the people who are very vulnerable can fall in that trap anytime. Now, by bringing a minimum wage, it is likely to cut off many workers and drive them into unemployment. Do you think by sending them into unemployment, you are going to help them jump out of poverty? You are instead worsening their situation. These fellows will find themselves -(Interjections)- no just give me time. They find themselves in an - this is an economic fact and you cannot argue about it, I am arguing from facts.

Mr Speaker, this is a country yearning for investors. One of the –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already picked Members to speak next. Honourable members, you cannot talk about the workers’ movement in this country without one name coming out. That name is Owere; I have sighted him in the gallery though I have not got a formal brief here. However, let me recognise him and he came in with a team of people. Therefore, as you debate, remember the workers’ fraternities are not only down here but also up in Gallery.

4.46
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, Uganda ratified the International Labour Organisation in 1963. To date, we have not effected its performance. When Dr Obote, the then Prime Minister did this, UPC expected that the minimum wage was to be put in place; it was to be something that workers would feel was justifiable.  

Presently, we stand at only Shs 6,000 as the official minimum wage; as stipulated by law. When the British brought this law, it was amended in 1935 and then in 1947, they set the basis for its operation for those who are members of unions.

Currently, I am very scared of looking at the trend. How do you protect workers who are not under unions, like house girls, shamba boys and many more? I know the army did something for their staff, where they were put under the minimum wage of Shs 240,000 because of fear that they may not lay down their tools but can easily use their tools against their employers.

I would like to propose that an agency be put in place to enforce this process through some innovative means because Government is appearing to be very lazy, given that the line ministry is absent. This should be the way to go that we have an institutional framework that should monitor how employees across the country are protected.

At present, we are operating a liberal and terrible economy. The market forces are determining everything and it is very difficult. During Dr Obote’s regime, Government protected the interests of workers. However, in today’s market economy, the current Government operates on extreme principles of capitalism. Where the market forces dominate, what do you do? That explains why the minister is walking out.

4.50
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the sponsor of this Bill and also the committee that has worked on this Bill. I would like to allay the fears of a Member who said that it is going to make the investors run away.

We have seen developed countries like America and European Countries having a minimum wage but people are always creating jobs there. Therefore, I do not see why it cannot work in Uganda. The only thing that I can sense is the reduction in the workforce because the more you pay, the fewer the workers. That is the only scenario.

Mr Speaker, I would like to look at the domestic workers and the security guards. The elites are the culprits in this; they are the ones who get young girls and boys from the villages, maybe even relatives. When they bring them as domestic workers, they pay them peanuts in the pretext that they give them food and other basics and these young girls have nowhere to run. However, with a minimum wage, all of us will behave. 

The security guards you see smartly dressed are paid peanuts. What is shocking is that somebody guarding a financial institution like a bank and he sees boxes of money coming in is paid only Shs 120,000. Isn’t that like putting a piece of meat in front of a dog and it starts salivating? It may even jump on you.

Therefore, this Bill is timely. Let us look at those cadres and focus on their minimum wage. However, as the Member has said, it is a matter of enforcement. We also need to go out and sensitise our people who go looking for jobs especially –(Member timed out.)

4.53
MR BARNABAS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to say something on this Bill. I support the Bill and with very simple reasons. If we set the minimum wage and increase some money for our people, we will increase the money in the hands of the people. That means we will increase their purchasing power and will also increase the consumption of the products of the industrialists and the investors whom we fear might run away if the minimum wage went up.

Therefore, if we increase consumption, the demand for those goods will rise. If the demand for the goods rises, the manufacturers will have more reasons to stay in the market and produce more. On the other side, if we improve the amount of money in the hands of the people, we will, therefore, increase access to the services that this Government is supposed to provide. 

It is already a cycle that we should start in principle with increasing the amount of money in the hands of our people and because the more money we have and the more consumption there is, the wider the chances of increasing the tax-base of this country. We have over the years continued to recharge the same people and many people are avoiding taxation because they do not have the income to pay. 

In the long run, I believe that the minimum wage will increase the quality of life for our people and we will have better education for our children and the generations to come will be grateful that we did what many of us regard as painful. Increase the wages and set a minimum wage for people and development will be a possibility.

The challenge is, how do we enforce this? One of us said we are in a free market economy and therefore, no regulations – that is what it sounded like – we have to get down and do some regulation. This is our country. We have to make things happen. We have to make the best we can while we are in this House. I would like to thank the group that moved the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.56
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the report.

Before I support the motion, I need to ask a few questions. Our honourable colleagues are assuming that the minimum wage that shall be set in this country will improve the lives of the unskilled or skilled workers. Right now, we do not know how much is going to be set. 

Our colleague was giving an example of someone being paid Shs 120,000. What about if the Board sets the minimum wage of Shs 6,000? We need to be serious in this important subject. We are discussing but we do not know exactly what is going to happen.
Secondly, what should be noted is that currently, as a country, we are graduating more than 40,000 youth every year from universities. All those are going for unskilled jobs. Government is not giving jobs and there are no white collar ones.

Therefore, if you are setting minimum wage, we need to put into consideration what will happen to those graduates who are participating in the unskilled kind of employment. We need to be clear. When we set the minimum wage and the payment, are we going to have them in terms of hours someone does work, days or months? (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you my honourable colleague. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that the jobs that we have in the market are in thousands. I do not know how Government is going to give minimum wage per type of job. For instance, to say, “this is the minimum for scientists, fine art and those who are digging-” who is going to do valuation? Is it the Government chief valuer? 

MR OLANYA: Thank you for the information. Finally, we are in a liberal economy where each and every one is free to set up his or her prices he feels like. We need to be careful when we are discussing this important subject matter. Thank you.

4.59
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I am guided by the history of the minimum wage in other countries.
As we are aware, in 1929, the world suffered a big economy crush. By 1930 the entire United States was facing economic bankruptcy while President Franklin Roosevelt was struggling to figure out how to kick start the economy. It was not until 1938 when he introduced the minimum wages Bill, 2015 that the American economy finally got back to its feet.

Why did it do so? By introducing the minimum wage, people were attracted to jobs that they could do well rather than those that paid well. Therefore, services and production improved and by 1941 when America went to war, they were able to fund it for five years and beyond.

Secondly, we are worried about the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 chasing away investors but this is not true. What we are doing is setting an economic flow that is going to bolster the income of the lower classes while at the same time, taking away from the income of those who are highly paid. What, therefore, happens is that while the price of goods may go up and everyone may be paying more for goods, the truth is that the lower classes will be guaranteed an increase in income and they will be able to purchase those goods at a higher price and production will not go down.

Finally, my third reason for supporting this motion is because it is biblically sound. It derives from Luke 10:7, which says, “For the worker is worthy of his wages.” Thank you.

5.01
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support this motion. I thank the committee for a detailed report.
Many arguments have been put across but I would like to point to one or two things. First of all, if I may recollect, three or four years ago, a Minimum Wage Board was formed in this country to formulate a policy. This Board was supposed to be tabled and approved by this House. That came to pass and never happened. That has simply left our workers out there with no place for recourse.

Secondly, it has been mentioned here that either our workers unionise or otherwise are prone to exploitation. Therefore, this Bill, if passed into law, will be a big recourse for our workers.

You may be aware that recently, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development addressed the country saying that our economy is doing quite well and we are flying. If we do not address the plight of our workers, they will be left behind. 

I, therefore, stand to strongly support this motion and bear witness that once it comes into law, all the advantages that have been put in place will come into fruition. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will have the Leader of the Opposition. I have been advised it is hon. Odur today. (Laughter) 

5.03
MR JANATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also speaking as the Shadow Minister for Public Service that needs to speak for workers.

First of all, I would like to register that I support this motion and I would like to thank hon. Rwakajara for bringing it. These are the types of Bills that he should always be associated with.

In the report, it was noted that Uganda signed the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Protocol in 1963. The last time the Board was active was in 1984. I can also put it on record that those were the times the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) was in power. You could see the justification why the workers loved the party very much.

One strong justification for the minimum wage is that it reduces dependence on Government once the employees are able to access quality payment, which my friend is calling “basic”. In this report, if you look at the background, they have justified it as a basic pay. Employees and workers will not depend on Government. The better you are paid, the less you depend on Government. Therefore, it will reduce the dependence syndrome that we have in this country.

Secondly, we should start looking at quality. In Uganda, we get taken by numbers. You want the number of people who are employed but you do not care about the quality of their employment. If somebody does not have quality employment, they are as good as not being employed.

Therefore, for me, I think it is better to have those workers who are well remunerated, meeting their basic needs and then they can, in turn, be brought slowly into the tax base because when you bring them up, you are indirectly expanding the tax revenue of the country. Therefore, you pay less people and they are not in the tax base.

The other one is that many people who spend are those people who are employed- the ones we are fighting for. They get money and spend and that helps the economy. An economy, which is not spending is keeping money in houses and banks and this does not help.

Therefore, we need those groups of people who are not able to spend to come into the economy and oil the system because they say money makes itself.

The more you spend, the more money you get. Therefore, I agree that it is going to help this economy and we should support it. I urge Government to take care of it to ensure that the political will is there so that we just do not legislate here and leave it on the shelves. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the general discussion has indicated that this Bill should have been passed yesterday. With the exception from the submission from West Budama North, the general contribution has been in favour of the Bill.

Can I put the question to the motion for second reading? Honourable members, thank you for the debate. I now put the question that the Bill entitled “The Minimum Wages Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stand part of this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.


Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is interpretation, we will stand over it. 

Clause 4

MS ASAMO:  Establishment of a Minimum Wages Advisory Board. It is proposed to amend the clause by redrafting it as:

(1) 	There is established a minimum wages Advisory Board whose members shall be appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Public Service Commission and with the approval of Cabinet.

(2)  	The board shall consist of the Chairperson, a Vice Chairperson and not more than seven members who shall be appointed on the basis of their knowledge, expertise and experience in issues of labour relations.

(3)	At least 40 per cent of the members of the board shall be female, and at least one of all the members shall be a Person With Disability.

(4)	The members of the board shall as far as possible be drawn from the Ministry responsible for Labour, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, National Planning Authority, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the Federation of Uganda Employers, National Organisation of Trade Unions, the Central Organisation of Free Trade Unions and any other umbrella trade union that may be registered under the Labour Unions Act as well as from non-unionised workers.

(5) 	Member of the board other than a member appointed from a Government Ministry, department or agency shall hold office for a period of three years and is eligible for reappointment for only one term.

The justification is to require the appointment of the board members to be made with the necessary consultation with the Public Service Commission;

To require the appointment of board members to be made on the basis of their experience and other necessary qualifications;

To cater for gender equity and the special professional requirement of legal knowledge.

To provide for the clear organisations where the members of the board shall be drawn from;

To provide for a reasonable tenure of office of the members of the board while taking into consideration the members from government ministries, departments and agencies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Hon. Rwakajara, do you agree with these amendments?

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Mr Chair. Apart from the organisations that should be represented on the board, it should stop at the ministries, National Planning Authority and then the two organisations of Trade Unions. I would propose that we stop there apart from mentioning others and non-unionised workers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, you are opposed to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics and the Federation of Uganda Employers?

MR RWAKAJARA: Those are okay apart from the non-unionised workers because the workers are represented by the organisations that are mentioned.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we have not understood.

MS ASAMO: I think in this House, we have a law, which has brought in un-unionised workers and it would be good to have a board with a member representing them.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are non-unionised workers not workers in this country? Is that what you are saying? Is it because they do not have any mechanism of representation? How else can they be heard?

MR RWAKAJARA: Mr Chairperson, the challenge is how do you identify non-unionised? However if this House and everybody thinks it is important, I will concede. 

However, workers are represented by workers’ organisations. It may end up calling for even employers who are not in employers’ association. I thought it would be more organised if we had a workers’ representative organisation rather than leaving a gap because who would they be selected?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: How will you identify and have representation from this? What process will be in place to do this?

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, the issue of un-unionised workers was picked during the election of the Workers’ Representatives. There was a concern of people who were not unionised to be part of that process. In addition, we thought there are these people who have not yet got into the trade unions but not all workers in these industries belong to the unions.

Therefore, I think it is critical that we need to identify that group and the power has already been given to the board to make that decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No but how will it be? Who will look for them and how will they be identified and fitted in?

MS ASAMO: There are institutions where people are not registered unless we say because I think these people can be identified; they are there in the system.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Chair. I think I would agree with the fears of the mover of the motion. The challenge would be as you were rightly guiding, how do you process? Unionised workers are people who are in a group. Therefore, it is easy.

The non-unionised workers are workers but here you already have trade unions recognised, the federation of employers etcetera. It would be a big challenge. Unless you want to change and say, maybe you want to enlarge the number and have members from the public. Therefore, you leave for the person constituting to get any of the representatives that side. 

However, it would be a challenge to put it this way. We shall not be helping. This Parliament would be blamed for making it amorphous and when the intention is very clear that there are not in the unions, some of them not because of their choices. Some are because of where they are working, they are not allowed to join Trade unions. Then, some domestic workers – I agree with the mover of the motion that the chairperson concedes and leaves out – the amendment would be to remove the “us” from non-unionised workers. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We would have to set the minimum wage, monitor it and probably enforce it. If that is what this board is about, would it have taken off the people who are not unionised, without them being on the board arising from difficultly of selection? Let us first hear from the chairperson.

MS ASAMO: As we go to the roles of the board, I concede because then, they will take care of all the workers - unskilled, domestic and so on. I think that is okay.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson has conceded to this difficulty of identification but their interest will be generally incorporated by the people who are representing the workers. With that exception now, can I now put the amendment that proposes the counter amendment that the non-unionised workers be removed from the requirement for the representation on the board? I put the question of the amendment from the proposal of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MS ASAMO: In clause 5, we are looking at the functions of the Minimum Wage Advisory Board. It is proposed to amend the clause in paragraph (c) by deleting the phrase, “as directed by the minister” appearing at the end of the paragraph and redrafting it as, “(c) carrying out a periodic revision of minimum wages fixed by the board at least once every financial year.” 

The justification is to enable the board to operate independently in carrying out a periodic revision of wages. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay, hon. Rwakajara? I put the question to that amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 as amended agreed to.

Clause 6

MS ASAMO: Clause 6 is on the duration of the term of appointment. It is proposed to amend the clause by redrafting the headnote of the clause as, “vacation of office of a member of the board”; 
In sub-clause (1), we propose: 

    a) To delete the phrase, “and subject to the following provisions” appearing at the end of the sub-clause; 
    b) By deleting paragraph (a) 
    c) By renumbering paragraph (b) and sub-clause (2); 
    d) In sub-clause (2) by renumbering the sub-clause as sub-clause (3); 
    e) In sub-clause (3) by renumbering sub-clause (4) and in drafting it as, 
    f) “(4) a member of the board shall be paid such allowance as may be provided for in terms of appointment, in respect of travel and other expenses properly incurred by the member in the performance of his or her duties.” 

The justification is to provide for a clearer headnote that is in line with the content of the clause and to clearly provide for how members of the board shall be remunerated.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. The issue of renumbering or numbering will be done by the drafting team. We do not have to spend time on that. However, the substantive amendment that has been proposed by the committee – 

MR OBOTH: The clarification I seek is the amendment proposed in sub-clause (4) which reads, “A member of the board shall pay such allowances as may be provided for in the terms of appointment, in respect of travel and other expenses properly incurred by the member in the performance of his or her duties.” I do not know whether the justification given is clear. 

Chairperson, will the members only be paid travel and other expenses? Does that mean that they first need to prove all requisition with attachment? Is that what you intended? Or did you generally intend for sitting allowances, as you put it in respect of travel? This is because that would be limiting to travel and other expenses. 

I need some help whether that is the spirit of the clause, that they will only be paid such allowances as may be provided for in the terms of appointment. That would be okay, in respect of travel, which qualifies it. That is my understanding. The word “properly” puts an obligation on the person going to be paid allowance that every time you are supposed to be paid allowance, you must show that you travelled.

I just wonder if that is the method we are going to adopt in drafting on allowances; accountabilities were given before. Here, the money is generally given and then, you can account. That is the accounting thing these days. Therefore, are we changing it when you say, “properly incurred” so that you have to first prove travel? That is the small clarification I seek.   

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, in addition to that, if you said, “properly incurred”, should a member come and decide to stay in a five star hotel for 10 days and he comes with receipts that the money has been properly spent? What are you going to do?

I am aware that most of these members are drawn from various ministries and agencies. Some of them already request for allowances as they are moving for other work. What are we going to do to avoid double expenditure from various agencies? For example, you get money from a ministry and then again when you are going for work, you are drawing money from there. What answers do you have for this? Thank you. 

MS ASAMO: Having listened to them, I think we should end at the appointment so that each person is given different rates. This is because somebody coming from the ministry cannot draw the same allowance as a PWD from Kitgum. This will be a different thing on that board so we shall end at appointment.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am sorry but I tried to open this Bill on my iPad but it is very slow. Are we saying, “As specified in the appointment” or “under the terms”? This should be "terms", which is general. I do not think that the letters of appointment will have specific rates of allowances and these allowances do change. However, if we say, “according to the terms of appointment”, then –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are we okay now? 

MR GAFABUSA: Even where we stop at appointment, I would like to add that, “allowances may be provided for in terms of appointment or assignment.”  This is because some of the members of the board will only be assigned to this and not appointed since they would already be servants in a ministry, agency or department so they will not have appointments in this assignment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Well, they will be assigned but what would be their relationship with the board? Would there be a document or they just write a letter and then say okay, now you are there, it is okay or will they have to give you terms from the board? How does secondment work? Do you work on your own terms or do you work in accordance with the terms seconded to?

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, the normal proceedings that you are – Actually, it is the appointment in this case and it would still attract a written letter. 

It would still take care of the other incidents where somebody is seconded. Even when you are seconded or nominated, in Government they say, you are nominated and designated to be a member or you are representing. It would still be appointment even for those who are in other Government agencies. Therefore, it would cover.

MR ANGURA: Mr Chairperson, to add on that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, there are procedures on how you address these meetings. Yes, what where you saying? (Laughter)      

MR ANGURA: Most obliged Chairperson. I just wanted to add on what my honourable colleague from West Budama County South said that for an appointment among others, you also need to accept it. The communication is given to you and it is also your responsibility to honour it based on the terms, conditions and references in relation to that. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, is that okay now? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Chairperson. I would like to understand the spirit behind this. In the past, we have been reading in the press that one of the board chairpersons of an agency in Government has been travelling abroad and comes back with expenses to be refunded. You know, this is the chairperson of the board and that comes with authority.
 
Maybe the spirit was to put something to try to check on those who may want to use their positions to travel because I see here explicitly you wanted to deal with travels and it caused problems in that agency between the executive director and the board chairperson. 

Mr Chairperson, maybe, you may want to redraft something if that was the spirit so that this is taken care of.

MR OBOTH: Hon. Odur, the fear that you had is what some of us had. It was not checking against misuse of that – Actually, it had opened that as long as you make proper accountability – The same newspapers you read is the same newspapers that some of the Members here read. If you allow it, then you can come to Serena and stay for two nights as long as the board meeting is tomorrow; you say, you know I came from Omoro District and I know you are people who keep time in this board. I have been living in Serena. 

Also, you could procure – may be from Budama –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do not worry. There are very many people who come from Omoro in this country. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: The obligation was that the only thing to show that you properly incurred. The word “proper” would be to show receipts. I could also procure invoices from Serena without necessarily being there and I account.

My good friend, I think stopping at appointment would solve that problem. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I now put the question to this? The proposal from the committee now has been amended to stop at “…provided for in the terms of appointment.” We will end it there and the rest of it goes. I now put the question to the amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MS ASAMO: Proceedings of the board. It is proposed to amend the clause by:

    1) Deleting sub-clause (3); 
    2)  Deleting sub-clause (5); 
    3) Deleting sub-clause (6)

The justification is that sub-clause (3) is catered for in sub-clause (1). 

The mandate to make rules to regulate the board procedures should be left with the board not the Minister. 

Appointment of the secretary is not an issue of the proceedings of the board and ought to be dealt with substantively in a different clause.

Appointment of the other members of staff of the secretariat is not an issue of the proceedings of the board and ought to be dealt with substantively in a different clause.

It is proposed to insert a new clause - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, that is another matter. Honourable members, you have heard the proposal to amend by deletion of three sub-clauses; (3)(5)and(6). The justification has been given and I see no objection coming from the mover of the Bill. 

I put the question to these amendments as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 8

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, it is proposed to insert a new Clause 8, as secretary to the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, I think the description would be proposed to insert a new clause immediately after Clause 7. That would be the proper phrasing. Okay? 

MS ASAMO: Secretary to the board:

(1) 	There shall be a Secretary to the Board who shall be appointed by the board on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.
(2) 	The secretary to the board shall be the head of the secretariat of the board.
(3) 	The secretary to the board shall hold office on terms and conditions determined by the board in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
(4) 	The secretary to the board shall be responsible for:
	(a) Arranging the business at meetings of the board;

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is better you number them so that the drafters would know exactly what is going on.

MS ASAMO: Okay, the secretary to the board shall be responsible for:

(a) 	Arranging the business at meetings of the board; 
(b) 	Taking minutes of the meetings of the board; and
(c) 	Keeping the records of the decisions of the board.
(d) 	To perform such functions as the board may direct.
(5) 	The secretary to the board shall in the performance of his or her duties be responsible to the chairperson of the board.

The justification is to provide clearly for the Office of Secretary to the Board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Like I keep saying, when the committees draft these amendments, you should let our legal people look at them so that we check them. For example, the drafting (b)(c)and (d) seem to bring in some elements of things that we do not understand easily. 

Putting “and” after Clause 8(4)(b) means Clause 8(4)(c) would be the last of that. Clause 8(4)(d), you are putting something that is completely – I do not know how to put it there. Or you wanted to give an incidental thing there but how do we do it? Can we move the “and” to Clause 8(4)(c) and keeping the records of the decisions of the board and to perform such – I think there should be such other functions as the board may direct because you already functions. These are other functions in addition to what you have already specifically stated. 

In Clause 8(4)(b), you would say “taking minutes of the meetings of the board”; and in Clause 8(4)(c) “keeping the records of the decisions of the board and performing other functions as the board may direct.” So, we are saying arranging, taking, keeping, so it should be performing such other functions as the board may direct.

(5) The secretary to the board shall in the performance of his or her duties be responsible to the chairperson of the board. Is it the chairperson of the board or to the board? 

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, to dispose of that, I think it should be to the board. You want to assume that they will create conflict and when there is conflict between the two, one will be thumbing his chest saying, “I am the boss” but actually the boss of the secretary is the board. 

Secondly, do we need to say in (c) that the secretary to the board shall be responsible for keeping the records of the decisions of the board? Just the record of the decisions? How about other documents? What will happen to them? Have we provided for housing custody for other documents which are not decisions or we would amend and say, “keeping records and other documents of the board”? “Decisions” means only where there has been resolutions. We could be guided on this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We could use the word “proceedings.” This means procedures and other decisions that are taken and so proceedings will take care of the whole picture.

MR AOGON: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. I have a concern. From which pool is the board going to draw the secretary? The person, according to the Bill, is not likely to come out from the implementing agency or ministry. Yet to me, I thought it would be wise to have somebody who is going to be secretary to the board come from the implementing agency or ministry so that the implementer should be involved.

MS ASAMO: This is a position of somebody working in the institution and that is why the committee has referred to “in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service”. Therefore, it is a job that people are going to apply for. 

This is like executive secretary of the board who will be doing the daily work of the institution. The board has to be independent and so, there will be consultation to get this person. This person comes in to do the daily work. The other board members only come for meetings. Thank you.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. I would like to find out from the committee whether we do not need to prescribe the qualifications of the secretary given the fact that provisions relating to the secretary do stand alone in this Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Don’t you think that is taken care of by 8(1)? “There shall be a Secretary to the Board who shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.” Is it taken care of?

MR MUGOYA: Mr Chairperson, I looked at this provision. Prima facie it is okay but given the sensitivity of the functions of the secretary to the board, it is quite important that probably we say, “He should be a practicing advocate” or “should have such and such qualifications”. That makes it better for us to understand the kind of person who is taking minutes, interpreting records of the board and other roles.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, whereas that sounds very good, especially that we know most secretaries to boards, you must have been chartered; most of them are lawyers. 

I think in the wisdom of the committee, they deliberately left that out the recommendation by public – I have a problem with that appointment on recommendation. I would have been comfortable to say, “in consultation with” because now, whatever the Ministry of Public Service has recommended to you, you have only to act. The board will only have to pick one or two. It means that Public Service has to interview them and say, “we recommend the following for appointment”. 

Whereas, if it is “in consultation with”, the Public Service Commission would prescribe the qualification. However, with an attempt here to try to make the prescription for, or qualification, it could be very – we have tried before in other obvious areas but we cannot be exhaustive. In this one, you would give the discretion to the Public Service Commission with the board to know the specification of the person they want. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much. These days here, we are not getting people involved mainly as chartered secretaries and administrators. The best practice in this case would be to get a professional chartered secretary and administrator. That is Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators (ICSA). No wonder today we are getting many lawyers asked to enrol as members of the ICSA. That is to strengthen on corporate governance. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: I think the information was useful in giving the relevance of lawyers and how they learn other things very fast. (Laughter) We shall be biased because there was somebody here saying, “order” when hon. Mugoya said that you need lawyers to do this. 

Mr Chairperson, I was proposing that if we could process it and I implore my brother that we leave the vagueness on the specification to be done by the Public Service Commission. What was in your mind on the recommendation? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You might want to borrow from the Judicial Service Commission’s relations with the President. They do their assessment and processing and then, they send names. I think that is the procedure that is anticipated here to make it separate from where Public Service is only consulted. Now, they want their full participation and their recommendation is what the board acts on. 

MR MWIRU: I rise to object to the consultation. This sector is very complicated. I will give an example. We have district labour officers in districts. They do not act in the interest of the workers whom they are supposed to protect. They act in the interest of the industrialists who are in those areas. We have grappled with that problem for long because those labour officers are in districts; they are not centralised. 

By the fact that you are talking about a secretary who will be recommended by the Ministry of Public Service, I would support that because I think the Ministry of Public Service will have interrogated someone on how he comes to be the secretary of the board. 

However, if we leave it to the board to appoint – we are talking about a sector where we are going to have a multi sectoral approach where very many people are going to come on the board to advise on the minimum wage. For purposes of leaving the board strong, we would leave the Ministry of Public Service to recommend. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay honourable members? Let us proceed.

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Mr Chairperson, I am anxious about this position being provided for per se in the Bill. I think we have seen problems, for instance, where the deputy executive director, secretary-general and others are provided for in the Constitution. In my view, while it is provided for like this, the board should have more control over what is happening to avoid conflict within the organisation.

That is why I would like to support the honourable colleague and I would prefer that it is “in consultation with Public Service Commission” other than the Public Service Commission making the recommendation and then the board is put at the mercy of who is provided by the Public Service Commission; and probably having contestation of who is more powerful and who is not powerful in the organisation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I will put the question on this discussion. There is a view that it should stay the way it is recommended by the committee, that the processes of identification or processing of a particular candidate should be done by the Public Service Commission and a list of names recommended to the board for appointment. The other view is that the board should take the decision but it should consult with the Public Service Commission.

I will put the question on the first one because that will determine which way we go. I put the question to the proposal as presented by the committee that the board secretary shall be appointed by the board on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission.

(Question put and agreed to.)

I now put the question to the amendments as proposed in the new clause 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

New clause

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes to insert a new clause after clause 8 to read: 
“Other staff of the board
(1) 	The board may employ other staff as may be necessary for the proper and efficient discharge of the objects and functions of the board.
(2) 	The staff appointed under this section shall hold office on terms and conditions determined by the board, in consultation with the Ministry of Public Service.
(3) 	Public officers may be seconded to the service of the board or may otherwise give assistance to the board.
(4) 	The board may, subject to any conditions and restrictions, delegate any of its powers under subsection (1) to a committee of the board, the secretary or any employee of the board.” 

The justification is that this will provide for recruitment of other staff of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal for a new clause, headed: “Other staff of the board”.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, Sir, I propose that we be a little specific. If we leave it open as “any other staff necessary”, how do we determine the word “necessary”? They can bring 50 people if they want.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, this is a board. They will be the one to determine the necessity. 

Can I put the question to the insertion of this new clause? I put the question to the insertion of this new clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think the way the report is processed is presenting a difficulty. We have dealt with clause 8 and now we are seeing a new provision for clause 8, i.e., general provisions applicable to the minimum wage board. 

Let us deal with clause 8 as it is in the Bill because normally our guiding document is the Bill. Therefore, you do not use clauses that are not in the Bill. New clauses are recognised as such. We are now on clause 8, yet we previously took a decision thinking there was no amendment.

Since we are still at committee stage, can we go back to clause 8 as it is in the Bill? Committee chairperson, do you have any amendment to clause 8 as it is in the Bill?

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, under the general provisions applicable to the minimum wage board, we propose to renumber the clause as 10 and amend it by deleting sub clauses (1)(2) and (3). This is because the sub clauses apply to a board that is appointed with specific instructions to fix a particular minimum wage. 

Redraft sub clause (4) and re-number it (1) to read as follows: 

“(1) The board may inquire into the wages and conditions of service of employees coming within its terms of reference and after complying with this Act, shall submit recommendations to the minister.
    (2) In inquiring into the wages and conditions of service of employees under subsection (1), the board may require the employees and employers coming within its terms of reference or any other interested party to make presentations to the board.”

The justification is that this ensures clarity of the provision.


In sub clause (5), delete paragraph (a) and re-number it (3) and redraft the sub clause as:

“(1) The presentations referred to in subsection (2) shall relate to, if proposed by the employees, the total number of hours they wish to work, the nature of the day-to-day duties in the sector, the supply of labour to the sector and any other matter that they may wish to bring to the attention of the board and shall conclude with a proposal of the minimum wage they are willing to accept.”

The justification is that this is for clarity.

In sub clause (7), delete paragraphs (f), (i), (j) and renumbering it as (5)

The justification is that paragraphs (i) and (j) are a repetition of paragraphs (d) and (a) respectively while paragraph (f) is discriminatory and unrealistic.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear honourable members? I put the question as proposed in clause 8 by the committee. I put the question that clause 8, as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS ASAMO: Clause 9: Duties and powers of the Minimum Wage Board. 

It is proposed to amend the clause by:

    a) In the headnote by inserting the word “advisory” between the words “wage” and “board”
    b) Renumbering the clause as 11:
    c) In sub clause (1), by substituting for figure “3” appearing in line one with figure “4”.

The justification is that the board is appointed under clause 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that clear honourable members? I put the question to that amendment as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MS ASAMO: Clause 10: Report of the Board. 

It is proposed to amend clause 10 and to renumber it as 12: 
    • In sub clause (1) by redrafting it as:
”The board shall submit to the minister reports of its findings and recommendations on a quarterly basis.”

The Justification is to require the board to report on its operations after every quarter.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairman, I think that is good but my issue is: What is the role of Parliament in all this? Do we feature anywhere? Do they submit to this House so that we have a say? Do they lay a report on the Table quarterly? 

MS ASAMO: I think it will be the role of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to make a report to Parliament not the board.
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I put the question to this? I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, Clause 11 is Dissolution of the Minimum Wage Board. 

It is proposed to delete the entire clause.

The justification is that the clause is now inapplicable as a consequence of specifying the tenure of the board in clause 4.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question for the proposal for deletion of clause 11 from the Bill. I put the question for the deletion.	

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, deleted.

Clause 12 

MS ASAMO: Clause 12: Establishment of a contractual minimum wage. It is proposed to delete the entire clause.

The justification is that all minimum wages shall be fixed by the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete the whole of clause 12. I put the question that clause 12 be deleted from the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, deleted.

Clause 13

MS ASAMO: Proposal to insert a new Clause 12, as Advisory Committees. 
“Clause 12: Advisory Committees. 
(l) 	The Board may establish advisory committees and subcommittees for the efficient performance of the functions of the board under this Act. 
(2) 	A committee or subcommittee established under this section may comprise members of the board or members of staff or both. (3) The board may assign to any committee or subcommittee established under this section, functions subject to conditions and restrictions as the board may determine. 
(4) 	A decision of the advisory committee or subcommittee shall be subject to confirmation by the board before being implemented. 
(5) 	A member of a committee or subcommittee of the board shall disclose conflict of interest.”

The justification is to provide for advisory committees of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you disclose conflict of interest or interest? 

MS ASAMO: Why we are bringing conflict of interest is that in case you have been allocated to a subcommittee and you have a conflict of interest, you declare so that you are not –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I am saying is: Is it usually phrased as declaring interest or you declare conflict of interest?

MS ASAMO: I think conflict of interest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You declare interest. You will rephrase it to say “A member of a committee or subcommittee of the board shall disclose his or her interest.”

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairman, it is usually the disclosure when the interest conflicts. When we adopt the disclosure of interest, which should have been the proper one that you know, I have an interest here - you may have an interest as a board or committee member or advisory committee member but also you probably have -
	
Therefore, when the two interests conflict, that is when you say, I have conflict of interest. I would implore that we maintain the committee’s proposal. You are only disclosing that your interest are conflicting not that –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: In drafting, we need to maintain consistency of language. What language do we always use in declaration of interest?

MR OBOTH: Conflict of interest.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No. We declare interest.

MR OBOTH: Even when they are conflicting. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is up to the board to say that there is conflict here –

MR OBOTH: Much Obliged, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We need to be consistent in the use of language.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Mine is in reference to sub clause (4) which says “A decision of the advisory committee or subcommittee shall be subject to confirmation...” Ordinarily, we use the words “subject to approval by the board’ before being implemented.

Approval connotes a situation where the board shall revisit, discuss and come up with a decision.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Which one is this?

MR MUGOYA: Sub clause (4) particularly the words “subject to confirmation” I am requesting that we adopt the word “approval” instead of the word “confirmation.”
	
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think true because we usually confirm minutes of our own meetings. We do not confirm minutes of other people’s meetings and this is a decision taken by the advisory board. So, what will be required is an approval. Is that okay? 

Hon. Oboth, you see, normally when you are drafting an interest clause, the heading would be “Conflict of Interest”. However, the actual command of the clause would not talk about declaration of conflict of interest. It would be declaration of interest. You concede? Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Mr Chairperson, I concede though I had in mind that having an interest is not a problem until it is conflicting. (Laughter) You only declare when it is conflicting with what you are going to do but nobody goes to that board or committee without interest. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let me give you an example of our Rules of Procedure under Rule 93; Declaration of personal interest in any matter before the House. It says: 

“(1)A Member shall not take part in the discussion of any matter before the House or committee, in which he or she has direct pecuniary interest unless he or she has declared the nature of that interest to the House or Committee.”

This is not the nature of conflict.

Honourable members, we were processing the new clause and the proposal has been made in clause 4 to replace the word “confirmation” with the word “approval” by the board. In clause 5, a member of the committee or sub-committee of the board shall disclose his or her interest. So, those are the –

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Chairperson, can we now borrow from our rules and add the word “personal” so that it reads “A member can declare his or her personal interest” just to make it clear. It is because sometimes, we are interested in things but when they are not for personal gain. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that the spirit of this one? It might not be the same. Can I put the question to the amendment the chairperson has proposed? I put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Clause, as amended, agreed to.

New Clause

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The new clause that has been adopted was on the advisory committees. Honourable chairperson, you have another new clause you are proposing?

MS ASAMO: New Clause 13: Procedure of committees and sub-committees states, “Except as expressly provided under the Act, the procedure of committees established under section 12 shall be prescribed by the board”. 

The justification is to require the board to make regulations to guide the conduct of committees of the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal for insertion of a new clause for the title, “Procedure of committees and sub-committees”, which has been presented by the chairperson. I put the question to that proposal for a new clause. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Clause, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS ASAMO: Clause 13 is on ministerial approval. We propose to delete the entire clause. 
The justification is that the minister shall no longer need to approve minimum wage as all minimum wages shall be fixed by the board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, the proposal from the committee is to have Clause 13 deleted from the Bill. I put the question for deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14

MS ASAMO: Clause 14 is on failure to accept a basic agreed minimum wage. We propose to delete the entire clause. The justification is that all minimum wages shall be fixed by the board and not by negotiation anymore. In case of disputes or disagreements, the parties can go to court.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the proposal is to delete Clause 14. I put the question for deletion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.
	
Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS ASAMO: Clause 17 is on powers of authorised officers. We propose to renumber it as Clause 14 and to amend the clause in sub-clause (2) by inserting at the end of the phrase “except where the disclosure is for purposes of court proceedings, matter of public interest and national security and where it is for fulfilling an objective of this Act or any other Act of Parliament” to read as follows:

“An authorised officer shall not disclose any information obtained in the exercise of powers conferred by this section except where the disclosure is for purpose of court proceedings, matters of public interest and national security and where it is for fulfilling an objective of this Act or any other Act of Parliament.”

The justification is to provide for exceptions under which an authorised officer may disclose information obtained in the exercise of powers conferred by the Act. 

In sub-clause (3), substitute for the word “where” appearing on line two by inserting a new sub-clause (4) to provide as follows: 

“(4)An authorised officer may enter any relevant premises at reasonable time in order to exercise any powers vested in him or her under the Act and may, where exit is denied, break out of the premise in order to liberate himself or herself or any other person with who having lawfully entered the premises under this Act is detained therein.”

The justification is to provide an authorised officer power of entry into premises and to break out to exit from the premises where exit is denied to him or her.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. For purposes of clarity, this is an authorised officer. An authorised officer and unauthorised officer both sound the same and yet they are different.

MR OBOTH: I am envisaging hon. Rwakajara or myself being in this situation but you are within a concrete building or wall fence. I would not mind this because I think it is one of the best provisions; that when you break out, you will not be sued. I only have a challenge with “premises at a reasonable time”. When you say at a “reasonable time” that means you already know what reasonable time is. My thinking is that if you have reasonable time in mind, you state it. 

Mr Chairman, if we are saying “may enter any relevant premises” we would go with that at any reasonable time. If the word “reasonable” or any reasonable, “any” is the word that should be added between “at” and “reasonable” so that it can give latitude within which to do that. And of course the test of reasonableness is a test of a bystander along Nagongera Street.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is it necessary to use “reasonable” or just “any relevant premises at any time” in order to exercise any power? Well, any reasonable time would still be midnight.

MR OBOTH: “Reasonable” is that it could be either working hours or whatever. However, when you say that at “any time” a board or committee member who could be over zealous can come at midnight and also break-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, you see the reasonableness is in the assessment of the officer exercising the right.

MR OBOTH: Absolutely right.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, if there should be information that something is happening at midnight that would be the reasonable time to enter premises.

MR OBOTH: I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, is it still necessary to put “reasonable”? Anyway, let us leave it there.

MR OBOTH: Well, the normal drafting and you are senior at this would be, you provide “at any given time” or “any reasonable time” or “any time”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So, we just insert a new word “any reasonable time”. Okay. That is the amendment. Can I put the question to that amendment proposed by hon. Oboth? I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question to the amendment at proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS ASAMO: Clause 18 is penalty for obstruction of authorised officers. It is proposed to amend clause 18 by renumbering it as clause 15 and by substituting for the word “five” appearing in line three the word “four” and inserting the phrase “for imprisonment for a period not exceeding 12 months or both” at the end of the clause.

Redraft a sub-clause as “A person who obstruct an authorised officer in the exercise of any power conferred by this Act commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 12 months or both.” 

Justification: To provide for an option for a custodial sentence and to align with the law, revision of fines and other financial amounts in the Criminal Matters Act No.14/2008.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that is clear. Can I put the question to that amendment as proposed by the committee? I put the question?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairman, we propose to amend clause 21 and to renumber it as clause 18 by inserting the phrase “with the approval of Cabinet” between the words “may” and “make” in line one. Redraft the clause as, “The minister may with approval of Cabinet, make rules prescribing anything that is to be prescribed by the minister under this Act and generally for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

Justification: To provide for approval of the rules made by the minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  By Cabinet. Okay? I will put the question to the -

MR MWIRU: I object to the proposal by the committee by introducing a Cabinet. I would like to settle for the provision as it is in the Act because I see a situation where the minister will take forever to get approval from Cabinet and the purpose of the Bill will be defeated. 

I would like to trust our ministers that with the technical staff they have in the ministry, they can make rules for purpose of giving effect to the Act. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The presumption of this statutory instrument that comes from ministers is that it is from Cabinet. That is the presumption. Therefore, you cannot expect the minister to act outside Cabinet because that is where they draw their authority. Therefore, it will be redundant to suggest that the minister goes to Cabinet. He/she goes there in every meeting and presents every issue.

Therefore, we proceed with the presumption of ministerial functions although we would like to say, “The minister may by statutory instrument make rules prescribing anything that is to be prescribed under the Act”, just the normal way you put there; by statutory instrument.

Okay, that would be the change that would be there. Therefore, if that is acceptable to the committee and the mover of this Bill that you insert, “The minister may by statutory instrument make rules prescribing” if that is acceptable, I can put the question. I put the question to that amendment?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

New Schedule

MS ASAMO: Insert a new schedule as schedule 1. Schedule 1, currency point; “One currency point shall be equivalent to twenty thousand Shillings.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is this not captured under the miscellaneous things? Because if you are going to change the value of currency points then the implication would be that you have to come to all the laws where they appear and amend all of them. But is it in every law? Okay. What I would like to ask is do you make provision for the value of the currency point in every law?

Okay, I put the question to the insertion of the new clause as proposed by the committee?

(Question put and agreed to.)

New schedule No.1, as proposed agreed to.

Clause 3

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, do you have anything on clause 3? Yes you do.

MS ASAMO: Clause 3 is interpretation. It is proposed to amend the clause by deleting some interpretations including “employee”, “employer”, “outworker” and “statutory minimum remuneration”, “wages regulation order’ and “wages regulation proposal”.

The justification is that the words are already defined in the same context in the existing Act. It is proposed to amend the clause by inserting new interpretations to include: 

    1. “Currency point” as a value assigned to it in the first schedule in this Act. 
    2. “Labour officer” is the commissioner or the district labour officer.
    3. “Minimum wage” means the minimum sum payable to a worker for the work performed or services rendered within a given period whether calculated on the basis of time or output, which may not be reduced either by an individual or collective agreement.

Redrafting the definition of a minister as:

    1. “Minister” means the minister responsible for Labour.
    2. “Wage” means a remuneration or earning however designated or calculated capable of being expressed in monetary terms and fixed by mutual agreement or by national laws or regulations, which is payable by virtue of a written or unwritten contract of employment by the employer or to an employee for work done or service rendered.

The justification is to provide for interpretation of stated words and phrases as used in the context of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, the amendments to the definitions are as presented. Yes, honourable member for West Budama North or South.

MR OBOTH: The Member of Parliament for West Budama North walked out when he lost an argument on this and the one for South stayed.

The committee is proposing to delete the definition. What harm does it do when we leave it? You are saying it is already defined in the context. You know that most people want services and works to be done to them but they do not want to pay.

For emphasis of giving weight to this Bill, I would propose that we maintain it as in the Bill unless there is a complaint that it is ridiculous or repetitive but I would think that it gives the weight that deserves. It is a one stop area when you want to get the definition. It is attached therein.

The rest of the other proposed amendment from the – yes, I will take information from Prince Mugoya.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The information I would like to give you is that ordinarily when we have labour disputes in the industrial court, the area of contention is the definition of an employee or an employer so we need to have a definition here.

MR OBOTH: That is apparently very useful information to support the case that we maintain it unless the committee tells us why. Even the justification that it is already defined in the context can bring contest. This will be giving hon. Mugoya or hon. Paul Mwiru and the rest a lot of job for no good reason here.

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Mr Chairperson. The information I would like to also give is that when they say the interpretation for these is already given in the context, the context we are referring to is after the interpretation clause. One needs to first go deep into the context to get the meaning of these words. It is better we provide for them in the interpretation clause before we go into the real context that we are referring to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is also for the avoidance of doubt for as long as there is no conflict in the definition. Chairperson, would you like to say something?

MS ASAMO: Mr Chairperson, with that guidance from the legal minds, I concede. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there have been some proposed amendments; the one on deleting already defined terms has been withdrawn so the new amendment that is proposed on the new definitions by the chairperson has been articulated. I put the question to those amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

MR RWAKAJARA: Mr Chairperson, I beg to move to insert a new clause; Clause 22 to repeal the Act Cap 221 of the old Act –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the old Act? State it.

MR RWAKAJARA: “The Minimum Wage Advisory Board and Wages Council Act” be repealed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is the amendment proposed and I can see members rising to second it; the Members of Parliament for West Budama South, Jinja Municipality East, Kumi and Lira Municipalities have all seconded it. 

Honourable members, I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by hon. Rwakajara.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the new Clause 22 on repeals do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is an amendment to the long title. Chairperson, do you propose an amendment to the long title of the Bill?

MS ASAMO: The long title is proposed to be amended by inserting the phrase, “Amend the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Council Act Cap 221” thus redraft it as, “An Act to amend the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Wages Council Act Cap” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: We have repealed so it is an Act to repeal.

MS ASAMO: Aren’t we amending anything?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, you are now saying, “An Act to repeal”

MS ASAMO: “An Act to repeal the minimum-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Wait. There is now no amendment. It is now an Act to reform and repeal. Not so? But you see, you repeal after - An Act to reform and repeal the existing law. After you have repealed, there is nothing to reform but you are reforming things in sector and now you are repealing what was existing.

MR OBOTH: I would agree with you honourable Chair that an Act to reform and repeal. You go with that so that the amendment has now been overtaken. There is nothing to save from that other legislation. It is an overhaul. That now gives a justification for reform. You have reformed the whole minimum wage stuff. In addition, you repeal the old one for being old and useless and you move on.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I just suggest that may make better sense if you say, “An Act to reform the law relating to the establishment of minimum wage board and for regulation of remuneration and for conditions of employment of employees and to repeal the minimum wage law and make provisions for other matters connected therewith.” Would that be smatter? Can we have a quick drafting here? Can we draft it properly?

MR ELOTU: I think it should be to “repeal and re-enactment”. You repeal an old law and enact a new one.

MR AOGON: Mr Chairperson, I was of a view that when we say we first reform and then repeal, it would tantamount to for instance if you have a patient, you treat him and when he is okay now, you kill. Does it work? Therefore, I would think we need to first repeal and then reform.

MR GAFABUSA: My understanding is that we first reform and then we repeal. Because even when we are seated here and going through all these provision of this Bill, until we reach the last one that hon. Rwakajara brought, we are actually still under the old law. Until we repeal, we are only reforming. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But you can see that what even the honourable member is saying is that hon. Rwakajara, just remembered that he needed to repeal the other one. That is how it is because you have done the reform and everything now you have the new set of things- do away with the old ones. It is not like treating patients. They are very different. Therefore, your example was completely - Therefore, after treating the patient you do not kill, you discharge. 

MR MWIRU: I would like to propose the long title to read as “An Act to repeal the Minimum Wage Advisory Board’s Act and to provide for the Minimum Wage Act.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What is the purpose of this law? The law is reforming the whole sector and then repealing whatever was regulating it before. I thought that is what the purpose of this law is. Therefore, can we take it in confidence that the technical people will deal with the long title properly given the spirit of our discussion?

Therefore, the purpose of the Act is to reform the law relating to this sector. Make those necessary changes, and repeal the existing law. Okay. Can I put the question to that?

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question to the title to this Bill to remain as the title to this Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.40
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Chairperson, I beg to move a motion for the House to resume and the Committee of the whole House to report thereto. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is for resumption of the House to enable the Committee of the whole House report. I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.41
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The minimum Wages Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.42
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

6.43
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Minimum Wages Bill, 2015 be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to that motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE MINIMUM WAGES ACT, 2019.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations hon. Rwakajara and hon. Asamo for standing in the gap and making us do what we should be doing. (Applause) Thank you very much, honourable members, for the co-operation we have given to these matters that we have concluded in this Bill. 

MR RWAKAJARA: I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and members. Thank you for standing with the workers of this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is now adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. We have done very well. 

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

