Tuesday, 5 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome the Government side and I welcome the Opposition side as well as the Independents. I hope that during the recess, you had time to meet your voters and to update them on what we have been doing and what we are planning to do. 

I also take this opportunity to welcome hon. Paula Turyahikayo, who has been away on sick leave. She was involved in an accident but she is back. (Applause) We welcome her, but missing from our midst today is, the Rt Hon. Kategeya who is indisposed; hon. Hillary Onek, who is also indisposed; hon. Martin Drito, who is recovering from a motor accident; hon. Hussein Kyanjo, who is undergoing, I think, the fourth operation; hon. Gregory Matovu, who is also still indisposed; hon. Peter Omolo; and hon. Joy Karissa. Let us keep them in our prayers so that they can return to do the work they were assigned in this House.

Honourable members, during the recess, the Inspector-General of Government sent to the Clerk forms for the Members to make their bi-annual declaration. The deadline is 1st March. The forms are at the reception for those who have not yet collected them. I would urge you to fill them quickly so that you are not caught by the deadline.

Thirdly, the Business Committee sat and we have reviewed the attendance, both of the plenary and the committees, which remains unsatisfactory. I have asked the Clerk to compile a list of attendance, which she is going to submit to me for action. I want to appeal to Members to fulfil their obligations both in the plenary and in the committees and to remind you that Article 83 is a very strict article and it was reduced into our Rules of Procedure under rule 101,sub-rule 7 and I want to read it for you. 

“The Speaker shall, if it comes to his or her attention that a Member is consistently absent from the sittings of the House without permission, give a notice in writing to the Member...” and one of the consequences of giving that notice is that I must inform the House. If I write to you, I must then come to the House and say, “I have written to so and so”; and if I do that, the consequences are really very grave. So, I would like to appeal to Members not to force my hand in that manner. (Laughter)

I also want to reiterate that the fora of the Parliament should not hold meetings on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays. They should concentrate on doing that during weekends either on Friday, Saturday, Sunday or Monday so that they do not interfere with the official programmes of Parliament.

On questions for oral answers, several questions remain unanswered from the last sitting. I would like to appeal to the Leader of Government Business to ensure that responses which are pending are expeditiously sent to the Clerk so that we can dispose of them during this month. But I would also like to appeal to members of the Cabinet to write succinct responses. Sometimes, when you make very lengthy responses, they attract many supplementaries and take a lot of our time.
 
We also have a lot of outstanding petitions. The Business Committee had agreed to set aside time to dispose of all petitions. So, I want to appeal to the committees and the chairpersons to expedite work on them so that we can report back to those who petitioned us.

Sometime in the first session, I directed the Clerk to prepare compendiums of the Speaker’s decisions from all the Parliaments for ease of reference. I still reiterate that I would like to see that compendium so that we can use it.

We also agreed that we need a workshop to re-orient Members on etiquette and how to conduct business in Parliament. So, during the course of this month, we shall take off some two days so that we have this workshop.

In order to improve on management of time both in the plenary and to complete our business, we are now allocating time for each item. If you look at the Order Paper, every item has been allotted its time and we shall strictly adhere to that. I have also requested the whips of the parties and also the Independents to assist in organising those who are going to contribute so that we spread out the opportunities, but also ensure that we use our time valuably.

Now, while we were on recess, a renowned businessman, Prof. Mulwana, passed away. We want to thank those who went to support the family at the burial. I invite the House to rise for a moment of silence in his honour.

Finally, the Business Committee set up priorities for the business. They will be issued to you by the Clerk and we want to really improve on our performance because it has not been as good as we had wanted. Thank you very much. (Applause)

Let us stand up for one minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND BIOSAFETY BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have encouraged our committees to initiate legislation. I want to thank the Committee on Science and Technology for initiating this legislation. So, before the minister reads the Bill, I invite the chair of the committee to speak to us briefly.

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Denis Obua):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Happy new year to you, and to all the honourable Members of Parliament.
 
Item three on our Order Paper is, Bills, First Reading and it is the National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012. I just want to put the record straight before the minister reads the Bill.

This House recalls that on 6 November 2012, it granted permission to the parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology to introduce this Bill as a Private Member’s Bill. Subsequently, the Clerk who is the custodian of all resolutions of Parliament wrote to the PS, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 13 November 2012, requesting for a certificate of financial implication as required by Section 10 of the Budget Act. Thereafter, the leadership of the committee had protracted meetings and consultations with the Ministry of Finance, and in particular, the Minister of State, who is spearheading the process before Parliament. I would want to inform Parliament that we agreed as the leadership of the committee that the ministry takes the lead in presenting the Bill before Parliament and the Parliament Standing Committee on Science and Technology will process the Bill as required by the Rules of Procedure. I just wanted to put that record straight before the minister officially reads the Bill for the first time. Thank you.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija):  Madam Speaker and colleagues, I also say happy new year. I concur 100 percent with what my colleague, hon. Obua, has said. We have been working very closely on this matter. Therefore, I would like to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Biotechnology and Biosafety Bill, 2012” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded?  Seconded by the Minister of Local Government. Honourable minister, where is the certificate of financial implication?

MR MATIA KASAIJA:  Madam Speaker, I have a copy of the Bill here and it is reading 2012, please. I am glad to lay on the Table a certificate of financial implication issued by the Minister of Finance and signed by nobody else, but hon. Maria Kiwanuka, the one in charge of the sector. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is committed to the Committee of Science and Technology for scrutiny and report back.

LAYING OF THE TROPHY BY THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FOOTBALL CLUB EAC 2012 CHAMPIONS

2.38
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru South, Kayunga):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise to lay on Table the trophy won by the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team in the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament, 2012 held in Nairobi, Kenya. I beg to lay. (Applause)

I would also like to lay on Table the portrait of the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team that won the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament, 2012. I beg to lay. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF GOLD MEDAL AWARDS TO MEMBERS OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FOOTBALL TEAM

2.39
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong):  Madam Speaker, it is a common practice in the Commonwealth member states that when a team wins and medals are awarded, they are formally presented. I, therefore, have the pleasure by virtue of the authority entrusted upon me as the team manager of the Uganda Parliamentary Football Team, a team that has won for two consecutive years, the East African Community Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament, to present to you for the award of the gold medal for the East African Community, the following Members of Parliament who represented this institution. I will read five at a time and request the Members to proceed and receive their gold medals.

Hon. Aleru Tom Aza, hon. Mwiru Paul, hon. Muwuma Milton, hon. Okeyo Peter - in that order - hon. Balikuddembe Joseph -(Laughter)

And hon. Ogwang Peter will be followed by hon. Mugema Peter -(Laughter)- hon. Kiyingi Bbosa Kenneth, hon. Atiku Benard, hon. Kafeero Robert Sekitoleko, hon. Baryayanga Andrew, hon. Badda Fred, hon. Maganda Julius, hon. Kafuda Boaz, hon. Nsereko Muhammad, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Obua Denis Hamson and finally, hon. Nsanja Patrick, the team captain, and the one who scored the winning goal during the finals. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I think the team captain can receive the medals for Members who are not here; hon. Nsereko is out of the country, while hon. Odonga Otto got an injury.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish also to introduce the members of staff who participated alongside Members of Parliament, they are up in the Gallery. Let me also introduce, in absentia, our coach, who is a former national player, Mr Tom Lwanga. I want to thank Members of Parliament for supporting us. We are hosting this year’s tournament in Kampala. Thank you -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, may I request the staff who participated in the tournament to stand up in the Distinguished Guests Gallery. (Applause) Mr Sekidde Daniel is our goalkeeper and the best goalkeeper in the East African Community. (Applause) The rest are in the Public Gallery. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

STATEMENT BY THE CAPTAIN OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY FOOTBALL TEAM

2.45
MR PATRICK NSANJA (Independent, Ntenjeru South, Kayunga):  Madam Speaker, I, MP Ntenjeru South and Captain, Uganda Parliamentary Football Team, on Uganda’s victory in the 2012 East African Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament held in Nairobi, stand to make a statement on the performance of the Uganda Parliament in the East African Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament, 2012 that was held in Nairobi. 

Every year, the East African Community organises an Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament where all East African Parliaments participate. It is hosted on a rotational basis, and Kenya hosted last year’s tournament after Burundi in 2011.

Madam Speaker, as the team captain for the Uganda Parliamentary Football Club, I have the pleasure to inform this House that Uganda has for the second consecutive year won this trophy after defeating the East African Legislative Assembly team in the final game played on 14 December 2012 at Kasarani National Stadium in Nairobi.

In 2011, Uganda defeated Burundi in Bujumbura and still brought home the trophy. In addition, Uganda’s hon. Odonga Otto scooped the top scorer’s golden boot having scored a total of four goals in the tournament.

I, therefore, take this opportunity to thank the following people who have contributed tremendously to our success. I thank the Office of the Speaker and Parliament of Uganda generally for the moral and financial support; the participants, who include Members of Parliament and some staff members, for the strong solidarity, discipline and hard work exhibited both during training and at the tournament; the team coach, Mr Tom Lwanga and the trainer, Mr Haruna Mawa, for the fitness and wellness of Members as well as the guidance of the team; and the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team for their moral support and solidarity. 

Uganda is the current chair of the East African Community summit which will be hosted by the Government of Uganda this year. Subsequently, the Parliament of Uganda and the Uganda Parliamentary Football Club will be hosting this year’s Inter-Parliamentary Football Tournament in Kampala where all the East African Parliaments are expected to attend.

It is against this background that I bring to the attention of the Government of Uganda and Parliament in particular that hosting this tournament requires some financial contribution from the host. We shall submit a formal request at an appropriate time for the budgetary implications.

In conclusion, as it was stated by the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), hon. Margaret Zziwa Nantongo, in her opening remarks at the same tournament, Sports is a recreational activity that has enabled participants to create harmony and facilitate unity and a spirit of integration in the East African Community. We, therefore, in the same spirit, request that the Uganda Parliamentary Sports Club be exploited to realise the IPU theme which still stands:  “Parliaments and people:  Bridging the gap.”

Therefore, this calls for more financial, moral and technical support. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much Captain of the football team.

LAYING OF TROPHIES BY THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY NETBALL TEAM EAC 2012 RUNNERS-UP

2.50
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese):  Madam Speaker and the honourable members, I wish to lay on Table a trophy won by the netball team of the Parliament of Uganda in the tournament of the East African Community, 2012, which was won as a result of being the first runners-up and for having exhibited integrity, honesty and fair play. I beg to lay. 

I further wish to lay on Table a trophy, which was won by the Parliament of Uganda through one of our own, the hon. Harriet Ntabazi, as the best defender of the East African Community.

Being a “Nalongo”, I could not come with less, and I further wish to lay on Table another trophy, which was won by our very own as the top most scorer and best shooter of the East African Community, the hon. Netalasire Sarah Nalongo. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much the team captain of the netball team.

PRESENTATION OF SILVER MEDAL AWARDS TO THE MEMBERS OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY NETBALL TEAM

2.52
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with the Commonwealth practice, allow me to present to you the honourable ladies who participated in the Inter-Parliamentary Sports Tournament of the East African Community, and who emerged the runners-up.

I want to invite hon. Winfred Kiiza, who is the team captain to receive her silver medal; hon. Alum Santa, a member of the team; hon. Amero Susan; hon. Mariam Nalubega; hon. Ntabazi Harriet; hon. Nakawunde Sarah; hon. Kayagi Netalisire Sarah; hon. Franca Judith Akello; and hon. Connie Galiwango in that order. Finally, myself, Bintu Jalia, the team manager.

I will receive on behalf of the other honourable ladies who are not around. The hon. Franca Judith, she wedded recently and she could not be around; and the others are away on parliamentary duties.

THE SPEAKER:  I want to commend the netball team which has participated in the tournament for the first time, but to thank more importantly, our coaches, Ms Milly Kamoga seated there; and Ms Imelda Nyongesa, who made it possible for us to shine in the East African Community.

I want to call upon Government to ensure that we have the necessary funds to host this important tournament because we intend to keep the football cup for Parliament. We must win it for the third time and keep it, and improve on the performance of the netball team. Thank you very much.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole East Constituency, Butaleja):  Thank you very much Madam Speaker. You will notice that right now the African tournament is taking place in South Africa, and Uganda nearly qualified, but because of the inherent problems that we have had in the sports administration, it has progressively been impossible for Uganda to participate in tournaments of this nature over the years.

Now that the Parliament has given the lead, and demonstrated to the world that it is possible, it is high time the sports minister and the Parliament to provide the necessary resources for Uganda Cranes and the She Cranes to fly higher so that it does not stop with Parliament, but Uganda should fly higher and higher. I thank you very much Madam Speaker and I congratulate Members.

THE SPEAKER:  Let me invite the manager of the netball team to make a statement.

STATEMENT BY THE TEAM MANAGER OF THE UGANDA PARLIAMENTARY NETBALL TEAM

2.57
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, the East African Parliamentary Sports Tournament is an annual event whose goal is to harness and foster cooperation between the participating countries, and is a networking and integration avenue for those participants. It is also an opportunity for the very busy and hardworking Members of Parliament from the East African countries to have physical exercise, as well as enjoy the lighter side of life.

The 2012 tournament was hosted by the Kenya National Assembly in Nairobi, and this was the first time for the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team to participate. It started on the 7th and ended on 14th December. 

The year 2012 marked the first entry and participation of the netball teams in the tournament and the participating teams were graced by the presence of the Speaker of EALA, hon. Margaret Zziwa Nantongo, who commissioned the netball teams and participated in the event as a defender on the EALA team. Four teams participated, including, the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team, the Kenya Parliamentary Netball Team, the Tanzania Parliamentary Netball Team and the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) Netball Team.

It is on this note that I want to introduce the following Members who participated on the Ugandan Parliamentary Team. I would like to ask the honourable ladies who are in the House to stand up for recognition. (Applause) This team comprises the Members of Parliament, but we also have the members of staff who joined us and they participated in this tournament. They include:  Ms Shallon Moreen Atuhaire, Ms Lillian Aduka, Ms Rebecca Kamega, Ms Sylvia Nanyonjo and Ms Justine Kalembe. Ms Milly Kamoga is the coach of this team and an ex-international player for Uganda. We also had Ms Imelda Nyongesa who was an assistant coach, but she works for Uganda Prisons. Please stand up for recognition. Those ladies made us proud. 

By the end of the tournament, Team Uganda had beaten all the teams except one, making us the first runners-up after Tanzania.  The team was awarded a fair play trophy as you have seen. Madam Speaker, we won the best shooter’s award and it was taken by hon. Sarah Netalasire. We also won the best defender’s award and this was taken by hon. Harriet Ntabazi. In all, the team brought home four trophies namely:  First runners-up, fair play, best shooter and best defender of the tournament.

On behalf of the team, I would like to extend our appreciation to the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, who is an active member of the team and she plays centre position, at the same time she is the matron of the team. We would also like to extend our appreciation to the leadership of the entire Parliament for facilitating the team to participate in this noble tournament.

We were beaten because Tanzania Parliament facilitated its teams on a residential training for two months, and yet we trained for only three weeks, but managed to be the first runners-up. I would like to also inform the Government and your office, Madam Speaker, that we are hosting the next tournament and the parliamentary teams will need to be facilitated.

I wish the Members of Parliament a happy tournament when we next have it. Whenever we go for training, Members should take it upon themselves to turn up. This is for your own health. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much manager. For my part, I want to pledge the commitment of the Speaker and the Parliamentary Commission. I want to now hear from the Minister for Sports.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR SPORTS (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi):  I want to express my gratitude to the Parliamentary teams of football and netball. I am so happy as the founder of the Parliamentary Football Club in the Sixth Parliament to see that we are still progressing and winning the trophies of East Africa. You deserve the commendation.

I want to salute members of the netball team; I recall when they approached me, I thought they were doing it for fun. I bought them the first set of uniforms and prepared for them to play in Nakivubo. Indeed from there, they have now become a giant of East Africa. We need to salute you for that.

Lastly, it is good for the entire nation to see that even parliamentarians are also playing a part in promoting and developing sports in this country. This will affect the entire nation and we shall altogether develop sports in this country.

THE SPEAKER:  Congratulations to the parliamentary sports team. In the Distinguished Visitors’ Gallery, we have Ms Gladys Kyotungire, who has recently been crowned Miss Uganda, UK. She is accompanied by Ms Phiona Bizzu, outgoing Miss Uganda; you are all welcome. She is also accompanied by Ms Barbara Kimbugwe, former Miss Uganda 2004-2005. They are here to support the campaign that Parliament has waged on issues of child sacrifice; that is what they have come to do in the country. We wish them well and we shall work with you. Thank you.

Honourable members, I think I did not say this in the beginning; the Order Paper will be handled exactly as it is. No diversions.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF THE ECONOMY

3.06
MR FREDRICK MBAGHADI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to welcome you all back from the festive season and to wish you a happy new year. 

I wish to inform this House that at the end of the last session, I, on behalf of the Committee on National Economy, stood on this Floor and presented a report of the committee on the performance of the economy of the country for the period 2011/2012.

Unfortunately, that report never got the opportunity of being debated. So, I stand here to give a synopsis of the report. That means that I am merely going to mention the highlights. The good thing is that copies have been availed for the second time. I remember last time Members got copies, but luckily enough, we still have some copies for you.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will bear with me because I am going to give you the highlights or summary of the contents in that report. 

THE SPEAKER:  Please do it in 10 minutes. 

MR MBAGADHI:  The analysis in that report indicates a slowdown in economic activity. Real GDP grew by only 3.2 percent, that was in the year 2011/2012 compared to 6.7 percent the previous year. 

The report tackles the behaviour of the macroeconomic parameters across regions and blocs. Elaborately, the report captures the monetary and fiscal sector developments. 

There were a good number of challenges for macroeconomic management in the FY 2011/2012 because the economy was hit by major exogenous shocks that depressed real growth driving up inflation. 

During the first quarter, a sharp depreciation of the exchange rate added to the inflation pressure. Headline inflation rose rapidly from five percent, at the beginning of 2011, to a peak of 30.5 percent in October 2011. This was the highest to be recorded ever since the 1990s. Core inflation rose from 5.6 percent to a peak of 30.8 percent in October 2011. 

Over the review period and following a tightened monetary policy to constrain demand, there was a decline in real currency in circulation. Public sector credit also stagnated. Through the diligent effort by Bank of Uganda to ease its monetary stance, by December 2012, the Central Bank rate hit a 12 percent mark. On this note, I would like to mention that going by today’s monetary policy statement in the New Vision of today, that 12 percent mark is still being maintained. 

While this took place, it is unfortunate that the commercial banks’ lending rates failed to move in tandem with the CBR and at one point, the commercial lending rates escalated to 27 percent compared to 19.9 percent the previous year. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, if you remember, during that period of review, it was a difficult time for the business community. It was the time when businessmen defaulted on their loan portfolios and many of them ended up losing their property. All these coupled with other economic factors were the cause of the slowdown in the level of economic activity.

In a nutshell, the committee observed that the decision of the Bank of Uganda to stabilise the economy and control inflation was prudently done and yielded some good results. This report also captured the inefficiencies within the services, agriculture and other sectors, resulting in limited production and hence, curtailing overall economic growth.  

In conclusion, the committee notes that amidst the economic upheavals, the country continued to maintain relative stability in most of the key macroeconomic variables. 

On one hand, the economy continued to register a significant mismatch between exports and imports; lending rates stubbornly remained high; inefficiencies in the energy sector remained loosely attended to; and inflation remained a little above the programmed limits. 

In respect of the foregoing, the report, therefore, highlights a good number of observations and recommendations and most importantly calls upon Government for the prudent management of the meagre resources and fixing the supply side constraints for us to have sustainable economic growth. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable chair. That is a summary of the report which was presented. You are free to debate within three minutes each. The debate on the report will stop at exactly 4.00 p.m.

3.12
MR VICENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I note with concern from the report that the rate of growth of our economy was staggering, and when you look at the level of inflation, it is very clear that aggregate demand exceeded aggregate supply.

However, when you look at what is happening in the economy, little is being done to increase aggregate supply. We may have the figures; today they are reporting that the inflation rate is at 4.9 percent, from 39 percent. But to what extent do we see this translating into the reduction in the prices. Look at sugar today; a kilogramme of sugar is between Shs 3,500 to Shs 4,500 and yet you say inflation has gone down from 30 percent to 4.9 percent. But you do not see this translating – so it means we need to do more than this as Parliament and as a government. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I was in the village; when you look at our marketing strategy and market infrastructure, especially the road network – I invite the honourable Minister of Works, you cannot talk about food inflation and the high prices if you are not addressing the very factors that affect it. A bunch of matooke in Kakongora, where I come from, the person who produces this matooke sells it at Shs 2,000 but by the time it gets to Kampala, it is sold at Shs 40,000. And this very woman also goes to the same market to buy a kilogramme of sugar at Shs 4,000. Why don’t we address these very economic fundamentals that will increase aggregate supply? 

I want to talk about our monetary policy. I want to allay the fears of the country. We are not doing badly, but I think what is not right are our policies. We privatised the economy, but you cannot privatise the economy when you leave some people to – I don’t know which word to use, but look at the banks, by the time most Members of Parliament, I am sure have loans. You borrowed this money at 17 percent; inflation was at 30 percent; they increased the interest rates to 30 percent. The central bank rate reduced to 13 percent, but the commercial banks do not reduce their interest rates correspondingly. So, do we have a government in charge? When they increase the Central Bank rate, they increase their interest rates, but when they reduce the Central Bank rate, the unsuspecting customers are cheated by these banks. What do we do as a government? We either look to privatise the economy or control the economy; otherwise we are not doing anything –(Member timed out.)

3.16
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as this report was given to us today, we are able to make some observations. My first observation is that you find that an economy in most cases is determined by its fuel prices. Much as we liberalised the economy, Uganda used to have fuel reserves. If we got into trouble, in six months, we would be in a worse off situation. We would like the people responsible to comment on the fuel reserves because that also determines the economy. 

The other issue is about the border markets. This is in relation with our traders in South Sudan. Some of their property is confiscated and nobody is in charge. We beg Government to take charge of our traders along the border markets and those who trade across borders.

The other thing is about the requirement for our importers to make deposits at the Mombasa Port. If you are importing items like sugar, you have to deposit Shs 100 million plus other items before you transact through that port. I would like to ask the responsible minister to help our importers because there is need for our importers to trade freely in Kenya.

My last point is about VAT. I observed that at one point, VAT on water was scrapped. However, it is being included on the receipts indirectly in form of increased tariffs. I would like to request that the responsible minister explains that situation. This is because all those encompass what an economy should be. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.18
MR SSEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee. I am really worried about the picture being given to us in relation to the economy.

On page 2, the report says that, “In summary, the analysis from this report indicates a slowdown in the economic activities as the real GDP grew by only 3.2 percent.” Why am I worried? The population growth rate is now at 3.4 percent annually. This means that the economy is slowing down, it is at 3.2, and whatever little that is being realised is being affected by a knockdown effect due to the high population growth rate. I think we should come out to address that issue of population growth rate.

Many leaders and politicians are coming out to encourage people to produce as many children as possible. Yes, even the religious books tell us to produce many children, but there must be a limit on this. Otherwise, at this rate – you have already heard that when our pupils left primary schools, they couldn’t find enough infrastructure at secondary level and most of them are still languishing; they have not been admitted to secondary schools. The National Planning Authority must, therefore, work hand-in-hand with Government to really plan for this country.

The other time, the minister talked about growth in the agriculture sector as being at 3.0 percent - I recall she said that while reading the budget estimates. To date, it is still the same. So, I don’t know whether it is going to stagnate at that rate. I think the chairperson should help explain that to us because the minister also talked about the service industry realizing - was it a negative growth? Yes, it was a negative growth, if I still recall very well. That should also be explained to us. Otherwise, when it comes to agriculture growing at only 3.0 percent and when two years back, it was at 9.0 percent – when you look at the priority crops as given by the Ministry of Finance and that of Agriculture - they talk about beans, maize, coffee and I don’t recall seeing cotton on that list.

It seems the priorities in terms of crops keep changing. When you look at the budget speeches and statements made from 2001 to date – at one time, one of those priority crops was Irish potatoes. Now it has changed to our common crops. So, my appeal to the chairperson, the ministry and Government, is for them to concentrate on one commodity.

3.21
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson of the committee. Although the chairperson was very brief, he mentioned that there is a slowdown in our economy. He also mentioned that many businessmen are now falling out of business. This is a very big concern to us all.

Our biggest problem is that everybody is an importer. There are very few people talking about exports. When you go to our borders, most of the containers you see are those coming into Uganda. Those that move out of Uganda are usually empty. That is why there is a very big imbalance between our import bill and exports.

Last time, the Minister of Finance mentioned here that we should make sure we finance our productive sectors. In view of this report, I hope the Minister of Finance will this time bring a budget to reflect what she said last time. I think we should really have a target. We have the regional market; we have people who want to buy our grain. How much grain do we want to produce and how can we plan to produce, what is needed on the regional market? For example, how much coffee do we want to produce? Much of our coffee and tea is needed for blending other bad coffee types. So, the question is, how much of such tea or coffee do we need to produce and how much money do we need to inject into such an investment?

The chairperson is lamenting, but we can plan properly for ourselves this time. This will help us have a target to increase on our exports. Thank you very much.

3.23
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (INDEPENDENT, Kyotera County, Rakai):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the presentation. In his presentation, the chairperson noted the fact that inflation went up from 5.0 to 30.5 percent. And if you recall, it was at that time when prices for all goods and services went up.

Now, inflation has gone down to 4.9 percent, but the prices of goods and services are still high with traders making abnormal profits. So, who is there to protect consumers? In Uganda, we have left our consumers to be exploited. There is nothing like consumer protection. I beg that the minister finds mechanisms of protecting consumers. This is important because if sellers are left to make abnormal profits it will lead to income inequalities. The gap between the rich and the poor will increase. We need to protect our consumers. 

As you may recall, there was a fuel crisis in Uganda some time back with a litre of petrol going up from Shs 2,000 to Shs 3,500. But even up to date, fuel still costs the same amount despite the fact that inflation has come down. A kilogramme of meat went up from Shs 2,000 to Shs 8,000 and now it costs Shs 10,000. What is the logic behind? Why don’t we protect our people, Madam Speaker? 

3.26
COL. (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura):  Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for presenting this report. However, I have some concerns that have not been fully addressed by this report.

One, is that, I think our economy needs a very strong development bank in order to trigger development. There is no country that can develop without a strong development bank to assist indigenous Ugandans to invest. As you may observe, most of the investors here are from outside Uganda and most of them are supported by their banks, for example, the Exim Bank of India and the Exim Bank of America. All these are banks supporting their investors. So, there is need for us as a country to strengthen our development bank so that we can support our indigenous investors to participate in the growth of this economy. 

Secondly, I still think that we need to establish a very strong agricultural bank because most of our economy depends on agriculture, and agriculture can employ all these youth who are being emitted by universities and higher institutions of learning. I appeal to the Minister of Finance to look into this matter of establishing a strong development bank and establishing an agricultural bank so that we can help our indigenous Ugandans to become big investors.

Finally, I have serious concerns about not passing the Pensions Bill. If we had this Bill, we would have many players coming to the market to tap into this economy and tapping the capital so that we can lend out this capital to our investors and even to Government to carry out these development projects like other countries are doing. Thank you.

3.28
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by wishing you and honourable members a happy new year. I thank the chairperson for the report and appreciate the recommendations that the committee has made. However, I would like to say that when it comes to national economy, we are all players in the economic playing field and for that reason, the government, the leaders and the citizenry have a role to play in the national economy. We cannot leave it to only a single player and in this direction, much as I would like to talk about population explosion and the economic burden because of dependency, I will go further to talk about household expenditure. 

We, as leaders, have been promoting household income and people are trying to get income although it is not yet possible for them to break through. Why? The household expenditure is very exorbitant. When you look at the budgets for weddings and parties, when you find a small domestic household with 10 telephones, all of them consuming airtime and they are charged on money, then you will know that our population has developed a consumerism kind of approach. They are only spending on consumptive items and we need to sensitise this community and our citizenry that the household expenditure is too high. 

I belong to a tribe where people inherit land and the issue of land fragmentation is causing low production, because if an original land owner who once owned 10 or 20 acres has three or four boys and has to split it into four, it becomes five acres. When his boys also get theirs, they will continue to split it, and by the end of two generations, there is no more land and then they start fighting and cannot produce or do anything economical. It becomes just dependence.

I think as they develop the land policy, and as they develop the guidelines on land use, I think we need to address the issue of land fragmentation and this inheritance of land. Maybe we could sit and put our heads together and find a way of handling this kind of practice. I know it is cultural, we may have to fight some cultures, but I think it is not taking us far.

And of course the unregulated micro-financing; they are going to people’s households to woo them into taking soft and big loans and people end up losing their property in these loans. People who are now becoming so aggressive -(Member timed out.)

3.32
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee and the chair for the report they have presented. However, as we all can see on page 23, the committee indicates as a matter of fact that agriculture was a key component in alleviating the status of the economy. Therefore, this is the very area where Government should focus and pay more attention to ensure that it enhances the economy of this country. But as we note now, there is general lack of clarity as to what Government is doing to ensure that farmers can access agricultural loans. They do not know what to do or where to get agricultural loans that are friendly to farmers. 

There is also lack of clarity on how to manage our soils. As we moved in the countryside during the recess, I noted with a lot of sadness that most of our soils have been exhausted and the only way to revive these soils is to apply either organic fertilisers or factory fertilisers. But as we speak, the prices of fertilisers are so high and an ordinary farmer cannot afford to buy these fertilisers. So, I think Government should do something about this. 

The country is also ignorant about what Government is doing to safeguard the prices of communities. I represent fishing communities, but as we speak, in a difference of only one year, the price of fish has declined from Shs 10,000 to as low as Shs 3,500 but the Government has been silent about this. There is no mechanism to protect the producers when the prices of commodities go down. 

Lastly, the extension services need to be boosted. A number of technologies have been developed in research stations but these technologies are lying redundant in research stations such as Kawanda, Namulonge, Namalele and elsewhere, and the system to extend these extension services is still lacking. Government must ensure that it puts a lot more effort into improving the extension services. That is when the economy will be helped. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.35
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report presented to us. Indeed, your report has important information on what is to be done, but a question came to my mind; when talking about inflation, what would a common man understand? Is it the prices or food shortage that cause inflation? 

Last year came with several phenomena; floods, hailstorms and many other occurrences, especially in Agago. The people of Agago are going to face the same inflation and difficulties in the economy this year because in the months of September, October and November last year, there were a lot of floods in the area and people lost crops and many other things. It is now a season to plant but they do not have seeds for planting. So, there will be food shortages until around November to December again, and that is probably the time they are going to receive food supplies. 

Madam Speaker, why do I bring this up? This is one of the areas that cause inflation – when you look at the supply vis-à-vis the demand in place. I would urge that in an area like this, we need to be proactive by addressing the situation ahead of time so that the country does not go into chaos.

Secondly, just like I said, the common man understands things in a very narrow way, which in a way is good ground for us to get a solution. What are we exporting as a country? Who are the people exporting the goods that we are producing in this country? And where are they putting the profits? Look at our coffee, fish, tea, cotton; who are the exporters and where are they taking the profits? Are the profits remaining in the country? Isn’t this what is causing our currency to become weak? These are the areas we should not neglect because if we do, we shall be in a problem. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, many people, especially – there is what we call “Certificate of land ownership” which is being promoted for people who own land communally. But the way it is being discussed is as though they are supposed to use it to get loans –(Member timed out.)

3.38
MR TIMOTHY LWANGA (NRM, Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join those who have thanked the committee for producing such a good report. However, let us be honest; this is history – it is talking about the period up to June last year. It would have been wonderful if the committee had included a paragraph, just to give us an insight into what is happening right now. (Applause) So, this is history, and it does not help us that much. (Applause)

We have got to ask a few questions. And one of them is that the shilling has continued to go down in value, and this explains the reason why the cost of fuel has remained high. I think Government must think of finding a solution to increasing production. We must increase production so that we export more and earn more dollars, and so that prices come down. How do the prices come down? When we have more dollars, imports will cost less and, therefore, life will be easier since, unfortunately, our people desire luxurious imported goods. And we have to do something about this and hopefully, the Minister of Finance is listening to me. We must tax these luxurious goods so that people focus money on productive goods rather than luxuries. 

Commercial bank lending rates have remained high despite the fact that the CBR is coming down. We must ask ourselves why this is so. And here, I think the Governor of the Bank of Uganda – because he is actually contributing to the monetary policy of Government – must come up with an answer. If his rates are going down, why should the commercial banks’ lending rates remain high? The idea is that when you bring down these rates, people can afford to borrow more and put that money into production, but this is not happening.

Madam Speaker, that is all I have to say, but I hope the ministers concerned have noted. Thank you.

3.41
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report. The issue of the Central Bank rates and the commercial bank rates – most of the commercial banks mobilise money to lend to us within. So, it has nothing much to do with the Central Bank rate because the Central Bank does not lend money to commercial banks; it only works on the treasury bills. 

The bigger problem is the cost of capital here – I think it is the highest in the whole world. Many business people have lost property because of the cost of capital. I have a friend who borrowed Shs 600 million from the Uganda Development Bank and invested it in a hotel. Now, they are asking him to pay Shs 2 billion after two years. So, it is a big challenge.

Another issue is that of capital flight making foreign currency scarce. Many investors hold their money in foreign currency and later take it out. So, they make the foreign currency (dollars) here scarce. In the end, interest rates go up and even some charges here – you will find traders are paying rent in dollars. I do not know whether Parliament is paying in dollars for accommodation at Bauman House - but those are issues which are domestic. 

In South Africa, you cannot trade in other currencies apart from the Rand. Why do people pay for rent in dollars here in Uganda? It will reach a time when people will be charged taxi fares in dollars. Even URA is charging in dollars! I think it is an issue we have to look into critically as Members of Parliament.

So, the inflation – the question of why we had a bumper harvest but prices went up is because people produce food, but sell it in order to pay school fees and medical bills. So, it is upon us to emphasise to Government to invest in education and health. People upcountry are poor because they have sold whatever they have to pay school fees and medical bills. I think that is Government’s role and not for the individuals.

On the issue of agriculture, prices for fertilizers are extremely high. I think Government could look at – instead of this issue of NAADS –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Now, honourable members, we may have to stop, but I have seen those who want to speak. You will speak on the next item because it is also on the economy.

3.44
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy that I am speaking on this subject, of the paper that has been presented to us, because we must be serious. From budget to budget in Uganda, we are talking about economic growth. Have we ever had any situation of bad economic growth or no economic growth? If not, where are the indicators on the ground to show that we are registering economic growth? 

For example, the people I represent would like to see proof on the ground that exports have ever exceeded the volume of imports so that we know we are moving ahead. Where are the indicators? We have been singing every January to December, “Economic growth! Economic growth!” What are you talking about? (Laughter) So, there must be seriousness when we are talking about economic growth.

Secondly, the people of Rubaga South requested me to ask the Minister of Finance the following question:  That for over two years, we have been undergoing the change of currency and we are told by the Bank of Uganda that the exercise would stop after some two years or one and half years. But every time you go to the bank for money, you are given both new and old currency notes. What proof is there that the old money has been burnt and destroyed? Where are the indicators? Why is the exercise endless? Who are you fooling? This is serious because we are taxpayers. (Laughter) So, those are the issues that should be answered. 

Another very important point is that you cannot say that Uganda is economically improving or growing and yet what you see on the market is alarming. We have a number of sub-standard consumer goods from China on the market; the batteries expire within one day; women’s shoes wear out within two weeks and men’s shoes within one month. (Laughter) So, where are we headed? 

When I joined to the Ninth Parliament, I found a Bill on counterfeit goods in the Clerk’s office. When are we passing that Bill? When are we stopping the sub-standard goods from China? They are using Uganda as a dumping ground and I am concerned, in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Environment. (Applause) Something should be done. We are not prepared for the consequences of negativity.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is a problem of the farmers in the -(Member timed out.)

3.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to contribute to the debate on the Floor, and I would like to first thank the committee for this report.

I will specifically talk about interest rates. I am aware that there are laws:  The Bank of Uganda Act, the Financial Institutions Act and the Financial Institutions Regulations. 

The problem we are having with these bank rates is that they are in two phases; there is some borrowing, governed by the Mortgage (Amendment) Act, which has a provision that a bank cannot change the interest rates. However, when it comes to this other normal borrowing, banks have been changing the rates as and when they deem it fit. What is the problem with this? 

While I was in my constituency, we found teachers who had borrowed money at a certain interest rate and at a particular point in time, the banks increased the interest rates and this affected their planned income, which they received after the bank deductions. Where is the problem?

I had the benefit of interacting with Bank of Uganda when we were at a workshop and we were saying, “Look, people come and borrow money from these commercial banks. When you go to them, the banks tell you, we also borrow at a certain rate from Bank of Uganda.” It is like they are trying to create an impression that the Credit Reference Bureau also borrows from Bank of Uganda and actually lends to them, whereas the understanding of the people is different. We believe that there is a contract between the bank and the customer. Bank of Uganda must regulate these rates.

Even when you walk to these banks in town today, every bank has its own rate and even if the lending rate of Bank of Uganda comes down, these banks stay at the same rate. I think it is at this point that Bank of Uganda must come in to regulate these banks and not to let it look as if they have no role to play in regulation.

Madam Speaker, there is also an effect on the economy when the lending rates go high, because most of the time the people cannot access this money and when this happens, no business can take place. If, for instance, salary earners like teachers had planned to take a loan in a particular period of time and they had agreed on the interest rate, when it goes high, it affects them. 

I have seen some banks, which I will not mention. Some were increasing their rates while others had remained static. So, the Ministry of Finance, through Bank of Uganda, must register this so that they do not come to this Parliament to lament about these interest rates. 

If a Member of Parliament cannot address this situation through this House then what remedy do the traders out there have in as far as this is concerned? So, I deemed it fit to come and add my voice to this debate because it seemed as if we are just talking about it passively as if we are just talking English in Economics. I wanted to emphasise the need for the Ministry of Finance to address this. Thank you.

3.51
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. Like hon. Tim Lwanga noted, this seems to be more of a post-mortem. With the coming into force of a budget, there is always a new economic regime because resources are now being re-allocated to meet the challenges.

When you look at the Rules of Procedure, the committee is mandated to examine the state of the economy. When you look at all the figures given in this report, and I invite colleagues to look at all the tables, which have been given, they are all for the last financial years. So, we are talking of a totally different creature, and I would really request the committee that in order to be helpful to us, you need to have these reports timely so that we can put our minds together to address the challenges facing the economy.

Let me give you an example. Two months ago, the honourable Minister of Finance was on this Floor and warned the country that we are headed for tough economic times. He did! And asked us to be disciplined in terms of our expenditure. When you look at this report, the picture is totally different. We have a budget where 22 to 24 percent has a component of development partner financing. We now know that part of it has been withheld. What impact is it going to have on the economy, because I understand from the press that we are actually getting resources to pay back some of this money, which was swindled. Is it going to affect the budget performance? 

These are the sort of issues that I thought the report would address. As it is now, look at the pump prices. They are giving us pump prices of up to April last financial year, but the situation has changed. We are talking about petrol prices at Shs 3700 now and the report cites about Shs 3500.

Much as the spirit to have reports is good, they should be timely in order to be relevant. As it is now, we are engaged in a general economic debate because some of the issues raised in the report were sort of addressed in the last budget, and new challenges have come up, which need to be addressed.

So, Madam Speaker, I do not want to go into the details of this report, but to request the committee to be timely so that whatever information they give us is relevant. Thank you.

3.54
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I share similar views and I was wondering because in most cases, as Parliament, we feel powerless when we come and debate matters that actually do not get Government to act. So, most often, we end up being looked at as people who lament, and I think this very report is an example, because for all this time, even when you look at the recommendations, they are not really practical. They are general and do not focus on the main tool that influences action, and that is the budget.

We talked for some time about increasing financing to the agricultural sector. This has been for so many years; not only last year, but over the years, even when Government gave a commitment to have over 10 percent of the budget to finance agriculture and lead to serious agrarian reforms. 

We cannot continue condemning peasants to the lifestyle they are leading. The indicator that most of the time we try to please the peasants and a few other people is when we keep clamouring for new districts, another high expenditure that affects the public purse and that does not even address the productivity of this country. The only sector that I have seen go unabated has been the population. We have not failed in increasing the population but we are failing to produce; we are failing to industrialise; and we are failing to increase services; but with the population, we have done extremely very well. (Laughter) Now, where are we heading? So, I see that this as a very big problem. 

We talked of increasing the budget for the Ministry of Tourism, but up to now there is no action. And yet these recommendations are talking about tourism; lack of financing the tourism sector. We say we want dollars; we want to get foreign exchange but you are not financing the tourism ministry; you are not allocating money for the tourism ministry. This is where I find a very big problem. I keep asking myself, what actually happens to the planners and the people who are really taking decisions in this country? You have seen NAADS over the years and seen –(Member timed out.) 
(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER:  Let us have Hon. Ntabazi and then Hon. Ekuma. Kasese, Musasizi, and the rest of you will speak on the Water debate.

3.57
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibudyo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am grateful for the report that the committee has presented because if it came on time, it would have solved some of the problems. It has cited some areas where we had problems last year, but because it has come very late and the issues raised now can longer be valid because the financial year is ending, but we shall of course continue discussing it as our duty as Members of Parliament. 
  
There are resolutions and recommendations, which we made in this House, Madam Speaker, during the season when there were very high prices. I thought that the ministries concerned would have picked on these resolutions and recommendations so that we would see a new year with improvements.
 
We talked of value-addition on many of the crops because we looked at agriculture as key to the economy.  And I think Government struggled to create zones. We identified the produce; we identified many crops according to the regions, but up to now, nothing has been done. So, we do not know whether the Ministry of Agriculture has not been facilitated well or maybe the resources there are too little to do anything to move a step ahead in order to put something in place because, for example, in my area we looked at food production - coffee and cocoa production. We have a lot of cocoa in our area but getting coffee and cocoa seedlings is a problem. Even food production itself is a problem. 

If you look at the companies which are selling seeds, there is East African Seed – whatever it is called - which is selling fake seeds. You personally buy the seeds and plant them and they cannot germinate. And this is the Ministry of Agriculture - we really do not know. Where is the problem? Are they the people in the Ministry? Are they the policies? We should really look for the root cause of the problem because we may continue blaming Government generally and yet the problem is with the individuals. 

Madam Speaker, we have another challenge of rural-urban migration. Many of the youths who would be doing the work in the villages, digging and improving on agriculture, have moved to town leaving production in the villages for the old women who cannot do much. So, we need to do something about the youths; employing the youths and creating more industries so that the youths are involved in bringing more dollars to the country. 

4.01
MR GEORGE STEPHEN EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to that of those who have thanked the committee for the work they have done.  

My comment goes to the Ministry of Agriculture.  If we are to boost the economy, the Ministry of Agriculture must come up with a marketing strategy for our agricultural products. I would like to take the example of Teso where we produce a lot of oranges and our neighbours from South Sudan come and pick the oranges at Shs 30,000 per bag. What marketing strategy do we have in order to promote agriculture in order to uplift the lives of the farmers?  Minister of Agriculture, you should really look into this because the Minister of Finance may not be able to determine the prices of farm products.
 
When we talk of the East African Community, our brothers from Kenya and Tanzania come to pick maize at a giveaway price. What are we doing? We have talked of increasing production, but producing what? We are producing more maize, but there is no market for maize. We are producing oranges, but there is no market for oranges. So, hon. Lwanga, what should we produce, because you said we must produce more and export. I think what we should concentrate on is to look for the market – a marketing strategy! 

I would also like to talk about the chocking exchange rates. Businesses today have collapsed because the exchange rate is so high. Yes, other colleagues have already alluded to this - all out trade is based on foreign exchange, that is, Dollars and Euros, and yet our farmers and local traders are not able to access these Dollars and Euros. So, Bank of Uganda should really come out clearly and say, “Look here, this is the way forward.” Our products should have a price ceiling. Why do we sell our products at a give-away price?  I have not seen Ugandan farmers or traders cross to Kenya to buy items in Ugandan Shillings. They buy them in foreign exchange. But in Uganda, foreigners come and purchase our products using our local currency, which is very weak. So, Madam Finance Minister, we need to look into this. 

I also want to comment on agriculture funding. Let it be a policy to fund agriculture because Uganda depends on agriculture. If we are able to produce more maize and export it, then we can earn foreign exchange to boost our economy. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as I said, the others will speak in the next debate, which is also on the economy. But Minister, I have two questions; you know, the Port of Mombasa is a port of the people of Uganda, but it seems like we are treated as second - under international law, that port is our port. So, there are restrictions being imposed on Ugandans and it seems nobody is taking an interest.
 
Right now, importers are worried about March. You know there is an election in Kenya; they are not sure whether their goods will arrive; they are considering going through Dar-es-Salaam which will add another $10,000 to the cost of bringing their goods here. Are you implementing the Convention on the Rights of Landlocked Countries to transit to the coast?

Then there is something that hon. Kabahenda said that small companies are chasing villagers to borrow money, but I also want to remind you that last year, banks were chasing MPs - (Laughter)- including the Speaker. They would ring me and send sms messages stating that, “Come and borrow this money; come and borrow 500 million within two days.” I think you need to do something about that.  

Minister, you can answer and you are sharing the 15 minutes with the Minister of Agriculture. 

4.05
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to respond to some of the concerns raised by the honourable Members of Parliament. 

I captured six broad areas of concern. One was on food security and prioritisation of the enterprises we are putting in place.  I want to report to you and persuade Members of Parliament to accept the fact that one of the primary responsibilities of Government as spelt out in the Constitution is to feed its own people. 

Notwithstanding the fact that the population of Uganda has been growing, the Ministry of Agriculture has been able to feed its people and with surpluses to sell to our neighbours. This is a fact, and in my view, this is an achievement.

Having said that, I want to thank the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy for observing that agriculture has bounced back; this is true. In the recent past, we have moved from less than one percent to three percent growth, and the latest in the last two quarters suggests that we have even grown further to about 4.5 percent. I think this is also some progress.

Some comments were raised on the extension system that we have in place. It is true that it is lacking, but equally true, we are doing something about it under a project known as Agricultural Technology Advisory Services supported by Government of Uganda and the World Bank. Briefly, this is a project that is strengthening the capacity of researchers to develop more technologies and also support the extensions to be able to deliver in that sense. So, it is true to say that technology that is being developed in research stations can now be translated and transmitted to the farmers by the extension system in place. But there are also other things that are happening that even non - this is supported by that project known as Yates but we have had a sector working group that has looked at Yates fertilisers, inputs, improved seeds and irrigation that are being costed for funding in the near future. 

Something was said about declining soil fertility. This is very true. This is very true. Our soil fertility is declining because we have been mining our soils.  Every time you harvest a bunch of matooke or maize or potatoes, you are taking away nutrients. There is cause to have these nutrients replenished. Clearly, we can do this using fertilisers, but imported fertilisers are very expensive simply because of the high transportation cost from the coast inland. In the long-term, we have looked at possibilities of exploiting our own fertilisers internally because the resources exist. You have heard that there are phosphate deposits in Tororo; we have got limestone in Kasese and other places; and with the discovery of oil, it will be easy to manufacture nitrogenous fertilisers. So, this will be in place as soon as we have the capacity to exploit them. But in the interim, especially when we are dealing with 68 percent of small-scale farmers, we can increase productivity by up to 80 percent using what is available on our own farms. If a home has some crop residues at its disposal - every home is burning wood every night. The moment you burn wood you are removing the element of carbon; the rest is fertilisers. So, what we require is conscious use of what is available on our farms to increase productivity. If we did that, we would raise our production up to 80 percent.

There was concern on agricultural financing. I know there have been some modest works in this direction, but I would rather leave this one to the honourable Minister of Finance to handle because she is more able to do that.

On value-addition, something positive is being done. I do not know whether Members of Parliament appreciate that of now, 40 percent of total processing in this country is agro processing, both on-farm and off-farm, and it has even gone beyond that level to industrialisation - the role of coffee ginneries, cotton ginneries, fruit processing facilities, milk plants and so on, and the latest is that we are entering into the construction of abattoirs. There is a modern one nearing completion near Bombo.

Finally, someone raised a question on marketing. In general, marketing is not in my docket. It is in the Ministry of Trade and Industry, but there was a specific question raised on oranges in Teso, and I am glad to report that a factory to handle this is going to be financed by the Government of South Korea to handle oranges in Teso.

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I wish to appreciate the offer given to me. (Hon. Mathias Nsubuga rose_)

THE SPEAKER:  No, Minister of Finance. (Mr Mbagadhi rose_)Okay, let the chair answer something briefly before the minister comes.

4.12
THE VICE-CHAIRPESON, THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fredrick Mbagadhi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to state that I do appreciate the concerns that are being raised by Members, but I felt I needed to respond to an issue that has been raised by not only hon. Katuntu, but also by hon. Ntabazi and hon. Timothy Lwanga; that is, the issue of having a report that seems to be a post-mortem. 

You will all agree with me that during the period between January and December 2012, this Parliament had a very busy schedule. As a committee, we tried to do all that it takes to perform our mandatory role of producing this report in time. However, I remember on the Order Paper, we always got space in business to follow. That is what actually bogged us down. And, hon. Lwanga mentions that the committee would have at least come up with a paragraph to give an insight into the economic situation between June up to date, but I want to remind you, honourable colleagues, that the content of this report is owned by a committee. And if at all we failed to present this report, possibly in June last year, then we could not come up again to add anything to it.

By the way, Madam Speaker, this report was presented at the end of last session, and even after presentation, we still never got time to debate this report. So, honourable colleagues, I beg your indulgence that you bear with us. I think with time, we shall work with the Office of the Speaker and that of the Clerk to ensure that we get these reports presented in a timely manner. Thank you very much.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join you and the august House in congratulating the Parliamentary Football Team and the Parliamentary Netball Team on the achievements. It is nice to know we have our own Kiprotichs right here in the House. (Applause)

I would also like to thank the Chairman and members of the Committee on National Economy for this report. I would also like to thank the honourable members for the very exhaustive and penetrating questions they have asked. Due to time constraints, I will just answer one or two of them now, but commit, Madam Speaker, to provide written responses to all the questions within one week to this Parliament.

I would like to start with your question about the Port of Mombasa and the treatment that has been given to Ugandan importers and exporters there, which has not been good. I am very pleased to inform you and the august House that two weeks ago, I led a mission to Tanzania to meet with our counterparts in Finance, in Transport and Trade. My colleagues from Transport and Trade have just stepped out, but they can also give more details. 

The upshot of our deliberations was that we signed a memorandum of understanding whereby Ugandan cargo is to receive preferential treatment in and out the Port of Dar-es-Salaam. To be technical, they have committed to through-put our goods through that port within seven days of arrival and to do paper work within four days. Uganda Railways has committed to sending some of our wagons and locomotives to Tanzania to help in evacuating our goods between Tabora and Mwanza. So, Tanzania Railways will haul them from Dar-es-Salaam to Tabora and our people will haul them from Tabora to Mwanza, and then across on our ferry and on the ferry of Tanzania - Umoja. This is in addition to the road transport option through Mutukula.

As I speak, Shell, one of the main fuel importers, has already commissioned a shipment of fuel to land in Dar-es-Salaam next week and to open the route. That has been done in anticipation of making sure we establish and maintain a second alternative route for our exports and imports. 

The second quick comment I will give, is on the agriculture sector. As my colleague of agriculture has said, agricultural production and productivity are very important but marketing is just as important. So, I would just like to build upon what he has said that there is a factory for food processing to be established in Teso and the ground work has already started to lay utility lines in and out of the place. This is being done in conjunction with the Republic of Korea. 

We are also putting in all our efforts to increase rural electrification so that people can put agro-processing plants near the places of production and in this way, spread employment across the country.

Our road projects are also on track. Again for agriculture, we have made sure we have ring-fenced our counterpart financing for all the road projects. So, I am happy to report that all the road projects are on course for this budget year. 

I will leave the rest for my written response, which I will provide to this august House within one week. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Minister. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 87.1 MILLION (US$ 135 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING OF THE WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (WMDP)

4.19
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to inform this House that this report was presented on 11 December, 2012, at the end of last session. I, therefore, want to remind honourable members that all Members got copies. Lucky enough, we have other copies which are being circulated. So, at this juncture, I will only give a synopsis of what is embedded in this report.

This loan request by Government is a request to borrow SDR 87.1 million, which is equivalent to US$ 135 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Water Management and Development Project. Like I said, this report is about 20 pages. We had all the relevant documents laid on Table when I presented it. Most importantly, I take this opportunity to present to this House a summary of the report. 

First, I will talk about the project development objectives, which are two. The first objective is to improve on the integrated water resource planning, management and development. The second objective is to improve the levels of accessibility to water and sanitation services in priority urban areas. These priority urban areas or centres are clearly mentioned in the annex of the report.

I found it pertinent to elaborate a little on the project components. We have three components. The first component is investment in integrated water resource development and management. This is expected to consume US$ 33.7 million which, is 25 percent of the financing. 

The second project component is to invest in urban water supply, sanitation services and catchment protection. This component is expected to consume US$ 98.5 million which is 73 percent of the financing. At this juncture, I would like to mention that during our visit as a committee in Manafwa, we realised that there was deterioration in the quality and quantity of water as a result of the catchment area not being protected. Therefore, when we talk about this project component of investing in urban water supply, sanitation services and catchment protection, I think it is really prudent that we get good results.  

The third component is strengthening institutions for effective water management and development plus project implementation. This component is expected to consume US$ 2.8 million, which is 2 percent of the financing.

We also have project implementation. Implementation of this project is expected to be done by two agencies; that is:  Ministry of Water and Environment, and National Water and Sewerage Corporation under the oversight of the Water and Environment Sector Working Group, plus the relevant Government bodies.
 
Before I come to the conclusion, I want to state clearly that in the report which was presented, we have documents which were attached in Annex 1, which shows the status of the previous loans and grants for water and sanitation infrastructure development under the Ministry of Water and Environment and the National Water and Sewerage Corporation. In that annex, we also have a list of small towns and regional centres in the Urban Water and Sewerage Department. We also have Annex 2, showing a map of the coverage of towns under different programmes.

In conclusion, the committee noted Government efforts to strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable integrated water resource management, planning, management and development, and to improve access and reliability of water services in priority urban centres. 

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends that this House approves the requested loan of SDR 87.1 million which is equivalent to US$ 135 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Water Management and Development Project. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable chairperson and your committee. The report – where are the signatures? Okay, honourable members, I was just checking the authenticity. The report has been signed by at least one third of the members. You are free to debate. Committee members will not contribute.





4.26
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the onset, I would like to say, I am in support of this loan because it is going to avail water for our people; and as they say, “Water is life”. However, I need some clarification from the Minister of Water as to why we in urban areas continue to pay for water yet in rural areas, people do not pay for water supplied to them. The amount they pay is very different if at all they pay. I would like to inform the minister that we have more of the poor of the poor in urban areas than in rural areas because people in rural areas have land, but people in urban areas do not have land. 

I wish to bring it to the attention of the minister that as urbanisation is taking place, the poor around the urban areas are being engulfed by the rich and they continue to live there with no income. Yet, you continue charging them, VAT inclusive. Since some of them cannot afford to pay for clean water, they have resorted to swamps. Let me give you an example. In Kasese, we have a river which is highly polluted by Kilembe Mines, called Nyamwamba.. But because people cannot access clean water, they have continued to use this water. And when studies were carried out, it was found that in Kasese, Hepatitis B, Dysentery and Diarrhoea are on the increase. 

Secondly, last year, we received a letter from the Minister of Water that we should submit dysfunctional boreholes to his office. I did that and up to now, I am waiting. When I move around my constituency, I see many boreholes that need repair. So, I want to ask, was it foolery that we write about the state of boreholes and existing water sources? What is happening; let the minister clarify what happened to his communication that we ably responded to. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.29
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I would like to thank the committee for this report and I must say that I am fully in support of the proposal by Government to borrow this money because the area to which it is supposed to be directed is a very crucial one. Like my colleague has just alluded, in most areas, including Kongasis where I come from, 80 percent of the diseases people suffer from are waterborne. If that reflects the whole country, that means if we provide safe water to our people, we shall have eradicated about 80 percent of the diseases that afflict our people from day to day. The effect, therefore, would be that people will save more because most people’s expenditure is directed towards treatment of such diseases. So, if safe water is provided, then people will be economically better off. The money which would otherwise be used for treatment will be directed to other areas like education and their general well-being and poverty will be reduced. That means that we have to prioritise provision of safe water. 

The challenge to Government is putting those funds to proper use. Approving the loan is one thing and utilising it for the intended purpose is another. The issue of accountability should, therefore, also be emphasised in service delivery if our people are to benefit from these services. Transparency and accountability should be considered. We have passed many loans, but we do not know how far they have gone. 

Last time, we passed a loan where Bukwo Gravity Flow Scheme was supposed to benefit; small towns like Bukwo and Suam were supposed to benefit. However, when you look here, they are still at preliminary design. For how long will these towns be at preliminary design –(Member timed out.)





4.32
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to appreciate this report from the committee and to support the request to borrow, because one of the principle areas which the NRM Government wants to focus on is improvement of infrastructure in terms of water, roads, electricity and so on. Water is also a primary ingredient in development for our people. 

I have seen that in Kiboga Town, which is part of my constituency, is on the list and when I talked to the people in the district, they told me that they had been visited by officials from the Ministry of Water. So, we would like to see this project implemented in Kiboga Town so that the people of that town can benefit from that water and spend less time looking for water from poor sources. 

I remember last year, the Prime Minister visited Kiboga and found that the Hospital did not have running water. One of the problems was that the town did not have adequate water supply. So, I hope that after this project, Kiboga Hospital and residents in the town will have proper water supply. 

Madam Speaker, I also think that Uganda is blessed with much rain. The Ministry of Water should also educate our people and invest in water harvesting both in rural areas and urban centres. At the moment, most of us just let the water run into drainages whereas we could capture that water and use it for agricultural and domestic purposes. So, I advise that the Minster of Water considers a component where they provide support for water harvesting, especially in the rural areas with scattered settlements where a centralised water scheme may not be possible.

The issue I want to conclude with is the one about the boreholes. My colleague has talked about the boreholes. Many boreholes in our districts are not operational. When I visit as a Member of Parliament, I am requested to help; they say, “Honourable, this borehole is not operational and the engineers told us it will cost Shs 200,000. So, can you contribute.” Therefore, can the ministries of Water and Finance make a conditional fund to the districts for the purpose of maintaining these water sources. (Member timed out.)

4.35
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report. But I would like to make observations on a number of issues. One, many times, Government has come here with requests to approve loans and with good intentions. Water and sanitation is a critical area in Uganda if we are to fight poverty and disease. I want Government to come up one day and tell us when the whole country will be covered with safe water. Whereas I appreciate that the resource envelope is small, we also need to prioritise certain areas like water, health, education and roads. 

People have been talking about the status of our economy. My friend, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, talked about economic growth. It is true that the economy has been growing year after year, but the indicators seem not to be seen on the ground and the reason is because our people do not have services like water and roads among other things. So, it is important that as we approve this loan in good spirit, we also need to have a strategic plan that clearly defines and answers the question of when our people in the entire country will have water. 

The Millennium Development Goals targeted 2015 to have halved the status of people living in poor sanitation and without water. I do not know how far we have gone as Uganda. I do not know whether the ministry has got these figures. 

Madam Speaker, today we are discussing a national matter and I represent a hilly constituency. If you look at the distance that people travel in search for water in the valleys, you can shed tears. However, I get surprised when I see Government prioritising other things but do not prioritise services that clearly touch the poor.

In conclusion, I would like to urge Government and all my colleagues here in Parliament to develop a spirit of having our country at heart; of putting our poor people first in whatever decisions or priorities we make so that we help our country and the economy to grow, and consequently, to improve the lives of our people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, three minutes each.

4.39
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the job well done. 

It is noble to borrow for improving water infrastructure, as water is life, and I support this loan on that basis. However, I have a few issues to highlight. First, I notice that on page four, under component No.2, investment in urban water supply and sanitation services and catchment protection, and under sub-component (1), you are borrowing US$ 25 million for Arua, US$ 16.5 million for Gulu, US$ 2.6 million for Bushenyi-Ishaka, and for Mbale US$ 10 million. 

I am familiar with the Bushenyi-Ishaka component and unfortunately, the Chairman mentioned that they were not able to visit this area. But I wish they had because Bushenyi-Ishaka has an existing plant that produces 1,000 cubic metres per hour. It has only been upgraded to 2,000 cubic metres per hour and the original plan was to improve this to 8,000 cubic metres per hour. The honourable Minister of State for Water at that time, hon. Namuyangu, came and launched this project in 2008.  Hon. Betty Bigombe was there last year, and she launched a plan that was unveiled and presented to the public. The idea was to build a station at Kitagata, which would be 8,000 cubic metres, to supply to Bushenyi of Nyaruzinga Plant at the moment, where the banana project is located, so that it has a system that would serve Sheema and Bushenyi districts. 

When you look at the population mentioned under Bushenyi-Ishaka, it was an estimated at 74,000 people, but we are really talking about half a million people. So, conceptually, this Bushenyi-Ishaka component is a misconception and they have missed the point. I do not know what has happened to the original designs that were shown to the public to have a station at Kitagata, build the line to Kitagata Town Council, Bugongi Town Council, Sheema Town Council and Kabwohe-Itendero Town Council as well as –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kafuda.

MR KATWIREMU:  Madam Speaker, I have not given you a hard time –

THE SPEAKER:  Okay, half a minute to conclude. (Laughter)

MR KATWIREMU:  So, the real estimate was US$ 15 million and I see US$ 2.6 million. I would want some clarification; what does the ministry intend to do with US$ 2.6 million because it will not work on the project. And if you just dig up the place, maybe, and you are not able to finish it, what then - because definitely, you will not do much with US$ 2.6 million? I would really want the minister to clarify to the people of Sheema South and tell them what happened to the US$ 15 to US$ 20 million. I thank you.  
   
4.43
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese):  I thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is just a clarification from the chairman. I have been following this proposal for credit from the beginning, up to this time, and I remember that this loan was approved by the World Bank Board on 26 June 2012, and the exchange rate they used was Shs 2,300 to a dollar. Right now, the dollar is at Shs 2,700. Therefore, I am worried, because the prices of materials right now in Uganda have also increased. Will that money, the US$ 135 million, be enough to cover all these components?

Secondly, about the disbursement. This loan is going to be disbursed in phases. In fact, it will take six years, and it is supposed to start in 2013 to 2018 –(Interjections)- yes, those are five years. But when we look at the component, most especially component No.2 on the investment in urban water supply and sanitation – recently, I had a problem in my constituency, in Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council, which is mentioned here under sub-component No.2, whereby the whole water project broke down completely and up to now, the people of Katwe-Kabatooro Town Council do not have water. It is good that I took there the honourable minister for Water - he knows that plant very well. I contacted the Managing Director of National Water who was supposed to provide an emergency – (Member timed out.)

4.46
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in wishing you a happy new year, particularly, my friend, Chairperson of ICT Committee, who almost did not make it to 2013. We thank God for your presence. 

First and foremost, I would like to congratulate the committee for scrutinising this request and making the recommendations therein. 

On behalf of the people of Arua, I think this is one loan that I should speak about. We have suffered; our people have drunk dirty water; the place is all littered with boreholes, and as we talk, the region is stressed with unpredictable weather conditions. Sometimes, we get a long spell of drought; and sometimes we get a lot of rain; that is the state in which we live. We sometimes do not know where some of the diseases we contract come from. But particularly, since water is life, we have associated most of our diseases with consumption of dirty water. 

Arua is becoming a city. It is not actually becoming, but it is already a city. As you know, we are businessmen and we have gone ahead to ensure that all that is required is in place and already, arrangements have been made to ensure that whatever development that takes place or that is being planned, fits within our plans; not that Government comes to plan for us. Things are already being done in consultation with other stakeholders.  

I am putting this to the responsible ministry; as you are coming to implement this US$ 25 million project, let us get value-for- money. And if you have got your hands associated with corruption, we are going to monitor this money to the dot to ensure that it delivers the required water supply. I am saying this because in this country, every funding that comes is associated with kickbacks. So, whoever is going to implement this project in Arua, therefore, should take note that we are already looking around and safeguarding this money by all means. 

Secondly, as I said, Arua is being littered – not only Arua, but the whole of West Nile. When you look at the observations and recommendations in (i), and –(Member timed out.)

4.50
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also in support of the government accessing this grant. However, my fear is about how to utilise this money. In several instances – I have been in this Parliament for the last two years – we have been granting loans to various sectors, but in most cases, you hardly see what is on the ground. So, I have a fear that after us granting that Government be given this facility so that people can access these services, I do not know whether they will implement. 

However, the intention is very good. If I look at the people of Budaka, where I come from, surely, just as many previous speakers have said, we are in bad shape to the extent that most of the people within Budaka – if I can get a sample of the water we take, you will sympathise with those people in Budaka. And when we look at the boreholes they are given, in terms of percentages of the boreholes which have been given to the people of Budaka, if I am not mistaken, the operational ones are only 5 percent. The remaining, 95 percent, are not in existence or functional. 

So, the only way out is to grant this loan; and let this loan strictly do what it is supposed to do instead of people dividing this money amongst themselves. Because I know that many people are eagerly waiting for this money to be granted and then they begin exchanging phone calls saying, “Can you give me this percentage; can you give me this.” But if it is intended to assist the people on the ground, I am in full support of this facility. Thank you.

4.52
MR JACOB MARKSONS OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan. I actually supported the loan yesterday. The need for water in Uganda as a whole cannot be overemphasised. However, I am amazed. During the recess, I met a water problem in my constituency, West Budama South, head on. The number of boreholes which Government is using, not less than 15 to 17 million. However, I do not know whether boreholes still make sense. How do we have the quality assurance on this? Some of these boreholes seem to be as shallow as a pit latrine. Because, one week they try to sink it down, and the following week the water is not there. 

Honourable minister, the hope for Uganda lies in safe and clean water coverage. The Japadhola, whom I represent in this Parliament –(Interjections)- I represent the Japadholas in this Parliament among other people - I am sensitive to my other colleague in the back - Should you not have water in your home, you would be the poorest person. 

Honourable Minister, Tororo District is fairly covered, and I am the Ninth Member of Parliament from West Budama. We have been approving loans, but going to other areas - I do not want to sound selfish - can this Government do us a favour and extend piped water from Gwaragwara to other trading centres and urban areas like Pagwenda and Mulanda? Just do us a favour honourable minister before we die of diseases related to water. 

Madam Speaker, the committee did quite a commendable job and I agree with their observations. The big problem that the ministry still finds is giving – I do not know how much they give to districts, but the districts are so much overwhelmed by the need to repair boreholes. 

Honourable minister and Government of Uganda, how I wish that you could increase your budget allocations for these boreholes or water coverage in this country -(Member timed out.)

4.56
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am in support of this loan request, because my people in Rukungiri Municipality have suffered for a long time. We have spent almost two years without water in the town and you know when you do not have water in town, it is such a big problem. So, I want to thank the committee which identified Rukungiri Municipality as one of those to benefit from this loan request.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the ministry to involve the local authorities, especially in identifying water sources and land. Usually, we get problems with such projects when it comes to identifying land and water sources. So, I think it is important to start early identification of such areas with the involvement of local leaders in the district.

My other point is about environmental degradation. We have a problem; it is expensive because the water sources are very far from the project points. For example, the source from which we hope to secure this water in Rukungiri is 20 kilometres from the town centre, because most of the nearest wetlands were destroyed. That makes the project expensive. So, allow me to use this opportunity to warn all those who are degrading wetlands to stop the practice.

Once more, I want to thank the committee – when you look at page six, you realise that the selection was good –(Laughter)– yes, it was good. You can see areas in Arua, Pallisa, Rukungiri – honourable members, we need to pass this loan and move to another one.

4.59
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buikwe South, I wish to welcome you back to Parliament. I also welcome hon. Paula Turyahikayo back to Parliament. 

I want to draw your attention to page five of the report especially component three, which talks about strengthening institutions for effective water management and development of the project. The report says that this will take 2 percent, which is US$ 2.8 million. The committee also says that this will enable the Minister of Water and Environment to provide oversight over the project through its water sector liaison division.

However, you will recall that all ministries provide policy statements. And through those statements they budget for activities including monitoring of their projects. In my view, this ministry should not depend on monies from a loan to carry out their oversight duties. I actually do not know why this escaped the committee’s mind. My view is that this kind of money should have been placed somewhere else because this ministry has got money meant to monitor such projects, unless they tell us otherwise –(Interjections)– no, it does not matter whether this is another project. Institutionally, we know that the ministry should be having these monitory mechanisms.

Madam Speaker, when we talk about investment in integrated water resources and development, you realise that in sub-component (1), we are still talking about identification, preparation, doing studies and so on. I am perturbed by the mechanisms by which we come out with components of the loan in processes which should have been undertaken in the first place. For example, doing studies, identification, implementation and so on, these should have been undertaken before considering the loan money because that money is only meant for implementation, in my view. Actually, I again wonder why the committee did not look at this.

It is important to say that the plan to supply water to the small towns is appreciated. I only want to say that it is true we have a list of towns identified, but these are not the only towns that should have been identified. I believe that there are many more others. I know that we already have water in Buikwe, but we should be talking about fishing villages or communities –(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I bring greetings from the people of Busia Municipality. They all wish a happy new year to the whole House and to you in particular, Madam Speaker.

I would like to say that I have been delegated to inform the House that the people of Busia Municipality are really in support of this report. (Laughter) On that note, I have been asked to thank the committee for the work well done.

Busia Municipality is at the border of Uganda and Kenya. It is the gateway to Uganda. Because of that, this town is supposed to be very clean given the fact that it has to give the impression of what Uganda is. So, with water being brought in, it will greatly help us in developing that place. It will also help us greatly to improve services in our health centres IV, which did not have water before. I know that water will also be extended to the abattoirs where traders from all over the region – South Sudan to Rwanda – and this place is also a clearing point for trade in Uganda. Water extension to that place will, therefore, help us clean up the town. I also hope that this project will help us very much in supporting our fish trade. You know that fish needs a lot of water; and it has to be kept clean so that it does not smell.

But most importantly, as you know, Busia is a tourist attraction site in Uganda. It is hoped, therefore, that this will contribute to the foreign exchange earnings, which can also reduce on the inflation because that will increase on exports, which in turn will help us improve Uganda’s Balance of Trade.

And when we get things like hotels, we will be creating employment –(Member timed out.) (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I may have to reduce on the number of people to speak to this item because we have another item to handle.

5.09
MR WILLIAM ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to state that I support this loan. It will help us execute these projects as soon as possible. Allow me first to make a correction in the report. There is no area or municipality called Bushenyi-Ishaka. That municipality is called Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, which is the constituency I represent, and that should be the name of the project.

The people of Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality are happy about this project, and hope it starts as soon as possible. I would like to inform you that this project was earmarked in 2002 when I was the Deputy Speaker of Greater Bushenyi District Council. The signposts were put up after identifying the area in Kitagata where the water source is. The area where the plant is going to be constructed was also secured in 2002. This would be the point at which we should be talking; but this other process which has come in has actually come in as a result of the funds allocated to Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality. To my surprise, this project you are talking about is going to benefit half a million people, because it will benefit Sheema, Buhonji, Kabwohe Town Council, Rwentuha, to Ishaka Municipality and to Kyamuhunga for the tea production. So, when you come up and allocate US$ 2.6 million, you have not seriously participated in a project which started in 2002. 

Therefore, the committee and even the minister who is looking at me now, and who is from that constituency of Bushenyi - Sheema - should have advised this committee that this money is not enough. He should make a ministry budget allocation to ensure that they allocate some of the money to this project.

When the President visited Bushenyi, we told him of this project. I went and faced the Minister of State for Water, hon. Betty Bigombe. I went with her, Engineer Katwiremu and hon. Nyakikongoro; we toured this project where the water is going to pass and so forth. There is a place where we reached at Kikuba where a big tank is going to be constructed to supply the whole of that area. So, when you talk of US$ 2.6 million which is not even a tenth of this project, you are not serious. 

Hon. Kamuntu, you are in this ministry; since 2002, we have been talking about this water –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I don’t intend to sabotage because I can already see excitement from Rukungiri, from Ishaka and from the people of Busia. However, I personally think new loans should be reflected in terms of how much debt Uganda already has. As we stand today, Uganda is in close to US$ 6 billion in terms of foreign debt - more than the national budget - and we are still pushing for more. It seems that we are not worried of these debts because anyway, it is going to be the future to pay. I have been going through the report and the loan is going to be serviced in a period of 40 years, and people may not see it as a direct burden today. 

Having said that, I also want to add that such loans should not have a direct burden on Ugandans; I am very tactical when I say a “direct burden.” When I was reading the previously tabled report by the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy, Uganda charges the highest rates on power in East Africa -(Interjection)- in the world, somebody has corrected me. We are endowed with waterfalls, rivers and lakes, but this is what we are doing because of the loans we are approving each and every other day.

Madam Speaker, the US$ 56 billion in terms of foreign debt is the highest in Uganda’s history since Independence. So, much as we are excited, accountability must be a key issue – (Member timed out.)

5.11
MS SARAH MATEKE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work, but I have a few observations. The first one is on page 4 - component (1), sub-components (1) and (2). I am requesting clarification from the chairperson about that identification, preparation and implementation on why we have to use all those million dollars; and on sub-component (2) - improvement of the water resources. I want some clarification on resources, monitoring and information systems. That money is too much; I think it can extend water to other areas. 

I would also like to know from the ministry what criteria you use to select these areas to have water. We have areas in Kisoro which are bordering the national parks. These are national parks where tourists go and we earn foreign currency, and I wonder why you left out Mgahinga National Park. People around there fetch water 2 kilometres inside the national park. That is why you hear that the gorillas have run away and have gone to Rwanda. Why can’t you consider such places like Nteeko which borders Bwindi National Park; I wonder why you do not consider such places and provide them with water. 

I also want to know why ministries do not liaise with each other, especially when the rural electrification is being carried out. Why don’t you liaise as ministries if water is not in such places? I have heard hon. Musasizi talking about taking water to these hilly areas. If you do not have any other technology you can use, why don’t you liaise with these people as they take electricity to these places such that we cater for these hilly areas as well?

Lastly, I want to inquire from the ministry as you make these plans for water, I don’t know whether you have also put in place plans for the sewerage treatment plants. We have a sewerage treatment plant in Kisoro, which was built in the middle of homesteads. This is a place with schools and homes. So, I want to inquire from the minister whether you have plans to either transfer that treatment plant or compensate the people who are staying there. Thank you. 

5.14
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me, first of all, to thank you and your Deputy, and colleagues, Members of Parliament, for the spiritual, moral and financial support that was given to me at a time when I was taken ill, as a result of the accident which I suffered last year in August.

I would also like to thank the committee for this report and particularly urge the Minister of Finance to ensure that these monies are released timely because there is always a challenge whereby we approve loans and the time it takes to release this money from the Ministry of Finance to the implementing agencies. 

Madam Speaker, my colleagues have talked about the utilisation of funds. This is a critical area that we need to focus on, not only as Government, but also as Members of Parliament because we release funds for implementation of programmes and activities in our constituencies and in our counties and at the end of the day, there is nothing on the ground. 

I am very excited that my municipality - Rukungiri has been considered. This is a municipality which also serves the people I represent in Rubabo County, Rukungiri District. I also urge the Ministry of Water and Environment to look at the rural areas where water services are really lacking. Thank you. 

5.16
STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in supporting this loan and also to thank the committee for the report. I would like to raise two issues. 

I come from Kajara County in Ntungamo District. Ntungamo is one of the biggest districts in the country now; we have three town councils, a municipality, a number of town boards and townships. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising the issue of equity; we are about one million people in the district. I would like to ask the minister whether it is equitable to pick out Ntungamo in the whole district, and leave out the three town councils of Kitwe, Rwashamere and Rubaare, a number of town boards and townships in the district. 

Another point I would like to raise concerns the matter raised by hon. Mugume and hon. Turyahikayo; the question of the water which is going to be taken from Rukungiri from a boundary river of Kahenje. Kahenje is 20 kilometres from Rukungiri, and we support them to get the water. But at the same time, that river is three kilometres from the township of Nyamunuka. Nyamunuka has a number of schools, churches and mosques and a very big population. Would it be possible, honourable minister, that in the design and in giving water to Rukungiri, a diversion is also given to Nyamunuka, which is also a town board –(Interjection)- I am informed, that would serve those people and support a wider population? Thank you. 

5.18
MRS MARGARET MAKHOKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namayingo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion and to thank the committee for the work well done. Just like the other Members have mentioned, water is life, and in Namayingo District, we have many challenges regarding water. Those of you who watched NTV last week could have seen footage from Namayingo District where people were sharing water with animals in small water ponds. And yet in this document, Namayingo is not considered. We even have an island where water is polluted and contaminated. Our people are not safe, and I am still wondering what criteria the ministers used to come up with those areas which are supposed to benefit from such loans. 

I went to the Ministry of Water to find out what the water coverage in Namayingo District and discovered that it is only 24 percent. And yet some years back, a feasibility study was carried out, and the only option that Government had was to give us water through gravity flow on Siyabona Hill. The feasibility study was completed in 2009, it is shelved to date. I just wonder how Namayingo can be helped because we are doing badly, especially the people in the islands. 

The challenge is that even boreholes cannot successfully be drilled in some of my sub-counties. It is very hard for us to access clean water; and now we have continued mobilising ourselves to dig the water ponds and share with the animals. So, my people are suffering. I request the ministry in charge to consider the people of Namayingo –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising to inquire from the ministry, because when I read through the report, in the last two policy statements of 2011/2012 and 2010/2011, Nyauka and Kyegegwa town councils appeared, but when you look at this list, they are not there. I do not know whether there is another loan or maybe another source of funding that we are going to get to facilitate these two projects. This is because we went and told the people down there that the water is going to be worked on and everybody got excited. They waited, but nothing was done. So, now that it is no longer on the list of areas where the project is to be implemented, what can we tell our people?

Then the other thing is that when you hear about Bundibugyo having cholera - we have a big problem. The water design which was made in 1954, was purposely to serve the main hospital and this is the same design which has been extended to the town. Now, in town, there is no water at all; we have one tap here and another there; and the whole town cannot be fed by a simple design that was made then. So, when you look at the list in the Annex, there is nothing talking about whether the design is going to be re-made or it is going to be put in place. There is nothing at all. At least every district has been mentioned apart from Bundibugyo District. What did we do to this country? In fact we need the Ministry to think about Bundibugyo District. We should extend the line – we have the mountainous people who cannot access gravity flow schemes because the water which is coming from up sometimes does not supply those on the higher ground. It goes directly to the lower areas – you know what “gravity flow” means. So, we have a challenge in mountainous areas and that is why you heard someone from Kabale talking about the same thing. We do not have water in those places and that is why you keep hearing about cholera; it is no longer an epidemic – it is endemic. So, what are you going to do to improve on the water situation in our district, especially in Bundibugyo? 

5.24
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I highly support the idea of financing the water management and development projects and we must go ahead to borrow that money. Moyo District faces an acute water problem. Our only source of water is from Metu sub-county hills and of late it has dried up, and even the town council itself does not have water; and children normally go to school late because their mothers have to wake up very early in the morning and they also leave their husbands in bed to go and look for water –(Laughter)- and this has resulted in diseases like cholera to affect us. 

And now, what is the way forward for this? Moyo Town Council is just about five kilometres away from the River Nile, and if Jinja can have a water reservoir from River Nile and Kampala can have a water reservoir from Gaba, why can’t the government also construct for us a water reservoir along River Nile, which is only 12 kilometres away from the town council, so that we can have constant and a steady flow of water for the town council. Thank you.

5.26
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with this motion and do entirely agree with it. However, I have a few comments. Number one, I do represent a constituency that is the most – I think it is, because I do not know any other - but to the best of my knowledge it is one of the most water stressed parts of this country. While the national average is 65 percent plus, the average in Isingiro County South is 11 percent. This is an area where you can’t drill a borehole; where you can’t have a value tank and even the available little water that goes through those hills is very salty, not even a tick can consume that water. Those of you who have been to Isingiro, especially Isingiro South can bear me witness. The only source of water in Isingiro is River Kagera.

In my constituency, I am almost towards the middle of my constituency, which is about ten miles - not ten kilometres - and that is the place where I grew up drawing water from, and where my mother still draws water from; ten miles away. What has happened? It has affected school enrolment and health. It is just a miserable situation, honourable colleagues and I would like to call upon the minister that whereas this loan is most welcome and perfectly and absolutely okay to those areas, I wish they could borrow a lot more to cover many other areas like Namayingo, Isingiro and especially Isingiro South. For those of you who have not been there, maybe we will have an opportunity to go there, but I honestly wish even much more money could be borrowed to cover this problem once and for all.

Lastly, there is also this issue of delayed disbursement and implementation. You have heard about the problem of Lake Victoria Management Programme. You read about it recently. Whereas other countries like Tanzania and Kenya, the sister states which are part and parcel of this project did complete their part, the Ugandan part has never been embarked on. Honestly, Mr Minister, can you explain this? Won’t this project face the same problems?

Lastly, these border areas need to be looked at from a different angle. If you want to avoid conflicts and diseases, you need to cover these border areas. You have heard recently of the growing conflict between Ugandans and Tanzanians caused mainly because during the dry seasons, we Ugandans tend to rush into Tanzania where their people have been catered for, to look for not only pasture but also water. 

I think we need to shape up as a country and as a government, so that we borrow much money to cover the entire country, and I wish you could start with Isingiro South. I want to thank you, and if ever it comes, I want to seek for your support. In fact, I will hand over the photograph I took recently. If anyone of you has ever seen a person drinking that kind of water, I challenge him, but I saw it during my recess -(Member timed out.)

5.30
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema):  Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. I also want to thank the Minister of Water, Minister of Finance and the committee for this project, and particularly for including Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality. But I wish to re-echo what the MP for Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality has just mentioned, that this project will not only go to Bushenyi-Ishaka, but will also consider Kabwohe, Kibingo and Bugonyi town councils, and it is expected to cost over US$ 20 million.

Therefore, it is perturbing that the ministers of Water and Finance only allocate US$ 2.32 million to this project, and then go further to allocate US$ 23 million to something like identification and preparation research; allocate US$ 6 million to monitoring and information systems; US$ 3 million to oversight and effective project management. Really, can’t you be ashamed? 

I want to appeal to you to get some more dollars from those other components we talked about and add them onto Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality rather than just giving US$ 2.3 million and then mentioning it in the list.

I also wish to say that the MP from Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality did mention US$ 2.6, but it is actually US$ 2.32 million.

The second point I wanted to mention is that in the long-run, the government should think of having its own factories to make pipes because it is involved in supplying water? It is just pipes and having a system, and then water flows by gravity. So, when you get this US$ 135 million and you say it is going to do only this, if we really had the capacity to make our own pipes and do away with these endless studies - you know, a lot of money goes into studies to design water systems, we would be able to provide water and really, now we should be talking about taking water to every village in Uganda. God has given us all these fresh water lakes, you only need to put pipes and provide water to every person, rather than having our women suffer carrying water over miles.

When we borrow money, also look at the tendering system that we use. You find that a lot of money goes into the tendering system whereas we could get cheaper ways of having water in our areas and giving everybody water. But honourable minister, think about giving Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality only US$ 2.3 million out of US$ 135 million for this project. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I have three questions for you. One, I want to know on behalf of the people of greater Bugiri, who is sabotaging the President of Uganda with regard to Siyabona Gravity Scheme. This was pledged seven years ago; it was put in the budget; then it disappeared. Up to today, the women of Bukhooli are using a cup to wash. So, we want to know who is sabotaging the President of Uganda.

Secondly, for the last 20 years, the people of Kamuli have been requesting Government to draw water from Mbulamuti on the River Nile, direct to Kamuli Town to increase the supply. We want to know why you have failed to answer that request in 20 years. It is only six miles from the River Nile to Kamuli.

Then minister, your predecessor promised a pump to Kasambira Town Water Project. She left and it is now three years. I want to know when they will get that pump for the water. Thank you very much. Now, let me ask the Chair to respond and then the minister.

MR MBAGADHI:  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In just a minute, I want to respond to one or two issues that were raised, but basically the issue that was raised by hon. Kafuda.

I wish to allay the fears of the honourable colleague on the issue he raised for clarification. His argument was that the loan was approved in June by the World Bank. I really want to concur with you that, that is the time when the World Bank gave a nod, but I want to inform you, honourable members, that the issue of lobbying for these loans, and actually the process of working on them is a tedious one. However, as the process moves on, we have in place what we call draft documents in form of agreements. The final agreement, which is signed between the Bank of Uganda and the ministry, is done after approval of Parliament.

However, hon. Kafuda, was specifically concerned with the issue of price fluctuations because he said that during that time, the dollar was at Ushs 2300, and right now we are talking of a dollar going for Ushs 2700. I want to allay your fears on that because as I said, this process is a little tedious. As the process is carried out, a lot is taken into account, and I want to refer you to page 7 of the report, where we have the allocation of resources by component.

On that page, we have the total basic cost which stands at US$ 122.6 million, but at the same time we have the physical contingencies of US$ 8.3 million, then again we have the price contingencies of US$ 4.1 million. The total project cost in that case comes to US$ 135 million, which is the total financing required.  So, I really wanted to assure you honourable colleague that at least the price fluctuations are taken into account. 

MR OKUPA:  Thank you, Chairman. When I look at your Annex I, I see a centre in Kasilo called Kadungulu, because at first I was deceived, and I thought that was part of what was going to be covered under this project. But I think it is not. However, you have stated against it, “New scheme.” What should I understand by “New scheme?” Is there a new scheme coming on board or what? 

The other one is that I have seen a centre where there is St Elizabeth Girls Secondary School under JICCA and you are saying the work is ongoing, but there is no work going on under that project. We passed that loan a long time ago; can you tell me what is happening because there is nothing?  

MS TAAKA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, if the dollar rate was at Shs 2,300 and it is now Shs 2,700, we are bound to get more shillings, which is good for us. 

MR MBAGADHI:  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Regarding the issue raised by hon. Okupa about the “New scheme.” What I know is that the Ministry of Water and Environment has got several interventions, especially in the water sector. Take, for instance, the Water and Sanitation Development Facilities and not only that project, but a good number of projects have been mentioned in this very report that are meant to serve several towns. So, honourable colleague, when we talk -(Interruption)

MR KASULE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving way. I am one of those who went around looking at these new towns with the Committee on Finance. 

“New scheme” means there is nothing on the ground in as far as piped water is concerned. So, it is an initial provision to give you piped water. So, there is no problem on the ground. I have one programme for Wakiso and there is completely no piped water in the area. They are going to start afresh; dig the wells, put pumps, and put the pipes; but there are also other programmes. I don’t know whether this loan is going to be incremental such that if there is an existing water project like in Bushenyi; but this one is going to supplement and add on the capacity. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us conclude. Don’t open the debate.  

MR MBAGADHI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague for the information that he has given and I think hon. Okupa is satisfied with that information. However, I want to assure you that on the issue of the new scheme, like he has said, there is totally no pipeline in place, but we have several other programmes or projects that are supposed to be running concurrently. The good thing is that the minister is going to explain further.  

Lastly, the Member from Kisoro raised an issue concerning the allocation of resources between components and she specifically mentioned the US$ 2.8 million, which has been earmarked for strengthening and project implementation.  But I think this is a little technical and I will request that the minister comes in to shed light on it.
 
DR LULUME BAYIGA:  Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  On which rule are you proceeding? Let the Minister of Finance proceed. 

DR LULUME BAYIGA:  Madam Speaker, this is a report to Parliament and the committee did its work on behalf of Parliament. So, it is on the basis of this report that we want to respond before the minister comes in. 

THE SPEAKER:  The minister is the owner of the loan request, let him speak first and if there is something still missing, we shall come back to it. 

5.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I would like to thank the committee and all of you for supporting this loan request, but also for raising pertinent issues because we know that water is life.

I want to re-echo the government’s commitment to provide water for all, according to the Constitution, but particularly according to the NRM Manifesto. I want to assure Members that all efforts are being made to ensure that funding for water projects is availed through our domestic revenues, if we cannot achieve that through grants and loans such as this one. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to implore Members, as a watchdog to this country, to ensure that value-for-money, for funds obtained either through our revenues or through loans is achieved.  

I want also to restate that our ministry continues to budget for funds every financial year, but to the dismay of all Ugandans, some of this money is abused, especially in local governments . If you do an audit, some boreholes appear by way of signposts and may not be on the ground. And that is why I am asking the MPs to really act as watchdogs and ensure funds reach the ground, especially for provision of water.

We have raised a concern over component No.3, where Ministry of Water and Environment as an implementing ministry should be empowered to do supervision, where these institutions such as the Department of Water, National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Department of Water Resource Management and Department of Environment, carry out certain functions, first of all the role of monitoring these loans and the performance, the evaluation, procurement of vehicles and equipment, plus procurement of training for the lower areas through the project support teams. So, it is very important that this money is budgeted for towards that activity because the money we provide under the normal budget may not be sufficient to monitor the performance of this budget. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to –(Hon. Bayiga rose)- let me finalise. I want to pledge that Government, particularly our ministry will continue to enhance budget allocations for water provision so that the people of Uganda can enjoy this facility of water since it is life. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. 

THE SPEAKER:  Just one clarification from hon. Bayiga to the minister. 

DR LULUME BAYIGA:  Madam Speaker, the minister wanted to escape this one. But thank you very much for the opportunity. 

When the money under normal budgetary processes is insufficient due to unforeseen circumstances, the ministry would seek a supplementary budget. This is my bone of contention:  That loan money should not be used for institutional capacity building and monitoring processes, in which case, even Members of Parliament should be factored in because this is our docket to monitor the implementation of processes. I find the Minister’s explanation very unsatisfactory in respect of this. (Applause) I have a suggestion that, that money be cut and pasted onto something that will provide more water to more towns -(Interjections)- for instance, in Namayingo, Buvuma, Kiyindi or Ntenjeru. 

Madam Speaker, we are also querying the US 23.1 million under component No.1:  Identification, preparation, implementation and so forth. Component (1) is taking a lot of money; US 23.1 million. I believe that this money can also be put to better use because we know that the Ministry of Water has got plans on how to provide for water, how to identify - I mean all this has been done already. Now, when you say US$ 23.1 million of the loan is to be used in processes that may have been already implemented to attract the loan in the first place, this would be misplacement of this loan money. And I would like this Parliament to subject this loan to further scrutiny and re-allocate this money to better use. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Minister, I do not know whether you are not aware that on many occasions this House has objected to this kind of provision - monitoring, planning - which are really functions of the ministry. They keep running in all the loans that are coming here. And they are big. They are even bigger than the actual component of the activity. 

MR KAJARA:  Madam Speaker, first of all, for Government to provide supplementary funding, it means that that money will be available, but you are aware that most of the times this money for supplementary budgets has not been forthcoming. That is why when they plan for a project, it is to enable it tobe implemented. 

There is this document on project appraisal on the proposed credit. On page 8, it talks about component (3): Strengthening institutions for effective project implementation, US$2.8 million including contingencies. It is said that the three sub-components will enable the ministry provide oversight of the project through its water sector liaison division. They also support ministry directorates of DWRD, that is Directorate of Water Resource Management; the Directorate of Environmental Affairs; and National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is self-financed to manage the day-to-day implementation of the project, including procurement of computers and vehicles, operations and maintenance, monitoring and evaluation, facilitation of project provision and review missions. 

These sub-components will also support capacity building activities for key stakeholders, including water and sanitation development facilities, catchment management organisations and district officials, in key areas such as training, procurement and implementation, and environmental and social management framework and resettlement policy framework. Support for implementation of relevant aspects of water sector governance action plans developed will also be done. 

If this is not done, honourable members, and I have just said that most times the budget that we formally allocate to these ministries may not include the necessary funds to run a particular credit, and if we do not budget for this kind of money, the project is likely to fail. That is why in a project such as this one, we plan for it to be facilitated in total.

As for component No.1, hon. Kamuntu will answer because as a ministry we receive requisitions from ministries, and they tell us how they are going to implement the plan; how they are going to allot the money they request. So, hon. Kamuntu will explain component No.1. I thank you Madam Speaker.                       

5.52
THE MINISTER FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much, and also to thank the committee and Members for the support of this loan. I do not know how I can share with you the challenge of water because it ties up with the mindset of most of our people. 

Uganda has abundant water resources. No doubt about that. Almost one fifth of the entire surface area of the country is covered with water -(Interjections)- yes. And we receive abundant rainfall; almost on the average, 1200 millimetres of rain. We receive it.

Now, the irony is that despite this water, nearly 35 percent of Ugandans, translated in absolute numbers, is about 11 million Ugandans, walk more than one kilometre to get to a source of water. This is really terrible. Can you imagine you have rain all over the place, and when it rains, after it has stopped, people go chasing it when it has been raining right on the doorsteps? If I was to share with you, Madam Speaker, because this is a very serious matter, I have a photograph here; I would have come with one. If you can see children particularly, and women, it would indicate to you, Madam Speaker, that this water challenge that we are facing is really a challenge of changing the attitude particularly of men. Men do not fetch water and consequently they do not mind about it. That is why - (Interjections)- no, I am serious because everybody -(Interjections)- no, look at this. 

THE SPEAKER:  Order, Members!

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Look at this. Why I am saying so is because I listened to Members. Some of them are complaining, that mountainous areas which do not have rivers, have no water. But surely, it rains even on the mountains -(Interjections)- yes! It rains even on the mountains. It does not rain in valleys only. Consequently, if you were harvesting rain on the roof of a house corrugated with iron sheets, the amount of rain that runs off, once harvested, you would reach more than 35 percent of Ugandans. But anyway the point is - 

THE SPEAKER:  Order, Members!

PROF. KAMUNTU:  We have a paradox in this country - I want to context it - that you have so much water and yet so many people have to walk so many miles to get it when it has been on the doorsteps. Consequently, we in the ministry, and that is why I really thank you for your support on the debate today. Why I thank you is that we are realising that this loan is simply a component of a huge picture we must address as a people. We must provide safe and clean water within easy reach of every Ugandan, and we must provide functionality maintenance. Surely, we must provide water, both in urban and rural areas, and we must supply water for production and other multipurpose uses. 

We have water; so, what is the problem? We must coordinate. This is the whole point. The problem is, we must coordinate an integrated, sustainable water management system, which will look at the entire resource combining the rivers, gravity water, rain harvesting, shallow wells and a whole range of pumping and others using gravity. 

We must empower communities. Madam Speaker, you know you asked me a question. You know I am shy, I cannot answer you directly because –(Laughter)- there is a dilemma. Shy, meaning -(Interjections)- I have – no, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER:  Order! Members.

PROF. KAMUNTU:  While I was saying – look – Madam Speaker, you asked three direct questions which – of course the Speaker once you ask – I should be positive. To be negative is dangerous. So, the best I can do, Madam Speaker, if you so wish, I will answer this question bilaterally. I will come to your office and answer this question -(Laughter)- because – on the rest of these issues – on the specific questions that have been raised, particularly on this question -[DR BAYIGGA:  “Order.”]– Under what rule? You be gentle. Don’t you have modesty in your language? 

DR BAYIGGA:  Madam Speaker, may the minister resume his seat. There is a point of order. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, you asked this question, but it is for the benefit of this country and this Parliament. For the first time, we are seeing a minister pretending to be shy -(Laughter)- to answer a question. Can this kind of precedent be accepted in this Parliament? Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the questions I asked are for a very big population of this country. They have been waiting for answers and they want to hear answers. Honourable minister, you may come to my office for other things, but I want you to answer the questions I asked. (Applause)

PROF. KAMUNTU:  No, Madam Speaker, you know there is modesty sometimes expected of a Member of Parliament, when you are answering a Speaker. Why? Because we have a dilemna institutionally. You have a Speaker who is a Speaker of the whole House, but she is also a Member of Parliament and consequently, she has constituency matters. But to save a situation of tempting the Speaker to participate in a debate on the Floor of the House; it is modesty, it is courtesy, it is civilisation, and it is expected that you become too shy to answer her questions. You answer the questions of the Speaker in a forum which is appropriate with her status in this office. But I will. So, let me just –

THE SPEAKER:  If you do not want to answer about Kasambira, which I represent, and Kamuli Town Council, which I represent; I want to hear about Bukhooli - Siyabona Gravity Scheme. 

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Thank you very much. Yes, I will answer that. At least that is a modification, which I can take on; but allow me to answer some specific issues raised.

One, was hon. James Mbahimba from Kasese. He was the first Member to contribute to the motion. He raised an issue about water in urban areas, particularly in Kasese, indicating that while Government seems to favour the rural poor, there are also the urban poor who do not have access to water. He also raised the issue of functionality of boreholes in these places.

My answer almost touches this question of functionality of boreholes; this question of some areas in this country not having access to water. This question also addresses hon. Alex Byarugaba of Isingiro. It is a general question, which I can answer as follows.

One, this loan is incremental. Incremental, meaning it is an addition to other loans in the ministry, and also other loans being negotiated. So, my plea to Members is that areas which are not covered here will be addressed because the commitment of the ministry and Government is to increase access to safe water 100 percent for all Ugandans. Consequently, if we have not done it, which is true, because the coverage is 65 percent; there is 35 percent which is remaining, and it is those 35 percent who are suffering. You have not been reached, but you will be reached. That is the general answer.

Then on the Bushenyi-Ishaka project; yes, projects are appraised as you can see. In the appraisal – when they appraise these projects, there are budgetary constraints. So, you appraise the project based on the funds available and based on those funds available, there are components you could cover under the loan. 

In the appraisal of these projects, the amount of money allocated to Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality was $2.6 million. This million will enable the project to start, but I can again assure the Members that the ministry is already discussing additional support to ensure that this project covers all the areas you have pointed out. The answer to this, therefore, is if you are a Muganda, you will say, “Akanyama akatono okayana kali munkwawa.” You first take this and we add-(Interjections)-. Yes, “Akanyama akatono okayana kali munkwawa.” Meaning – the little – you first take this – by translation, it is –(Interruption)

MR KATWIREMU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I have no objection to projects being phased. May I, therefore, know from you, honourable minister, whether this is phase one and, therefore, how many phases, and what is the eventual budget for the project?

PROF. KAMUNTU:  I hear Members whispering that we are rivals. That rivalry ended in 2011, and you do not need to raise it at this material time. So, Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality Water and Sanitation Sub-project is expected. It is a sub-project; it is not even a whole project. It will source the water from Kitagata and will provide for upgrading of the current water treatment plants and upgrading expansion of water supply. 

As you realise, in this component, the issue of extending water to Bugongi, to Kibingo, to Kabwohe and to Rwentuha was not there. This was simply expanding the treatment plants in Bushenyi and upgrading the expansion of water supply coming from Kitagata, and the construction of sewer systems which serve as a minimum to the central area of Ishaka-Bushenyi Town. So, this amount of money which I am provided with under this arch was for this component; but because of the recognised need in the areas of Bugongi, Kibingo and Kabwohe, this project is envisaged for expansion during the next phase. –And, negotiations have already started for the next phase. So, I can say, within the next financial year, the next phase will start. But this financial year, this one will start. That is very clear and precise. 


Now, the other issues which were used about the criteria for site selection; the plan for sewage treatment plants – the criteria for selection is based on appraisal. You appraise a project by visiting all sorts of areas and on the basis of the visits and statistics, and the data, you select the areas that you are going to have. But we bear in mind areas which are covered – there are many areas which are covered, and those which are not covered are incrementally added. 

Madam Speaker, coming specifically to your question, I want to beg that you allow me to come back on this issue with a detailed response so that it is firmly disposed of and the matter is settled. I also want to beg you to believe me that what I promise, I will do. Thank you Madam Speaker. (Interjections) 

Regarding issue No.1, let me explain the components of the project. The Minister of Finance explained some of the issues and left component No.1 where he wanted me to give full information. Component No.1 is investing in integrated water resource development and management. This is a huge thing, because the country has been zoned. You have Albert Nile, which takes Lakes Albert and Edward; then you have Kyoga which takes Sironko, Lake Kyoga and those rivers; then we have Victoria which takes rivers Rwizi and  Kagera, the Upper Nile, Aswa and Albert Nile. 

I want Members to appreciate that we have a whole country. If you look at the map of Uganda, we have these huge reservoirs of water which are in different parts of the country. In order to decentralise the management of water and the congestion, you would divide Uganda into catchments based on a sub-sector reform study which has been done. 

Now, to do this, it would require a lot of money. If you are going to have these zones managed so that this water is efficiently resource-managed with the location, and looking at what we call water catchment hot-spots, which are very critical, and yet we are starting from zero; we have not been there before. This is a new approach of managing water resources based on the catchments or reservoirs. So, it is a lot of money required because it will take several important steps for implementation. It is decentralised, and intended to decongest the problems we have had at the headquarters. It is an integrated approach and there is a whole array of designs, drawings and locations covering the whole country. That is component No.1, which takes US$ 33.7 million and it adds a contingency in implementing the project –(Dr Bayiga Lulume rose)– I am wondering, why you are agitated; you look so agitated. 

THE SPEAKER:  Are they not available to the committee; didn’t you receive the appraisal report? Okay, minister, can you donate that one?

DR LULUME:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. But it is not me alone who is agitated about this.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister do you have the capacity to submit 400 copies for the Members?

PROF. KAMUNTU:  Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the appraisal report and pledge to provide copies of the appraisal report. And in conclusion, I beg that the loan as tabled be approved so that we can implement and increase accessibility of water to all Ugandans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the request by Government to borrow SDR 87.1 million from the Internal Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing water management and development project. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE PETITION BY WAKISO AND MUKONO DISTRICTS ON THE OPERATION OF PIONEER EASY BUS (PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT)

6.13
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi):  Madam Speaker and honourable members, first, on behalf of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, I wish also to warmly welcome  back our colleague and sister, hon. Paula. 

I also wish to point out that this report was presented in December just before we broke off for the recess. I presented this report on behalf of the committee. So, I thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me the opportunity today to give a snapshot of the prayers of the petitioners and the recommendations of the committee. I will be very brief.

Madam Speaker, the subject matter of this petition, which was presented by hon. Betty Namboze on behalf of the local leaders of Mukono and Wakiso is that these local leaders were not satisfied with the operations of the Pioneer City Bus Services, especially because the entire contract and management of this service did not include them and was going to benefit Kampala Capital City Authority. 

Therefore, on page 3, the petitioners requested Parliament to: 

    1. Review the Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services Regulation, 2011). This was the legal framework for the operation of that bus service; 

    2. To probe the validity and legality of the concession agreement between Kampala Capital City Authority and Pioneer Easy Bus Company Ltd;

    3. To inquire into the mandate of Kampala Capital City Authority to make an inter-district agreement for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. The Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area covers Kampala City, Mukono District, Wakiso and Mpigi; and 

    4. To examine the procurement of transport services and operations by KCCA in this metropolitan area. 

We sat as a committee and we went through this and on page 13, our first recommendation is that indeed the regulation – The Traffic and Road Safety (City Bus Services) Regulations, 2011 had certain gaps and inconsistencies, and we do recommend that it be reviewed and amended, and that the stakeholders, particularly the local government leaders affected by the regulation, should be involved in the review. 

Secondly, regarding the authority of Kampala City to do physical planning within the metropolitan area, it is the recommendation of the committee that the Minister for Kampala should appoint the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority so that it handles the issues of planning and infrastructure development in the metropolitan area. This is provided for in the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, sections 21 and 22. We propose that this should be done within two months.

Regarding the validity of the contract between KCCA and Pioneer Easy Bus on page 15. The committee recommends that at the moment, the arrangement that is in place – which is an Executive Order given by the Minister for Transport – in that Executive Order, the Government was faced by an impending strike by the taxi operators and they gave an order to the bus company to release the buses to KCCA. It is the recommendation of the committee that this Executive Order should immediately be lifted and at that time, we had given one month. I believe it is still applicable. 

The entire contract should be re-negotiated and a new agreement should be entered into involving the Government, KCCA, Wakiso District, Mukono Municipal Council and the bus company.    

Regarding the mandate of KCCA to enter into inter-district agreements involving the districts of Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi, it is the view of the committee that the district local governments and urban councils are autonomous in planning and management of their services in areas under their jurisdiction.  Therefore, I recommend that KCCA should desist from acting outside the law and respect the role of relevant local authorities and other stakeholders.

Regarding the payment of taxes and fees; as I pointed out, this was at the heart of the petition with Wakiso pointing out that by October 2013, they had lost up to Shs 300 million, which they would have got from the operation of taxis if these buses were not plying into their areas. 

The committee recommends that taxes, fees and other statutory obligations of the bus company to KCCA and neighbouring local governments, should clearly be agreed upon in the contract, and the respective local governments of Wakiso, Mukono and I believe Mpigi, should be consulted in this negotiation process. 

On page 17, the nature of this contract was a Public-Private-Partnership arrangement and Government had pledged to perform certain terms under the contract. We recommend that they should abide by the terms of the concession and meet their obligations. One such obligation was that Government would provide a bank guarantee to the bus company, but they did not do that and the bus company had to go into borrowing and its own reserves.

The local governments of Wakiso and Mukono had complained that KCCA had refused to avail the contract of Pioneer Easy Bus Company to them and to the public, and this raised a lot of concern and suspicions. It is the recommendation of the committee that KCCA should provide a mechanism for the public to access all information on the public services it renders to the community.   

Regarding the bus fares, we recommend that they should not be fixed arbitrarily and that there should be a clear technical study and breakdown of the costs and benefits so as to avoid overcharging or undercharging by the bus operators.

There is now a situation of lack of clarity on the ownership of the assets, particularly the buses, because the minister in the letter appended here did commit Government that the buses would be under the responsibility of Government. The committee recommends that there should be a clear agreement on asset ownership and management between KCCA and Government, and the bus company. 

Under Section 6, we provided other relevant recommendations to improve city public transport and just to sum it up, it is the view of the committee - and I am glad that the Minister for Kampala is here – that KCCA, if you look at (e), with the support of the Government should expedite the evaluation of the current public transport services and review the entire city transport master plan so that we comprehensively deal with the issues of public transport in this city so that we get a modern public transport for the metropolitan area to cover issues of pollution from the exhaust fumes, street lighting, parking, location of fuel stations, road junctions, subways, terminals, trams, railway services, boda bodas and so forth. 

It is our view as a committee that it is now time for the Minister for Kampala to prevail over KCCA so that they provide Parliament and Government a comprehensive plan to improve the city transport service.   

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to submit once again that this Parliament does receive and approve this report. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER:  I thank you very much, chairperson. This is a small committee and I confirm that at least one third of the Members have signed the report. It was presented in full in December, and this was just a summary. Yes, hon. Nambooze, three minutes.     

MS NAMBOOZE:  I thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of this committee, but I am seeking for your guidance.

On the 11 December 2012, at around noon, I received a text message from our Clerk to the effect that the draft report shall be ready in the afternoon, and that I could pass by to look at it and raise objections if any. 

Madam Speaker, I had notified the chairperson about my intentions to come up with a minority report when the committee failed to investigate the issue of the ownership of Pioneer Easy buses – an allegation that had been raised in the petition concerning corruption.

Our rules, specifically, rule 194(3) provides that a person who seeks to make a minority report shall be assisted, and it is even stated that such assistance may come from the Office of the Clerk. Madam Speaker, there is a tendency these days that when drafts are made, the reports are quickly sent to the printer as we are entering the Chamber, and we receive the reports here, which means that a person who may wish to come up with a minority report has no opportunity to access the main report so that he or she can be able to write the minority. 

The report as presented here this afternoon – I do agree with most of the recommendations therein, but I totally disagree with some items which I think never surfaced – 

THE SPEAKER:  Point of Order. 

MR MAGYEZI:  Our Rules of Procedure are very clear and the honourable Member of Mukono Municipality is a senior member in this Parliament. She knows the manner in which a minority report is raised. The honourable member was not present at the time of signing the report, although the report was duly signed by the members. She is a member of the committee and, therefore, bound not to engage in debate on the same report on the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order, to now engage in a rebuttal of a report of her own committee without a substantive minority report? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when a Member feels strongly that he or she should have a minority report, you actually, even inform the Speaker that we are sitting, but you will be coming with a minority report. You also inform the chairperson of the committee. I have not received your letter relating to a minority report. 

6.28
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for their recommendations and conclusion. I also want to thank my sister Betty, the petitioners, because their petition has informed us and it has brought a lot of issues which need to be addressed. 

As Mukono District, we want to join the rest of the Members to thank Pioneer Easy Bus Company for the services so far rendered to our district. We know that the petitioners were concerned about revenue collection and the “Matatu” – UTODA business, which was ongoing. There was speculation that maybe Betty was interested in protecting UTODA and that is why they were fighting Pioneer Easy Bus –(Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE:  Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of order. Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa Peter, the honourable representing Mukono South has made a very serious accusation against me; that I brought this petition because I wanted to protect UTODA, and yet the reasons for this petition, most of which have been upheld even in the recommendations, show that the petitioners had reasons, and the subject matter is properly captured as being the statutory instrument which was written by KCCA without the input of the petitioners, as an agreement affecting Mukono. 

Madam Speaker, is hon. Bakaluba Mukasa in order to come here and mislead this House and accuse me of having an interest in a petition which I brought here, and which is qualified under our Rules of Procedure. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  I think the words he used were that he had heard. I don’t think he said that he was confirming. Proceed. 

REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA:  Thank you very much for your ruling, Madam Speaker. Actually, I just heard; it was an allegation and I am saying this in good faith to protect my sister hon. Betty, and that is why I thank you very much for the petition you raised in this order.

We, in Mukono District, as I said, welcome this development of the Pioneer Easy Bus Services, and we even want them to extend to other sub-counties in the district. Right now, they are in Mukono Municipality and Nama. I want them in Mukono South Constituency because they have extended to us a good service that has helped our poor people who cannot afford taxi fares. 

We in Mukono District also agree that we need some revenue from these Pioneer Easy Bus Services and any other bus service that will be coming in. Right now, Nama sub-county will need revenue, Mukono Municiaplity, Goma sub-county and other sub-counties. It is a good development.

We are also concerned about the fluctuating fares of the buses. It should be limited to either Shs 500 or Shs 1,000 but it keeps on changing. We want that to be corrected. 

Our history in Mukono District is very clear. We have had such services before, which used to spread in many sub-counties in Mukono District. We should, therefore, promote people with such businesses who would like to come and extend such services to our people. And that is why we are supporting and welcoming this development –(Member timed out.) 

6.32
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Though we appreciate the services of Pioneer Easy Bus, I also want to appreciate the petitioners for two reasons. 

I once worked in the Local Government. Local governments are independent in the sense that they collect their own revenue. If KCCA gets revenue from those buses and these local governments are not getting any revenue, that is not good. And if they were not consulted, then that is also very bad because these buses use roads which are in the respective local governments. 

For instance, if there is a problem in those local governments, maybe an accident occurs, the very people in those buses will get health services from health centres in those very districts. So, it was very wrong for KCCA not to consult the different local governments. 

Secondly, in the grading of districts, they consider revenue collection so much. If a district is grade 1 or grade 2, even the budget that the Central Government gives that district differs. That is why the amount of money allocated to my district is different from that allocated to Mukono District, and is also different from the money that goes to other districts. So, if this revenue comes to Kampala only or KCCA only that means those other districts are disadvantaged. 

Another point I want to put across is that since these local governments are not consulted, I see so many problems occurring. We are all Ugandans - our people also need to get jobs. They need employment. I don’t think, according to what I have read here, that these local governments, since they were not consulted, were given a chance for a certain percentage of their people to get employment with KCCA. Maybe even the people who got jobs in those buses are from within KCCA. And this is very unfair. That is why we are suffering from the problem of rural-urban migration. Most people are moving to towns because everything is concentrated in the city. Every good thing is here. Why don’t we balance so that even other areas get what they are supposed to get in terms of health services, education other than concentrating everything here? 

Madam Speaker, I want to also put this forward. We need regional balancing. I have seen in so many instances that most loans we pass here, be it education or health, are for Kampala. (Member timed out.)

6.35
MR JAMES KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to begin my contribution by seeking clarification. I see that KCCA had given to Pioneer Easy Bus a contract or tender to operate within the eastern and western zones of Kampala City. The division of the city into zones was meant to give an opportunity to more than one operator to bid for the different zones. I think the idea behind the zoning was to ensure that we don’t just get one monopoly operator for Kampala, but if possible, get four operators with each one operating in a different zone. 

However the current situation is that we have a single operator who was given a contract to operate in the eastern and western zones. My question to the Minister for Kampala is:  When are we going to have the contract awarded to a person to operate in the northern and southern zones of Kampala? 

On the issue of revenues, the report says that because the contract was not very well executed, even Pioneer Easy Bus itself is facing problems in collecting enough revenues given the stiff competition they are facing from the other - matatu operators. In this particular case, I think the committee’s recommendations are correct. The agreement needs to be reviewed. There is also need to involve operators from the surrounding districts where the buses are expected to be operating from when these agreements are being reviewed.(Interruption)

MR CHEBROT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is that I recall that at one time, I convened a meeting between Pioneer Easy Bus Services and KCCA. The original services of Pioneer Easy Bus Services were within the greater Kampala Metropolitan area, which didn’t include Mukono and Wakiso districts. However, later on, there were negotiations with the local authorities of Mukono and Wakiso, them being corporate bodies. They negotiated with management of Pioneer Easy Bus Services. If they haven’t informed you, I talked to the clerk of Mukono and the chairman, who expressed interest in having Pioneer Easy Bus Services extended to Mukono. If Pioneer Easy Bus Services is not paying, they should pay. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KABAJO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for giving that information. But you realise that that information does not differ from what I was saying. It seems that because of the way agreements have been executed, even Pioneer Easy Bus Services is having problems in collecting enough revenue, and is, therefore, facing challenges in meeting its obligations of paying taxes to the respective authorities including KCCA, Mukono and all the others. 

So, I think it is important that these agreements be reviewed so that measures are put in place to help this company collect enough revenue at a competitive rate while offering a good service to the people and also be able to pay taxes to the local authorities.

The other proposal I would like to make is that in other countries, there is a franchise system where the local authority agrees on the standards for the bus and the individual operators can purchase buses that correspond to those required standards. They can even be painted using a particular colour such that when you look at the bus, you wouldn’t tell whether it belongs to Wafula Ogutu and Company –(Member timed out.)

6.41
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye East, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank hon. Betty Nambooze for coming up with this petition. It has helped to highlight some of the issues affecting the operations of business in Kampala. I would also like to thank the committee for doing a good job.

From my understanding, the statutory instrument was put in place in order to operationalise the contract. The contract, therefore, came before the statutory instrument was made, and I think this is where the problem arose from. The statutory instrument sought to operationalise the contract, and that is why we are seeing what is not achievable appearing in the statutory instrument; because it appears in the contract.

As my colleague has said, it is not only Mukono District that is losing revenue. Pioneer Easy Bus has never put a single coin into the coffers of KCCA. This is because, according to the contract, KCCA has failed to implement its side of the bargain, which is, making provisions for bus stops and lanes, and this is very problematic, but it had to be included in the statutory instrument because it had appeared in the agreement. That is one of the issues to be rectified while reviewing the contract.

The second issue is about access to information. Maybe, since we now have a new minister for Kampala, as Members of Parliament from Kampala, we will now access information about the city. Otherwise, that is a big problem to the extent that what happens within KCCA looks like personal business. Accessing information from KCCA even by a Member of Parliament is very difficult. 

In that regard, I would like to request the new Minister for Kampala to make information in KCCA accessible to everybody. If information was accessible, hon. Betty Nambooze could not have brought this petition. That is a big problem that we need to solve.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there is also the issue of reviewing the instrument. If this instrument is not reviewed, we shall –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MR VINCENT KYAMADIDI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I would also like to thank the hon. Betty Nambooze, for raising these pertinent issues. At the end of the last Session, we were about to debate this report. But because the hon. Betty Nambooze and others were not around, it was deferred. 

We need to understand the background under which Pioneer Easy Bus Services came into place. We are told by the report that on 12 March 2012, there was an executive order from the President that Pioneer Easy Bus should start operations to avert a strike that was pending. And you can imagine what could have happened in the city. Maybe this is the question I should pose to the minister:  Don’t you think we should shift the Capital City of Uganda from Kampala to some other place? Because there is a tendency for some people to think that the city belongs to them. 

When there is, for example, a traffic jam, everybody is affected. Many of you have failed to meet appointments because of the traffic jam. So, it is common knowledge that we need to decongest the city. For Heaven’s sake we need to do that!. But how do we do this when we politicise everything? The other day, I was reading some of your reports where you kept talking about your membership in the local governments and public service committees – and it is all about the ego! This one wants to do this and that; and the other person wants to achieve this and that; while the majority of us are suffering. 

You will realise that it is only in Kampala where most of the Members of Parliament reside –(Interjections)- yes, I know that some of you reside in Mukono, but you are residing in Kampala; I will tell you that it is Kampala that is most highly represented here –(Interjections)- okay, how many Members of Parliament from Rwampara are here? (Laughter) That is why I am saying we need to treat Kampala as a city that belongs to all of us.

Okay, let me talk about these Pioneer Easy buses. There were obligations that were supposed to be met by the Government of Uganda and KCCA. Did you meet those obligations? I don’t know why we are not even helping our local business people. Assuming it were you who lost that revenue, what would you be doing now? You were brought in by an executive order and they are supposed to give you a guarantee, but they are not doing that; they are supposed to give you rent; and you are supposed to get an outright entry into the city, but that is not there. 

Today, I was coming from Nansana; Pioneer Easy Bus could not even have the right of way because of the traffic jam. So, we should at all these aspects. I want to beg honourable members that if we want to attract investments, we must know our responsibilities and we must know our roles. 

But I also want to implore Pioneer Easy Bus that in the event that this agreement is signed, they must also make good of what is due from them. They must provide better services. I am told they now close before 8.00 p.m. (Member timed out.)

6.47
MR ROBERT KASULE SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this was the best deal ever for Kampala. Many people in Kampala - my grandparents - were happy that at last they had got a bus because commuter taxis are very difficult for the aged and the disabled. So, this was a very good deal only that it could not be implemented. 

My take on this is that now that we have got this information - I thank the petitioners - we should process it to the extent that the next person to have a contract with KCCA should be careful because I think this was a contract written in heaven. We have small roads, they have potholes, there are too many vehicles in Kampala and the buses cannot simply work in Kampala. KCCA cannot at the moment implement this contract. 

There was the status quo of the UTODA. They did not give alternatives to where the taxis would be and there were so many fights and so much fear among the commuter taxi operators that they were going to be displaced. Now that we have a new Minister for the Presidency and in charge of KCCA, we should sit down and look at Kampala, and then contract; not just to try to fit the new contract into Kampala because it cannot work. We want it to work. 

Let us make the roads, work on the lanes before we contract; we cannot start with a contract and then implement a contract that cannot fit in Kampala. So, we want a Kampala that has a public transport system that can support everybody. 

Today, I rode on a Bodaboda to Wandegeya and I wanted to use Yusuf Lule Road, but I kept hiding in the back of the boda boda cyclist because of the dust –(Laughter)- because there is no public transport on that road and, I needed to come back to Parliament looking smart. But we need public transport that suits everybody. In developed countries, everybody goes into a commuter train or commuter bus. So, we need a properly implemented contract. We have just got this document but I wish we had been given more time to look at the document and the papers, and criticise after we have read all the details concerning this contract. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think you have had this report since December because the report was fully read in December. This is an additional one. We have been very generous.

6.50
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the petitioners for the petition, and the committee for the report. Public transport is a public good. Ordinarily, public transport used to be provided by Government, but today, we have the private sector getting involved, and I think this is a move in the right direction that should be given all the necessary support by Government. 

I, therefore, implore Government to live up to its commitment; that if they have any obligation under this arrangement, they should be seen to be fulfilling it, particularly the issue of guarantees. The investor staked his money and the government watched aside. You can imagine the risk they undertook and now they are left in this kind of situation. So, I am calling on the minister to take this matter up seriously to ensure that the necessary guarantees are provided and the required number of buses is actually in place.

Second, is the issue of physical planning for the entire metropolitan area. I want to move that the metropolitan area that now includes about four districts, is extended further to include Buikwe, Kayunga and a few more districts. I say this because the population is growing very fast, and we are already caught up in a situation where we have mushrooming developments. If you fly over this region, you will see mushrooms everywhere and it has now become very complicated to plan for this area. If we are to plan ahead, let us go into these districts that are not yet congested like Kayunga, because we really need to start planning for industries in Buikwe, Kayunga and in all the districts that are not yet so populated. And if we have to do that, we have to do it now and not tomorrow, because planning must precede development. 

We have been running into a situation where development moves ahead of planning and this is why we are in this quagmire. Minister of Physical Planning and Minister in charge of Kampala, I think it is high time that you amended this Act to extend the metropolitan area to include some of these districts. I mentioned Kayunga because that is where I familiar with but there are other districts like Buikwe and you can even go beyond the Nile –(Member timed out.)

6.53
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago):  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and hon. Betty Nambooze who petitioned. We are now debating very fundamental issues about transport in Kampala. After this report that we have gone through, I think they need to review the contract and in the process, the House should also recommend that we start zero tolerance to corruption, whereby if we receive key information which is not very clear, it should be looked into so that we get a clear report. If Pioneer Easy Bus did not come in the right way, we should put things right at this point. It is sometimes very difficult to differentiate between Mukono, Wakiso and other districts that neighbour Kampala, unless there is a signpost. This means whenever there is any development that will take place between the two towns or cities as we call it, it is better to bring the other neighbours on board so that in a way, we can avoid people trying to play around to avoid paying taxes, because that is where we get funds to support any developmental activities in this country. 

Lastly, the issue of traffic lights on our streets which also appears in this report on page 9. It is so perturbing. You will agree with me that when you approach all our junctions, almost all the traffic lights are not functional and the traffic officers have to stand there from morning to sunset, and you really sympathise with them. I think it is good to put these traffic lights in working condition so that these traffic officers are not held there like prisoners or slaves. I don’t think it is right. We need to do something, Madam Speaker. Thank you so much.

6.56
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have petitioned and Members who have contributed to the debate. My observation is on page 16 - bank guarantee between KCCA, Government of Uganda and the Pioneer Easy Bus Services. Since the Minister for the Presidency, who is head of KCCA is here, I want to note that I think there is a problem with public-private partnerships because at times when you go with this arrangement, it is what you partner with the Government and there should be equity. 

I am finding a problem that if the Pioneer Easy Bus Services, which was to be guaranteed to supply 525 buses, and it supplied only 100 buses, the company is already disabled because the obligation on the side of Government was not met. What does it mean? The company cannot continue running. And this is what happened with AGOA; the other group obliged to meet the conditions but the government failed. It is the same thing that happened in CHOGM. 

Public-private partnership is equity; the moment you do it and it is done fairly, that project will prosper. I visited Kuala Lumpur - that road from Singapore and the town of Singapore are under public-private partnership. We instituted this law of Kampala Metropolitan City Law for purposes of improving the services within Kampala City so as to enable it become a modern city. But when one partner does not do their part, then that fails the whole project. I see it as a problem if Government does not come in to meet its obligation; this project might not continue. 

I appeal to Government since the minister is here, to go and see where they can change to improve services. I believe if buses plied within the Kampala Metropolitan City it will be cheaper for someone from Mukono to come and work in Kampala.. And even the decongestion of Kampala City with these “Matatus” will be eliminated. 

Look at the city now since we instituted the law, there are still problems. If in this public-private partnership, Government does not meet its obligations, I do not expect to see any improvements in the city. I think Government should quickly intervene –(Member timed out.)

6.59
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the obligations of KCCA/Government, for example under (b), it states, “To construct/provide necessary infrastructure including bus lanes, gazetted routes, bus stages and bus stops, and even to provide land for Pioneer Easy Bus Services to construct shelters, terminals and so on.” 

It is good that the petitioner brought her case and it is also good that the committee has given us the best recommendations after doing research. Once we implement these recommendations, I know that KCCA will operate better, and since this time we have – I trust the Minister of Kampala as a young and very active person –(Interjections)- I am definitely older than him.

Under (f), if he can sit with the three partners – KCCA, Pioneer Bus Services and Government, and they look at the problems of each partner, we shall have the best transport system for our people. This city is very congested. In fact, I cannot drive to my place in Entebbe right now; I have to wait until 10.00 O’clock or even midnight so that I reach my place faster. 

If Pioneer Easy Bus Services were to be provided with the necessary requirements and they bring bigger buses – because we expected them to bring bigger buses. Actually, they have done worse – in fact, Government should look into investing in them because as a person who has been a transporter, I know that the transport sector is not something simple. So, let us assist Pioneer Easy Bus Services –(Interruption)

MR MUJUNI:  Actually, in the developed countries, the rich board commuter taxis, but in poor countries, the poor buy cars. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR TAYEBWA:  So, I am recommending that this minister, whom we trust, sits with these partners and draws a better programme, including renewing the contract of Pioneer Easy Bus Services because I know that only few people can manage this transport business. Once this happens, they can increase bus services and our people get transport and we eliminate this congestion in Kampala. Some of us shall not even be coming to attend some –(Member timed out.)

7.02
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for coming up with this comprehensive report as well as the petitioners. I am concerned that the time may not be enough because we need a complete review of the whole report. But looking at it, you find that the report is mutually contradictory because if you recommend renegotiation of the contract and then at the same time recommend implementation, which one are you going to implement? Is it the existing contract or the one you want to re-negotiate. 

The other problem is, we are talking about a single transport company; we should be talking about laws and policies which create an environment that is clearly understood by every potential investor about what they need to do. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker - again I am trying to economise on my time – the problem came with the KCCA law. You are talking about creating the Kampala Metropolitan Planning Area, which in effect made the neighbouring districts colonies of Kampala. When you negotiate a contract in Kampala, it becomes binding to the rest of us in Wakiso and Mukono. I remember they once moved up to Nsangi and they had a big problem with my sub-county chairperson there and that is why they are not operating there. 

Let us be understood clearly; we all support the development and actually, we castigated this Government for destroying UTC. So, we want these buses, but we must have a clear policy without talking about individual companies. There has even been this talk that Pioneer Easy Bus Services belongs to insiders in this Government. I have heard the names of Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi, hon. Rukikaire and others. But the point is, when we do not do things transparently and we seem to be focusing on a particular company, we are creating an impression out there that we are favouring a particular company yet we are targeting to streamline the policy. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, let us look at some of the clauses, for example; if properly implemented, travellers from Kamuli, Jinja etcetera are supposed to stop in Mbalala, Mukono. Those from Masaka, Mbarara etcetera are supposed to stop in Namagoma, in my constituency. But have you put there the facilities for these other buses to operate there? No.

Another issue is:  Why do you make an instrument or an agreement that creates a monopoly for certain companies? We are treading very dangerously and I would recommend that we delay a vote on this report. Let us study it more comprehensively so that we can tackle this problem once and for all. You cannot create, for example, the lanes that we are talking about – the bus lanes on the streets. This will require you to break down buildings. This agreement was not preceded by adequate planning. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  But honourable members, I think that we have with us the Building Control Act, which is before this House and I think it may address some of the issues of planning. It is here. Let me invite the minister; do you have any comments before we call the chairperson to wind up?

7.06
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I welcome all colleagues from the recess. All the comments from my colleagues are very welcome. When I came to office and I inquired about these issues of Pioneer Easy Bus Services, I was told that KCCA and all the other actors are waiting for the recommendations of the parliamentary committee. 

So, I can assure you, Madam Speaker, that now that Parliament has finally had time to debate the report - because when we closed the last Session, the Deputy Speaker who was in the Chair had directed, in his ruling, that in the interim, I should intervene and start convening meetings with stakeholders to see how we can start preparing to solve the problems. 

I had actually called a meeting with KCCA on Monday, the coming week, to discuss some of these challenges and this report, therefore, sheds light on some of the areas to start engaging with the stakeholders. My pledge to you –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA:  Madam Speaker, the executive order of the President included, among others, a public-private partnership, and to my understanding, that would mean the government would actually co-own. I want to seek clarification from the minister whether at the time of drafting this agreement, this was put into consideration and whether the stakeholders that the minister has invited include leaders from those areas, which are likely to be or are already being affected by the operations.

Finally, and maybe to allay my fears, whether this agreement creates a monopoly, because when you talk about the other commuter taxis and buses remaining outside the metropolitan area, are you not creating monopoly and, therefore, being a recipe for inefficiency in this service?

THE SPEAKER:  Minister, please answer and we conclude.

MR TUMWEBAZE:  Finally, Madam Speaker, I think you need to appreciate that I am not really an expert in these issues of Pioneer Easy Bus Services but you need to differentiate between what the executive order did and how Pioneer Easy Bus Services won the contract because they came into being through a competitive bidding process. The executive order came in to rescue the crisis, and Pioneer Easy Bus Services was already there. So, the details of the PP or that contract I think - I am saying I think because I am really subject to correction from the Chair who has studied all this. The bidding process - the contracting had already -(Hon. Nambooze rose_)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, we need to complete and end this. You can engage him later; even in the canteen.

MR TUMWEBAZE:  Madam Speaker, thank you. I don’t think monopoly is created because there are other routes that are yet to be advertised, from the information I have, and as per the committee recommendations, if they are carried, I think KCCA will be ready to advertise the other routes like the former KCC did with this specific one. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable chair, do you have any closing comments?

MR MAGYEZI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I really thank the honourable members for their views and input. Hon. Nantume and hon. Kabajo, you are totally right on the need to ensure that there is fair share of revenue, fair share of job opportunities, fair share of infrastructure between KCCA and the neighbouring local governments. 

For me, I think this was at the heart of the petition and this is where the petitioners - the local governments were saying, wait a minute, these buses are coming to our towns and as a result, the taxis are less and, therefore, we are going to lose revenue and yet we are out of the negotiations and out of the picture.

So, I think the key recommendation of the committee is that in the next negotiations or contract, Minister for Kampala, please ensure that the local governments of Wakiso, Mukono and Mpigi are actually brought on board.

Hon. Ssimbwa is totally right on access to information in Kampala. We have made it our recommendation, under recommendation seven, although we have expanded it, because this was with respect to opening up the contract on transport; but we have said generally with respect to access to information that KCCA should provide a mechanism on how the citizens of Kampala can access information on services in the city. I believe this instrument will also be developed and the honourable minister for the city will look at it.

But it is true that the bus company paid only Shs 30 million to KCCA. They had a lot of challenges. Hon. Kyamadidi is right in saying that the management of KCCA have more challenges especially on the political side; politicising so many things. I just want to inform the honourable members that there is another petition being handled by our committee on the mismanagement or the management of KCCA. The big battle between the Lord Mayor and the Executive Director - the political side and the technical side. And it is really my sincere hope - because we have gone through the consultations and we are almost ready to compile our report. I am sure that in the next one month or even three weeks, we should be able to bring this report to the House.

Our colleague, hon. Kasule travelled on a boda boda. This is a wonderful thing; I don’t know why he was hiding. One would want to calculate how much time we are losing in Kampala in the traffic jam, how much life we are losing in Kampala as a result of pollution from the fumes from these boda bodas, the old taxis and so on. So, I think it is important that yes, we need the boda bodas, but can they be regulated? 

I have just been to Nairobi City, a city which was almost like ours in terms of traffic congestion. Go to Kigali now. Order can be put in these cities. Kampala can be improved and I really believe that this should be a turning point. We have a very vibrant minister for the city, and I think he should help us to revamp and improve the situation.

The proposal of hon. Lugoloobi is quite interesting because we know very well that Buikwe and Kayunga districts were part and parcel of the bigger Mukono District. So, he is saying that in the metropolitan area, instead of waiting for the city to develop without planning, why don’t we plan ahead regarding the Kayunga and Buikwe areas and bring them on board? I think it is something that again I would request the honourable minister to consider, but the law is there and there is no way physical planning for Kampala can succeed without planning for the neighbouring districts.

That is why we need a Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority, and that is why the committee has requested the honourable minister that in the next two months, without fail, we should have the Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority in place.

Finally, I would like to request my colleague, hon. Sseggona -this document has been with us since December and honourable members have read it from top to bottom. It is only that this time, we said perhaps honourable members have forgotten their copies in their offices and we provided a second copy. I know that hon. Sseggona reads these documents very seriously, so I would like to request that indeed, this House goes ahead to consider and approve our report. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Chairperson. Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the leaders of Mukono and Wakiso seeking the intervention of Parliament to review the Traffic and Road Safety City Bus Service Regulations, 2011, and inquire into the validity/legality of the agreement appointing Pioneer Easy Bus Services as agents to operate bus services in the Kampala Metropolitan area by Kampala Capital City Authority.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I thank you very much. Today, for the first time, we have completed the items on the Order Paper and this is going to be the way forward. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 6 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
