

Tuesday, 14 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. It is with great regret that I announce the news of the death of one of our colleagues, hon. Annie Logiel, Woman Representative, Moroto District. It occurred this night in Copenhagen. We are in touch with the Uganda Mission in Denmark. They are going to work on the arrangements to enable the body to be brought back. We shall keep you updated.

Hon. Logiel was the deputy chairperson of the Sectoral Committee on Health and a member of the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. I would like to ask that we stand and observe a moment of silence in her honour.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to inform you that another colleague of ours has never quite settled since he took oath - hon. Apollo Masika of Bubulo County East. He has been battling with diabetes and he is still sick. I just wanted to inform you and ask you to pray for him so that he can eventually come back and represent his people effectively.

Thirdly, there was a communication from the Clerk about suspension of inland and external travels. I would like to clarify that the suspension of travel is for the 27th and 28th of February because I want Members to be here. You are the voters and I do not want any voter missing. Therefore, no one goes anywhere, not even within Kampala, on the 27th and 28th of February. You must be here to do your noble duty. However, in the meantime, you can carry out your other work.

Honourable members, we have been undergoing the process leading to the election of our representatives in the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA). We are required to elect a new team 90 days before the end of the term of the present team. Therefore, by 6 March 2017 we must have conducted those elections, gazetted them and reported to the secretariat in Arusha. As part of the process, I would like to inform you about my proposals for the verification committee. This is provided in our Rules of Procedure because there are people who are independent of political parties and therefore they cannot be processed. I would like to nominate the following: 

    1. Hon. Beatrice Rwakimari – Chairperson
    2. Hon. Rose Mutonyi Masaba -Member  
    3. Hon. Rose Ayaka Atima - Member 
    4. Hon. Jesca Ababiku - Member
    5. Hon. Bildad Moses Adome - Member
    6. Hon. Sam Lyomoki - Member
    7. Hon. Mwine Mpaka - Member
    8. Hon. Safia Nalule Juuko - Member
    9. Hon. Florence Namayanja - Member
    10. Hon. Wilson Nokrach - Member
    11. Hon. Emmanuel  Ongiertho - Member
    12. Hon. Onegiu Biyika  - Member
    13. Hon. Lukia Chekamondo - Member
    14. Hon. Geoffrey Macho - Member
    15. Hon. Santa Alum - Member
    16. Hon. Betty Aol Ocan - Member
    17. Hon. Moses Grace Balyeku - Member 
    18. Hon. Alex Mungoma Burundo - Member
    19. Hon. John Bosco Ikojo - Member
    20. Hon. Mourine Osoru - Member

These are the terms of reference for the verification committee:

The verification committee shall consider the nominees and all applicants independent of a political party or organisation and shall ensure that the requirements of Article 50 of the Treaty are fulfilled, specifically- 

a) 	That the nominee is a citizen of the partner state;
b) 	That the nominee does not hold the office of a minister in the partner state;
c) 	That the nominee is not an officer in the service of the East African Community;
d) 	That the nominee has proven experience or interest in consolidating and furthering the aims and objectives of the community. 

The committee shall consider the nominees and all the applicants independent of political parties and shall ensure that the nominee qualifies to be elected a Member of Parliament first in accordance with Article 80 of the Constitution, that the person is a citizen of Uganda; a registered voter; has completed minimum formal education of advanced level standard or its equivalent; is not of unsound mind; is not holding or acting in an office the functions of which involve a responsibility for or in connection with the conduct of election; is not a traditional or cultural leader under Article 246 (6); has not been adjudged bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda or been discharged; is not under a sentence of death or imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of a fine.

If that person is a public officer or person employed in a Government department or agency, he or she has to have resigned his or her office at least 90 days before nomination. Therefore, the 90 days would have been before the 8th and 9th of February.

The committee shall examine statements by nominees, which shall be statements on oath, to ensure that- 

i) 	The statements are in the format prescribed in the Rules of Procedure that specifies the name, educational qualification, address and occupation of the candidate; and 

ii) 	To ensure that the statement read is in the format under Schedule 3 of our Rules of Procedure, setting out the qualifications of citizenship, etcetera. 

This person should not be an officer in the service of East African Community and should have experience and interest in furthering the aims of the Community. Where there are members of political parties, the committee will ensure that the secretary-generals of those parties have authorised that person to nominate those candidates.

Honourable members, I put the question that the verification committee be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: They will have to work expeditiously. We require a report by 20 February with a view of everything being in place by the morning of 27 February.

2.32
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance regarding the massive land grabbing and evictions in Nakaseke South constituency in the subcounties of Kapeeka, Semuto and Kasangombe. Almost 20 villages are affected. The villages include Nzingu, Mizimbo, Kawuku, Naluvule, Kikumango, Lwetunga, Kyererezi and so many others. 

Madam Speaker, this situation has caused adverse effects of food scarcity. It hurts to see people become refugees in their own country, to the extent that children are no longer going to school. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, through the police, investigates these dubious land acquisitions by well-connected people who have power and wealth. Secondly, I urge Government to stop these illegal evictions immediately. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, 18 villages means over 30,000 families. Therefore, it is really a serious matter. By the way, I own land there and when I went there last Sunday, the residents came and said, “Next time you come you will not find us”. I asked who was evicting them and they said, “abantu abanene” whose names cannot be said. They said big people are behind these evictions.

2.34
THE GOVERNEMNT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Luttamaguzi for raising this matter. 

Last week, a similar matter was raised by hon. Fungaroo when he said that people are settling with cattle on other people’s land. I then informed Parliament that since the matter involved more than two ministries, the Office of the Prime Minister was going to send a team to West Nile to investigate and come back to this august House within a week. I have informed the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about that and he has sent a team to the ground. 

Madam Speaker, it seems that this matter is rampant. It will, therefore, require Government to make an assessment. Almost everywhere, there are people who are using leaders at the lower levels and whatever they have to jeopardise communities. 

What I can immediately do, since this matter is very urgent, is to send a team on Monday to Nakaseke to first establish the preliminary issues so that we can come up with a way forward. I will work with the Ministry of Lands and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to send a team to Nakaseke, liaising with the honourable member from Nakaseke. We shall be briefing this House on the outcome. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before I invite hon. Rwabushaija, please join me in welcoming a delegation from the National Assembly of Zambia from the Committee on Local Government. They are: Hon. Kabanda, the chairperson - I do  not know whether you are related to the Kabanda here; hon. Mulyata; hon. Chiyalika; hon. Mukosa; hon. Chibanda; hon. Samakayi; hon. Musonda; hon. Chikote; Mrs Situmbeko Zulu from the National Audit Office; Mr Muyoba, National Audit Office; Mr Simukoko, Ministry of Local Government; Mr Chilambwe, secretary to the delegation. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have the family of our distinguished colleague, the late Dr Mungherera. They are here to attend the tribute. 

2.37
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers Representatives): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here on a matter of national importance. 

Many of you, if you remember, received communication which was signed by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service, dated 30 January 2017, informing us about a national census on biometric data to capture all pensioners. This was to start yesterday, 13 February and end on 24 March. 

Honourable members, whereas this exercise is very important to all pensioners and senior citizens, I also note that it is a duplication of work and it causes Government to overspend. Last year, between April and June, a similar exercise was conducted by Ministry of Public Service together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, even after that exercise had been conducted, many of the pensioners did not receive their gratuity and pension. They have been suffering since then.

This time round, we got this communication and we thought that maybe there was something special. However, I would like to tell you that yesterday when they were supposed to have started, many pensioners in the different districts went to the places that had been gazetted but the Government officials from the ministry concerned did not show up. The districts I am referring to are Kamuli, Bukwo, Nebbi, Lamwo, Mukono, Mbarara and Amuria. Today, they were supposed to be in Soroti but they did not go there. 

I am concerned about the suffering of the senior citizens who are pensioners and they do not have money to move up and down. They have families to look after and some of them have not been paid for over six years from the time they retired. I am very concerned about it and I feel that Government should be mindful when they keep making people move up and down. When they fail to turn up, they should communicate well in time so that these people who are desperate do not suffer moving up and down. For districts like Bukwo and Lamwo, where they were supposed to be yesterday, there was no communication. 

Honourable colleagues, we should also be asking ourselves why we should spend so much money on such exercises. We did it in 2016 and now we are repeating a similar exercise in 2017; are we not overspending? It puzzles me and I think many others. Someone serves for over 30 years and then they retire and after retirement, someone submits their documents and they are endorsed. Even after that, they still doubt whether those people have ever worked in Government. 

The situation is so disheartening and my prayer is that the Ministry of Public Service should come and explain why we are repeating an exercise that was done last year in the days that I have mentioned. At the same time, they have not bothered to inform our senior citizens when they will do it and when they fail to turn up, they do not communicate. That is my concern, Madam Speaker. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where this culture of disrespect for senior people came from. People do not care. Minister of Public Service, are you here?

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, it is true the culture of disrespect for elders is un-Ugandan and we regret the inconveniences caused. 

The Minister of Public Service will have to make a statement in this House tomorrow. I will make sure that they come here and tell us how the programme is going on. The point of efficiency is very important, especially where we are grappling with numerous priorities, which do not have funds. Therefore, the Ministry of Public Service will come and present a statement here. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My understanding is that pension is a monthly deduction made from someone’s earnings and kept in a common pool. Therefore, can the minister tell us where the money for these pensioners is? Some of them are dying. Where did you keep the money? These things of priorities of Government - This is their money, which you removed. Where is the money?

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I have been very clear. I have informed this House that the minister in charge of the portfolio is going to make a statement tomorrow. Therefore, all the clarifications you are seeking will be very pertinent tomorrow. Can we hold on until tomorrow, please? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service is directed to come here tomorrow. This is extremely urgent. We cannot continue treating our seniors as if they are rubbish. 

Honourable members, in the gallery, we also have Dr Fred Bisso and members of the Uganda Medical Association. They have also come to sit in for the tribute. 

Can I have hon. Ogwal, Wamai, Erute and Nambeshe; one minute each. Honourable members, when you want to raise a matter on this Floor, you come and see me earlier. You do not just jump up on the Floor.

2.45
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I know that the media has helped us to highlight the matter I am going to talk about. It is, therefore, just a question of reminding us. 

The Janan Luwum Memorial Day is here with us again this week. I would like this House to be made aware that Thursday, 16 February will be a public holiday. This Parliament declared in 2015 that from that year on, every 16 February will be a public holiday in order to allow Christians and others to celebrate the sainthood of Janan Luwum.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that this year, the celebrations will take another turn in the sense that the Archbishop of Canterbury will be in Uganda. I thought parliamentarians would clap for that. (Laughter) It is a great honour. This is why we, Africans, say that tears can sometimes bring laughter. Much as it is a very sad event that Janan Luwum was murdered by a brutal regime, at least it has been able to open the veil for people to see the special and unique features of Uganda. Not only do we have Christians of very strong faiths as professed by the martyrs of Uganda but we now also have modern saints such as St Janani Luwum. Because of that, we are getting very distinguished visitors coming to see what Uganda cannot easily sell to the world. We are extremely proud this year that a distinguished man of God will be coming to Uganda to celebrate with us this particular day. 

For the people of Uganda, you recall that when Pope Francis came to Uganda recently, he planted a special tree in Munyonyo. I am happy to inform the House that a branch from that tree is going to be plucked and planted by the Archbishop of Canterbury in Mucwini on the 16th. It will be called the “tree of unity”. Why is it called the “tree of unity”? Pope Francis, who is the leader of the Catholic community in the world, planted that tree and the Archbishop of the Anglican Church will pluck a branch from that tree and plant it in Mucwini. That means that the Church will know that we belong to one community and we all profess Christ. 

We are pledging to all Ugandans that regardless of one’s religious affiliation, we all belong to Christ. It will be the tree of unity, uniting the Christians in Uganda and the people of Uganda at large.

Madam Speaker, finally allow me to say this: Members of Parliament, regardless of where you come from, always put the people of Acholi, Lango, Teso, Karamoja and Bunyoro on the forefront in this particular celebration. I know that you will find Anglicans, Catholics, Baptists all over the country; as I talk now, there are over 1,000 pilgrims who have come from Sudan and other neighbouring countries. We, parliamentarians, should take the lead. I am asking you, if you have never been to Mucwini, can you be one of the local pilgrims who will be there? Silence means everybody has agreed that we will lead our delegations from our different constituencies to honour this particular day. 

May God bless all of you. You will find us in Mucwini. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner Ogwal. We welcome the Archbishop of Canterbury. Last year, we had the pleasure of hosting the Archbishop of York, Dr John Sentamu. Now we have the Archbishop himself. The Parliamentary Commission will put aside two buses for those who want to go. We will be leaving from here to go to Mucwini. Please, register with the Clerk so that we can go and celebrate the martyrdom of a great man, Janani Luwum.

2.51
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of very serious national importance in regard to what I saw last night when I was driving from Lira to Kampala. 

At Kigumba, I found about 50 lorries struggling for posho from one factory. I wondered because these were all foreign trailers. I do not know if Uganda is safe. Kenya has already put a ban on the exportation of posho. Zambia has equally done the same. May I know if we have enough to allow these foreign lorries to take away posho from Uganda without any restriction? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: That matter was raised last week but no one came up with an answer.

2.52
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. 

This morning, the Appointments Committee was sitting to vet ambassadors who have been appointed by the President to go and serve in different parts of the world. As a former diplomat who served in that area for 25 years, I felt I would go as an ex officio and enrich the Appointments Committee. However, I was shocked when I was asked to leave yet the rules are very clear that all Members of Parliament are ex officio members of different committees of Parliament. 

When I looked at the rules, it says that the proceedings of the committee will be closed. Is it closed to the public or to the Members of Parliament? It is ambiguous because we all took the Oath of Secrecy as Members of Parliament and therefore, we can attend the proceedings of all committees.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I ejected the honourable member from the committee because we have not yet agreed on how far to open. However, I would like to propose that you support the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; they proposed that we open it. You support them and it will be open, but I cannot move goalposts.

2.54
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The matter of urgent public importance I am raising pertains to a 15-year-old school girl who perished prematurely in a catastrophic landslide in Bududa last week. 

Madam Speaker, this was quite unusual because it is not raining at this time. She was tending to goats of the family after school when this occurred in a landslide scar of last year. She was buried and it took almost a full day to retrieve the body.

Madam Speaker, what is of great concern is that the line ministry is not intervening because there has to an emergency intervention to conduct assessments - 

THE SPEAKER: What do you want the Government to do? Complete your sentence, quickly.

MR NAMBESHE: My prayer is that your office should prevail over the line ministry to conduct emergency interventions whenever disaster hits. 

Secondly, there is illegal registration in Bududa, giving people false hope that they are being relocated to Kiryandongo and Bulambuli and they are extorting money from the people. The ministry has received correspondences to this effect but so far, it has not responded.  

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that your office prevails over this ministry, which has an “I do not care” attitude towards the people who need their attention. Secondly, the ministry should also implement an affordable urbanisation strategy like the one of Ujamaa Villages in Tanzania. Those are my two prayers, Madam Speaker.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, first of all it is regrettable that we lose a person under similar circumstances like the way we lost very many people before. However, I would like to inform this august House that everything is being done by the ministry to complete the resettlement of the team that was relocated to Kiryandongo. We also plan to start another resettlement in about three other areas, including Bulambuli and Kapchorwa where we are trying to identify space for the landless. Everything is being done to consider particularly the residual case load of the people who remained. 

It is unfortunate that someone within Bulambuli may have taken advantage of the desperate communities to extort money from unsuspecting citizens. I would like to assure this House that we are going to follow that up immediately and make sure that it stops and those who have participated in it will be brought to book.

JOINT STATEMENT ON AN ACTION PLAN TO MITIGATE THE FOOD SECURITY AND DISASTER SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: As they sort out the whereabouts of the minister, I would like you to join me in welcoming the hon. Matthias Kasamba, hon. Rose Akol, Paul Musamali, Dennis Namara and George Odongo. They are in the public gallery. Those are the NRM candidates for the East African Legislative Assembly. You are welcome. (Applause)

STATEMENT ON PRESS ALLEGATIONS THAT MINISTRY OF HEALTH PLANS TO HAVE CHILDREN FROM 10 YEARS OF AGE ACCESS FAMILY PLANNING SERVICES

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Madam Speaker, reference is made to the concern that was raised by hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko on the Floor of Parliament in regard to press reports that appeared in the Daily Monitor of Thursday, 9 February 2016. The report said that the Ministry of Health planned to introduce a policy requiring children as young as 10 years of age to access family planning services from health facilities.

Madam Speaker, the authenticity of the document that was quoted in the Daily Monitor is highly questioned since there is no approval of such a policy from the Ministry of Health. Therefore, the Ministry of Health wishes to state clearly that there is no policy or guideline requiring children as young as 10 years of age to access family planning services from health facilities as stated. 

The story, which appeared in the Daily Monitor, was based on the National Policy Guidelines and Service Standards for Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights of 2012, which was not approved and has never been implemented. It is because we have been in consultation with stakeholders on this policy or guidelines and the process of consultation is not yet completed.

The 2012 guidelines are currently being reviewed and updated as the process of consultation is still ongoing by the Ministry of Health and other partners. This is basically meant to address changes, statistics and acceptable practices before the document can be endorsed for implementation. 

It is also important for Members to note that the process of reviewing guidelines or document involves many other stakeholders.  Therefore, the guidelines under review can only be endorsed by all the stakeholders after the queries have been adequately and efficiently addressed and loose ends tightened. The National Policy Guidelines and Service Standards for Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights aim at making explicit the direction of reproductive health within the contents of primary healthcare.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that the Ministry of Health’s position on family planning for young people remains abstinence, delay of age of sexual debut and sexual reproductive health information for young people according to appropriate age. 

As I conclude, I made it very clear last week, and I still emphasise, that my ministry does not have any policy nor guideline and is not planning to have any as far as family planning for children as young as 10 years is concerned. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the matter is put to rest for now. If you do otherwise, let us know so that we can speak about it. 

Is the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here now? Let us go to item No. 5 now. I do not see the minister, so we are doing some other work now. Mr Prime Minister, it seems the hon. Guma is on fire. Let us just -

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): I have some information for him if you allow me to do so. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, who is heading a team of several ministers, is coming this afternoon with a paper by Government, as promised and indeed as directed by the Speaker, on food security. There may be some typing delays, but I expect him to be in the House any time. Therefore, I seek for your indulgence. I assure you that the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is coming to make the statement.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.5.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE DR MARGARET MUNGHERERA

3.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Dr Margaret Mungherera. 

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of Dr Margaret Mungherera, a renowned senior consultant psychiatrist, which occurred on Saturday, 4 February 2017 in India;

AND WHEREAS the late Dr Margaret Mungherera, who died at the age of 59 years, was born on 25 October 1957 in Butaleja District and died after succumbing to cancer of the colon, which she had been diagnosed with about a year ago;

NOTING THAT the late Dr Margaret Mungherera held a Bachelors of Medicine and Surgery from Makerere University, a Diploma in Tropical Medicine and Hygiene from the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine and a Masters of Medicine in Psychiatry from Makerere University where she specialised in forensic psychiatry;

RECOGNISING THAT the late Dr Margaret Mungherera served in various positions in the civil service as a registrar at Butabika Hospital, a consultant psychiatrist at Mulago National Referral Hospital and a senior consultant psychiatrist at Mulago Hospital Complex Services, and was also the founder member of Uganda Women Medical Doctors Association and at the time of her death, she was the chairperson of the International Association of Medical Regulatory Authorities;

ALSO RECOGNISING THAT the late Dr Margaret Mungherera, through the various positions, amassed remarkable leadership and mentorship skills, which enabled her scale the heights in the medical world and from October 2013 to October 2014, she became the first African woman to head the World Medical Association;

APPRECIATING THAT the late Dr Mungherera was a dedicated medical practitioner who treated her medical profession as nothing but a calling to serve mankind and fought tirelessly and passionately for the welfare of health workers and quality treatment for patients, regardless of their status;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT she devoted more than 30 years to our country’s healthcare services; 

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
1. 	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends, the medical fraternity and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Dr Margaret Mungherera.

2. 	That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and contributions made by Dr Margaret Mungherera to the people of Uganda and the world.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is seconded by several Members of the House. Justify the motion, Mr Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The death of Dr Mungherera was and remains a tragic loss to Uganda and the entire global medical fraternity. We have lost an outstanding and distinguished medical professional who dedicated her life to championing the cause of improved healthcare services in Uganda and beyond. She dedicated her life to selflessly serve the people of Uganda. Last Wednesday, Cabinet, chaired by His Excellency President Yoweri Museveni, considered Dr Mungherera’s outstanding contribution to the country and the world and decided Parliament sits to honour and pay tribute to her.

Madam Speaker, in writing the history of the medical practice in Uganda and the world, the name and place of Dr Margaret Mungherera will always feature prominently. In writing the history of psychiatry and mental health practice in Uganda, again the name of Margaret Mungherera will not only be remembered but will be remembered with gratitude. When we are writing the history of Butabika National Referral Hospital, again the contribution and name of Dr Mungherera will always shine. In telling the story of breaking barriers and ceilings, Dr Mungherera will always provide an excellent example. 

Madam Speaker, together with a number of Ugandan physicians, we witnessed first-hand Dr Mungherera’s excellent credentials recognised when she was unanimously elected as the President of the World Medical Association at the World Medical Association General Assembly in Brazil in October 2013. We all celebrated her victory for it was indeed a victory for Uganda, Africa and indeed, the global medical fraternity.

Dr Mungherera was the second African to hold the post since the World Medical Association was formed about 70 years ago. She was the third woman and first African woman to hold that prestigious position. In her one year at the helm of the World Medical Association, she made and did all of us very proud. She carried the flag of Uganda high wherever she went preaching the message of the need to raise the quality of health service delivery and championing for improvement of the welfare and conditions of the health workers.

Madam Speaker, in her 35 years of dedicated service as a medical doctor, psychiatrist and administrator, Dr Mungherera left a positive mark and footprint wherever she went. Upon completing her degree in medicine from Makerere University in 1982 and internship at Mulago Hospital, she was posted to Butabika Mental Hospital as a medical officer.

In 1992, she became a psychiatrist having attained Masters of Medicine in Psychiatry from Makerere University. During her 25 years’ experience as a mental health professional, Dr Mungherera elevated the profile and role of psychiatry in the medical field to great heights. She made psychiatry become a reputable calling of medical service. As a result of her example and mentorship, today we have more young people choosing a career in psychiatry related disciplines. After 19 years at Butabika Hospital, Dr Mungherera joined Mulago National Referral Hospital where she worked as a senior consultant psychiatrist. 

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera used her experience beyond the hospital by sharing her knowledge and expertise through teaching and mentorship. She was, for instance, an honorary lecturer at Makerere University College of Health Sciences, a council member at Gulu University and Kampala International University and was also a board member of several non-profit organisations.

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera’s track record speaks volumes. In addition to the above, she served as the publicity secretary of the Association of Uganda Women Medical Doctors and the first woman to serve as the President of Uganda Medical Association, a post she held for six terms. (Applause) 

She was also the Vice-President of the Commonwealth Medical Association for East, Central and Southern Africa. In 2000, as President of Uganda Medical Association, she led her counterparts in East African countries to bring on board the regulatory councils and boards in the region to promote the quality of training and regulation of doctors and dental surgeons in the region. As a result, there is now reciprocal recognition of doctors and dental surgeons, harmonised training programmes for undergraduates and interns, and joint inspection and supervision of medical and dental schools.

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera stood for and advocated for improved health service delivery and the improvement of conditions of health workers. She was a leading advocate for improving the welfare of health workers at all levels. This was a cause that was close to her heart, which she spearheaded at every opportunity that she got. Government always appreciated her bold and constructive ideas on a number of issues. Indeed, several of her ideas and aspirations informed policy discussions that have led to our dedication and commitment to an improved healthcare system.

Government is aware that a lot more needs to be done to address the challenges we still face to achieve an improved healthcare system that indeed, we as a country deserve. We are working on that and will continue to do so. That is the best tribute that we can and must pay in memory of Dr Margaret Mungherera’s services.

Madam Speaker, on Thursday, 2 February 2017, I visited Dr Mungherera at Nsambya Hospital where she had been receiving treatment before being flown to India. She was in distress but we all hoped that she would get better. Sadly, it was not to be. Dr Mungherera has been battling advanced cancer of the colon. She sadly lost the battle on Saturday, 4 February 2017, coincidentally on World Cancer Day. 

At the requiem service at All Saints Cathedral Nakasero last Thursday, the moving tributes that we heard from a wide range of people as well as regional and international representation was further testimony to her transformative legacy. We would like to thank the family for nurturing such a distinguished daughter of our country whose life, legacy and example we honour and celebrate. 

We share in the grief of this loss with the widower, Richard Mushanga, the family, friends, colleagues, the nation, the medical fraternity and the world at large. May Dr Mungherera’s soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition.

3.21
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to an icon of selflessness, a woman of special tribute, a Ugandan recognised across the globe, a brain exemplified by works, a professional in theory and practice, a personality many loved to associate with, Dr Margaret Mungherera.

Madam Speaker, a few years ago, Dr Mungherera became a common face in this building, not because she was seeking for a representative office nor was she a subject of any committee investigation; Dr Mungherera was doing all the possible lobbying to ensure that sufficient funding is extended to the fight against cancer. She, like many other Ugandans, tried all that they could to convince Government to pay attention to the plight of medical facilities available for the treatment and management of cancer patients. It is tragic that she has succumbed to cancer. 

Government priorities remain skewed and the health sector suffers the weight of the unbalanced priorities. Despite her efforts and cries, the Uganda Cancer Institute only enjoys cosmetic autonomy. A shining building but overcrowded for comfort, insufficiently funded to offer any meaningful relief to cancer patients, littered with groans of pain and dead bodies lying alongside patients for long hours is the unfortunate reality.  The only viable tribute we can pay to Dr Mungherera is to actualise her dream and offer cancer patients dignified treatment and care.  (Applause)

The story of the bunker is an old unpalatable song. The promised support to patients at Agha Khan Hospital in Nairobi as a stopgap measure was a red herring. Voices are getting louder to the effect that even if the bunker was constructed, the technology used in there is so outdated to handle modern cancer cell mutations.  

Madam Speaker, I am equally alive to the promises the then Minister for Health gave on the Floor of this House to the effect that once funds were availed, the bunker would be in place in three months. I do not know how many months they are now. We appropriated the money but over a year down the road, the bunker is only a dream. The good thing is that the health ministers are here and they will tell us whether the three months to them means 12 months.
 
Dr Mungherera breathed her last in a foreign land like many other Ugandans, where she was rushed having failed to secure reliable medication at home. According to the latest report of the Auditor-General, over Shs 100 billion is spent on treatment of public servants outside this country. This figure does not include expenses incurred privately. At this rate, Uganda can only be what the President described - a shopping mall for other people. You simply cannot balance your payment if you must seek every facility or service from outside.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Dr Mungherera had another cry during most of her administrative times - the desire, like the Prime Minister has said, to remunerate medical workers commensurately with their input and improve their working conditions. 

In 2015, when she announced her retirement from the civil service, Dr Mungherera emphasised that there was need to increase payment for medical personnel in East Africa and Uganda in particular. She affirmed that health workers want better facilitation and recognition for their efforts, pointing to the fact that in East Africa, Ugandan medical workers are the worst paid. Reflecting on her experience in the medical field at the same event, Dr Mungherera explained that many skilled medical professionals are forced to seek employment abroad because of low pay in Uganda and working conditions that are not conducive.

Madam Speaker, when I was the chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), I interacted with many health regulatory organisations. I learnt from one of them that since the colonial days, Uganda has trained about 4,000 doctors and we have lost 1,500, which equates to nearly half. These doctors go to different countries, including Somalia, looking for money. People who have gone abroad to seek treatment in South Africa and Nairobi are being treated by Ugandans. 

There was a time I was flying out of the country and I met a minister with a sick baby. She had been asked to take her samples to Nairobi and return to Mulago for treatment because there was no machine at Mulago Hospital. The Prime Minister has promised that they are working on it. I do not know how many people we will have to lose their lives for the Prime Minister to come and tell Parliament that the problem has been sorted out. You have worked on it for too long – 30 years! I do not know how many more years you need.

Dr Mungherera said this at the same function I have talked about above: “As a senior consultant, I was earning Shs 2.3 million which was later raised to Shs 2.8 million and it catered for everything, including fuel for an old car I was given and paying for my driver”. Mark the words, “old car”, Mr Prime Minister. She continued, “If I can earn such an amount after working for over 30 years, what about those who are joining the field now?” She intimated that for the above stated, most seniors in the field have left and young people are on their own.

It is not enough for the Prime Minister to come here and praise her for not running away like the others did. You should be coming to Parliament to propose a solution that will stop medical workers from running away and not praise the few that have remained.

Dr Mungherera staked her all to ensure that the welfare of our medical workers is guaranteed. She was touched by the incessant drain of our best and senior brains in search of greener pastures across the borders. Margaret lived a life to emulate.  Margaret set a pace for all to walk.  Her journey on earth was a journey of excellence.

Madam Speaker, I do not have to repeat what the Prime Minister has catalogued. With those few remarks, I beg to support the motion to pay tribute to Dr Margaret Mungherera. May her soul rest in eternal piece.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We do not have much time as we have to close this debate at 4.00 p.m. Members will speak for three minutes each. I now invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Health who will be followed by hon. Waluswaka and hon. Agaba.

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Margaret Mungherera. I think I was reading from the same script as hon. Ssemujju and so I will be brief. 

I was privileged to be taught by Dr Margaret Mungherera in 1997 and she was a wonderful teacher. Dr Mungherera was full of great leadership skills. She was highly respected and loved more than hated. She was a passionate advocate of quality healthcare. She was also a passionate advocate of meaningful welfare of health workers. She was a passionate advocate for meaningful equitable remuneration of all health workers. Dr Mungherera was also an advocate for equitable distribution of females in the health workforce. She was selfless and you all heard what she worked for.

The doctor was a woman of great sense of humour. She was a motivational speaker, an educationist, a talented woman and also a great ambassador for this nation as a leader of international bodies. Honourable members can remember how she served on the commission of inquiry into the global fund chaired by Justice James Ogoola and also GAVI.

Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute, I would like to ask three questions which I think you should direct to the responsible people to answer. Dr Mungherera died of cancer on World Cancer Day, a year since the breakdown of the cancer machine. We need answers today or at an appropriate time.

Secondly, she was an advocate of health workers welfare and remuneration. What plans do the responsible people such as the Prime Minister and the Minister of Health have? It is good to come and make flowery speeches as we pay tribute but it would be more meaningful to pay tribute by respecting what she lived for.

Thirdly, I and my seniors such as the Prime Minister, hon. Chris Baryomunsi and the honourable ministers of health, all trained from Makerere University Medical School, and this was in the Albert Cook days which is over 100 years old. There is no single block that has been added to Makerere University Medical School. The structures that produced those world leaders like the Prime Minister are in shambles. The library where we train our medical students is only in name. I actually talked to hon. Connie Nakayenze, as the chairperson of the Committee on Education, to visit us. It is really shameful. I beg that as you respect and pay tribute to her, we also get answers to these three questions. 

3.34
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join the Prime Minister and the Members in paying tribute to the late Dr Margaret Mungherera.

A lot has been said but I would like to remind the House that as the saying goes, wise people come from the east, and that is why Dr Mungherera was the first African woman to chair the World Medical Association. The late Dr Mungherera started her primary education in Bunganga Primary School in Budumba, Butaleja District. During the presidential campaigns of 2011, the President promised to sponsor the construction of two classroom blocks where the hero studied her primary one. Up to now, the people of Butaleja are still waiting -

THE SPEAKER: Which school is that?

MR WALUSWAKA: Bunganga Primary School in Budumba. Butaleja has lost a great daughter. During that time, the only means of transport for Dr Mungherera to come and attend university education in Kampala was by train. As Government plans to build the Standard Gauge Railway, Budumba Railway Station has been scrapped. We do not know whether it is by intention. I pray that a railway station be built in Budumba as it was before. 

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera succumbed to cancer on World Cancer Day. I would like to join the rest of my colleagues to ask that Government expedites the process of procurement and installation of cancer machines in this country. Some of the parents and relatives of Dr Mungherera are in Butaleja and they go to Budumba Health Centre III. This health centre does not have a water source. I pray that this health centre be elevated to a health centre IV and be provided with water and a motorised solar system. I can see that the Minister of Water and Environment is here.

Madam Speaker, when Dr Mungherera’s parents come to process her gratuity, I pray that they are not tossed here and there because this lady has worked for her money - (Member timed out.)

3.38
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Ibanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion to pay tribute to Dr Mungherera as a former colleague at Kampala International University (KIU).

I interacted with Dr Mungherera as a junior staff at the university. She was one of the senior people and she contributed to the founding of the medical school of KIU. She participated in writing of the curriculum and accreditation of the medical courses curriculum. I worked much more closely with her while I was the Resident District Commissioner in Butaleja.

Madam Speaker, there are many things that I thought I would say about Dr Mungherera but the time is short. Dr Mungherera was a prowess in the medical profession as many eulogies have indicated. She was a gifted physician, an accomplished psychiatrist, a productive researcher and an innovative and motivational teacher. You could say that medicine flowed through her veins. She was a great mentor in her family that as a first born, she mentored three other siblings of hers to do medicine in the same family. 

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera was an independent minded person with original thoughts and ideas. For those of you who knew her well, she spoke what she thought and felt was right and accurate and she did not care what others thought about it. Sometimes when you would engage her in an argument, you would possibly think that she was confused because she would defend her point to the last, whether she was right or wrong. This enabled her write many publications and do research, which has been published in academic journals and many medical books.

Dr Mungherera was an acclaimed leader locally and internationally as has been said, with different accolades of leadership that she reached and the different positions she held before she passed on - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude. Let me welcome hon. Jeremiah Mutwalante Twa-Twa who is in the gallery. He was a Member of the Ninth Parliament. You are welcome.

MR AGABA: Let me use half a minute to briefly talk about her sickness and death. Many things happen in our lives and many times, we do not know how to treat them. Around March 2015, I was seated at KIU with Mr Hassan Bassajabalaba and Dr Mungherera when she complained that she was finding difficulty in passing stool. She appeared a bit pale and her lips were very dry. We told her to do a medical test and find out what she was suffering from; she seemed anaemic. When she did the tests, she discovered she had cancer. It was a simple observation that revealed detailed complications. The rest of the story has been mentioned. 

When she went to Chennai in India, they discovered the cancer was advanced; it had attacked the colon, the large intestines, the small intestines, the lungs and it had started on the liver. When they operated on her, about 40 per cent of the length of the small intestines and the colon was cut but it was difficult to save her life. Even when she was admitted in Nsambya, she knew what was happening but being a medical doctor it was thought that she should go back to India for psychological satisfaction. However, the journey was a journey of no return.

Madam Speaker, as we eulogise Dr Mungherera, I re-echo the voices of others; it is high time we remedied the healthcare system of our country so that we can save our people by attending to their health as soon as problems arise. I beg to second the motion, Madam Speaker.

3.43
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Margaret Mungherera. 

Madam Speaker, I came to know the late in 1980s, when I was in Uganda Airlines. She became a very close friend of mine and I had to learn a lot from her. Dr Mungherera was a real motivational and professional therapist; she fascinated many in all areas of humanity. At one time I had a very young sister who we had thought she had malaria but when we brought her to Kampala, Dr Mungherera came to visit me and found the girl at my house and she diagnosed her with cerebral malaria. She took care of my young sister while I kept flying out of the country as demanded by my profession, until my sister succumbed to this. She called me and I had to come back. That is how professional Dr Mungherera was. She treated everybody who was under her care with utmost care – like a brother, sister or parent.

Dr Mungherera, as the Prime Minister has said, she was an educationally accomplished female of all time. Her name in her profession was clean and most of us the women looked up to her. Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera, like any other lady under a profession dominated by men, went through a lot of challenges. However, she endured all until she attained that position of the first African woman to head the World Medical Association.

To my colleagues, especially the gentlemen, when you have time – I have been to India several times and I have met many of –(Member timed out.)

3.45
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to Dr Mungherera. Dr Margaret Mungherera was an icon that the women of Uganda ought to emulate; she was a strong leader. This lady stood for the rights of people with mental challenges and she played a big role in ensuring that the Mental Act is amended. 

We are aware that the Bill is already with us; Madam Speaker, in memory of her soul, we need to amend the Mental Act so that it can serve these people in the face of human rights.

Madam Speaker, Dr Mungherera was a Rotarian; she believed in service above self and this was demonstrated in her fight for the rights of the health workers and in her fight for the patients. It is unfortunate that she died of cancer outside Uganda. I would like to add my voice that there are unfortunate Ugandans who cannot even reach beyond the border of Uganda – that we also support them by ensuring that the health services are improved, especially the Uganda Cancer Institute; that the machine that was promised last year should be installed.

Madam Speaker, this gallant daughter of Uganda who passed away is not very easy to come by; somebody has said that in terms of education and work, she was dedicated and I pray that God will rest her soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.47
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we stand before you here today, we mourn the loss of a great woman. I am not in the medical profession but there are those people you meet and they humble you because of who they are. I knew Dr Mungherera in the women’s movement – that is why I refer to her – because she knew that any struggle was worth her time and whenever she could meet us, you would know that she would ask you to be bold and stay resolute. She would ask you how much money you were earning and how much a doctor was earning. She would say: “Nabilah, how much do you earn? How much does a medical doctor earn? Go and revise that.” She was very much focused on payment of our medical workers and I think that is one of her activism that we should move forward.

Madam Speaker, I will always cherish the innumerable occasions when I interacted with her. However, many young women who are in the medical profession are watching to see what we will do differently. Are we going to just emulate her and pay tribute to her without making the changes required?

To the Leader of Government Business, you brought the motion and so you should carry the mantle to see that the reforms that are necessary to pay tribute to her are carried out – not lip service. Thank you.

3.49
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion to eulogise Dr Mungherera. I did not interact with Dr Mungherera and neither did I know her personally. However, from the record, you would know what she was and what she believed in. We want to appreciate her for the service she rendered to Uganda and the rest of the world.

We realise that Dr Mungherera was an outstanding and distinguished medical professional who dedicated her life to championing the cause of improved health. It is unfortunate that she died when this could have been handled. She worked and advocated for issues of mental health and cancer. 

Madam Speaker, this House has been lamenting on the issue of cancer; many Ugandan women are dying of cancer. If you went to Mulago, you would see how many Ugandans are suffering there; just a few have been taken to Nairobi. This House approved some funds that if the bunker was not ready then the patients should be taken to Nairobi. However, if you went there today, less than 30 people have benefited from that money. The House has got to investigate this.

Madam Speaker, what I would like to bring out in this particular issue is that when we went to Mulago, the vulnerable women who are supposed to be treated- Madam Speaker, I would like to lament that the women are being made to pay Shs 300,000 to access cancer treatment and yet it is supposed to be free of charge. As a Committee on Health, we went and investigated this and told the authorities that if it is supposed to be paid for then it should be official. However, patients are made to pay Shs 300,000 and so many people are afraid of going to Mulago because they cannot pay Shs 300,000. That is very unfortunate. Rest in peace, Dr Mungherera.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to seek for answers; we withdrew money from the Contingency Fund to pay for the cancer machine that is why we have no money for disaster preparedness. Where is the cancer machine?

3.53
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support this motion moved in favour of a colleague, whom we hold in high esteem in the medical profession. I stand here as a Member of Parliament for Workers but also as a member of the medical profession and at the end, I will read a special request from the Uganda Medical Association. 

To us this is not an ordinary motion; it is a motion that calls for action. About three years ago, I was supposed to have moved a motion in this House in honour of Dr Margaret Mungherera when she became the first African woman doctor to hold the position of the President of International Medical Association. At that time, I was chairperson of the Committee on Health, we did not move it but had hope that she would be honoured when still alive.

It is a shock to us in the medical profession and the day she was flown out of Uganda, I and the secretary of the medical association, were supposed to have talked with her concerning three matters that are before this House, which are raised in the letter. When she left, we were scared but we had hope that she would come back – she still insisted on certain things that she thought would be done by this Parliament, especially for the medical profession and workers. Unfortunately, about a day later we received a call that she could not make it and it was a big shock to us.

To us, Dr Margaret Mungherera had become an icon figure and she has left a legacy. In our profession, she is referred to as Mama M.M and this shows the level of honour that she had achieved in the medical profession. 

Allow me to read this message from the Uganda Medical Association on the three great concerns:
“Dear honourable Members of Parliament of the 10th Parliament, three great concerns to remember as we honour Prof. Margaret Mungherera. 

The Uganda Medical Association wishes to applaud you for the courageous move to honour the late professor Dr Margaret Mungherera through a tribute on the Floor of Parliament. It might be helpful to remember that at the time of her death, the following three concerns were her priority and she would be very pleased with you, today, if you could tackle them to a logical end:
    1) Stopping medical brain drain out of Uganda. A big proportion of Ugandan doctors move out of the country in search of greener pastures every year. Prof. Mungherera was the head of the Uganda Medical Association team that drafted the petition to Parliament last year to propose an array of duty succession allowances to motivate our health workers to stay and serve Ugandans. 

This petition was delivered to the Speaker of Parliament on 20 June 2016. A tribute to Dr Mungherera is incomplete without considering here role in counselling many of the doctors who have stayed back to serve fellow Ugandans with hope that one day, their condition of service will improve.

    2) Mobilising doctors into a strong voice to advocate for the health needs of the ordinary Ugandans. The diverse and dynamic nature of medical knowledge dictates that the doctors should work together as a team for the best benefit to individual patients as well as the whole community. After serving 10 times as President of the Uganda Medical Association, Prof. Mungherera concluded that a loose association is not very effective in bringing doctors together to uphold the health concerns of Ugandans. She sought the help of this august House to enact a law to create the Uganda Medical Society. The Uganda Medical Society Bill has already been presented to this Parliament for the first reading; Prof. Mungherera would be very pleased if this 10th Parliament finalises this Bill.

    3) Advocating elimination of the catastrophic out of pocket expenditure on health care. As President of the World Medical Association, Prof. Mungherera visited many countries and realised that some of the most effective health care systems in the world rely on resources pulled together from modest contribution and individual service consumers. 

Unfortunately, many Ugandans continue to suffer financial ruin after paying out of pocket individually when a major illness strikes them. Prof. Mungherera would be pleased with this august House if it expedited the process of instituting a national health insurance. 
Thank you. For God and my country.” It is signed by Dr Fred Biso, honorary President, Uganda Medical Association.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this letter on the Table as a contribution from the Uganda Medical Association about the three above great concerns to remember as we honour Prof. Mungherera, on 14 February 2017. As I lay it on the Table, we request that this becomes part of the issue that should be discussed in this august House. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion which has been moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

I further would like to convey my condolences to the family of Dr Mungherera who has been appointed professor posthumously by Gulu University - I will therefore refer to her as Prof. Mungherera - the health workers and Ugandans. Two minutes are not enough for some of us to speak about Prof. Mungherera because she was a health worker of exceptional qualities. 

When I was training in medicine those days, you could hardly find psychiatrists who are women because it was a male dominated discipline but she chose to pursue a postgraduate training in psychiatry; that is the study of mental health. She also inspired many women to specialise in that area. 

However, it is a discipline which medical doctors do not usually go for; even with the many years of teaching medicine, I think we have around 30 psychiatrists in the country. They are not very many and I would like to thank her for the dedicated work that she put in. 

Dr Mungherera was of exceptional qualities, especially when it came to advocating for the welfare of health workers. There is a long story to this but I can just cite one or two examples: in 1999, I travelled with her and some other colleagues from the Ministry of Health to attend a conference in Kuala Lumpur Malaysia for five days. As we were checking out of the hotels, we found one of our colleagues from one of the West African countries. He had gone on a shopping spree, drunk everything in the mini bar and therefore he had no money to pay for his hotel bills. He was stranded because the hotel was telling him to pay his bills. 

Dr Mungherera became so concerned. She pulled out all the money that she had and mobilised us to top up and pay for the doctor. She said that she could not afford to see a doctor being humiliated. Just imagine she did this for somebody from West Africa.

The other incident I can cite is in 2012 when I was arrested due to the discussions we had here after the death of hon. Nebanda. She was among the first Ugandans to come and see me in the prison cells at that time when the Members of Parliament were afraid of visiting me. She said that she had come to see me not because I am a Member of Parliament but because I am a health worker. That shows you the kind of concern she had on the welfare of health workers.

I think the lesson to pick from this, and I am speaking now as a health worker agreeing with the issues being raised by Dr Lyomoki, is that Government and this Parliament should look into the issue of the welfare of health workers. 

Madam Speaker, when she was operated in India, we met up since I was the Minister of State of Health then. Her concern was what is being raised on the Floor of the House. She was asking why she needed to be operated in India and we discussed a range of measures, which Government is undertaking to make Mulago Hospital a centre of excellence. I do not have enough time to get into them because the Minister of Health may be given chance to do so. 

However, she shared these concerns and definitely Government is aware of them. There are also a number of measures being undertaken including training our senior doctors in specialised skills, rehabilitating Mulago and putting state of the art equipment. Other measures include passing laws here, which have made the cancer institute and heart institute into autonomous institutions so that we can improve services.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I just have a correction. Dr Sam Lyomoki talked of the bill to enact a law making the Uganda Medical Society a creature of the law. The Uganda Medical Association currently is just an assembly of doctors but it does not have the backing of the law. I had been working with Prof. Mungherera and the Uganda Medical Association and before I was appointed minister, I did move a motion seeking leave of the House to enable me introduce a Private Members Bill to create the Uganda Medical Society. It has not yet been tabled for first reading but I just want to appeal for the support of Members of Parliament, when that it is tabled soon. 

Right now, we are being assisted by the legal department in-house and I have also cross-checked so the Bill is almost ready. It will be moved for first reading anytime and I would appeal for support from Members of Parliament. This will be a law that will create the Uganda Medical Society so that the association of doctors is created by law just like other professions such as lawyers. This will help in advancing the cause of health workers, especially issues of welfare and terms of conditions. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. If you get stuck, let us know because it must be a long time since that motion was moved. It must be more than three years. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think we moved it in early 2015 but the doctors have been carrying out wide consultations because the Uganda Medical Association has branches. By then, when we moved the Bill, the draft that was attached only had views from doctors based around Kampala. The association has been conducting consultations from the doctors all over the country and I think they have more or less completed the consultation so the Bill should be tabled for first reading.

4.07
MS MARY KAROORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a fallen sister, Dr Margaret Mungherera. 

Madam Speaker, the life of Dr Margaret Mungherera is a very good example of a classical tragedy. A classical tragedy does not only hurt the family and the relatives but it impacts on entire communities, both local and global. The pain that has been felt by Dr Margaret’s death has been immense. She was my friend and we did a lot together in the women’s movements and so much more. She was an amazing person and she had that humane and touch that she took along with her medical profession.

Madam Speaker, we all will die but the testimony that you live behind is what matters. Dr Margaret Mungherera has left a fantastic testimony, an indelible mark. She kept the faith in everything that she did and I support everybody who has said that we need to look at her legacy and see how we can carry it forward.

Madam Minister of Health, everybody needs counselling in Uganda on this plague called cancer because people are scared. We always talk about early screening but when we tell people to go for screening if they suspect cancer cells, they say that they would rather not know. These days, we fear to eat everything; they say cancer cells feed on sugar. People are also advised not to use lipstick due to the fear of acquiring cancer. They also say if cassava has got a little bit of mould, it causes cancer. 

In Teso, groundnuts are one of our staple foods but they say once groundnuts have a bit of - what does not cause cancer? We all have telephones and we use them to send messages every day. If you use that telephone more than five times a day, you will get brain cancer. The same applies for Whatsapp and watching televisions. You have heard of all this. Honourable Minister of Health, please counsel Ugandans. Margaret, may your soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: You know it may require more than counselling. In China, every woman must be checked for cancer once a year by law, not negotiation. 

4.11
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to Dr Margaret Mungherera. I met her in the 80s in London, while studying. She was a devoted doctor. She was so devoted to her profession in that she chose to go and treat those with psychiatric problems. 

When you look around, how many doctors, even the Prime Minister here is a doctor; there is Dr Baryomunsi but how many of you chose to go and treat those with psychiatric problems? This is a lady who was committed and spent all her life working for this country. She was treating the sick and she did not even own a private clinic where she would go and make money by treating people privately.

She only earned that little money which Government paid her. 

She has died of cancer. If you go to the Cancer Institute – I have talked about the Cancer Institute so many times, Mr Prime Minister, you are a doctor. How many times you have visited that institute? The situation is pathetic. Hon. Karooro has just talked about the causes of cancer; we know them and we have appealed to the Government not to allow the import of old vehicles that are more than five to 10 years; they can cause cancer.

The situation is so bad at the Uganda Cancer Institute. Margaret has died – what are you doing? When are we getting the cancer machines? They should be instituted all around these referral hospitals. We have deducted money here and there to help our people – now Margaret is gone. Government is now lamenting; if we had all these provisions, our people would not be flying to India or going to Nairobi.

Doctors have run out of the country but Margaret chose to remain here and has served until she has passed on. What are you doing about it to save Ugandans? Wake up please and save our people. When you go to International Conference Centre, you say that we are putting 15 per cent of our budget on the health sector; but in reality, how much money are we putting there? 

4.13
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion to pay tribute to the late Prof. Mungherera and I would like to speak like a person who has benefited from her counselling and as a friend. 

Dr Mungherera inspired so many people; in my home, I have a daughter that is right now doing medicine in Aga Khan University on the guidance of Dr Mungherera. This is a girl who wished to do industrial chemistry but because there are a few girls who have done medicine in our region of Bukedi, and also because Dr Mungherera is an aunt and most of the children in our house referred to her as “aunt Mungherera”, she was able to change the mind of this girl to do medicine. This is the person we are talking about.

Recently, I had time to share with Dr Mungherera with a number of doctors when they were starting to lobby the team of several members of Parliament on the welfare of the members in the medical fraternity. We had that meeting with Dr Chris Baryomunsi, the chairperson of the Committee on Health, Dr Chris Oundo and the President of the Uganda Medical Association team, Dr Biso. This is a lady who was engaging people outside the medical team to see that Parliament comes out with a programme that can support the welfare of the members, within the medical field.

Despite having retired from the service, she still had that passion to see that in the medical team, people have the best of what they serve the people out there. I therefore would like to also add on to what our colleague, Dr Chris Baryomunsi and the Chairperson from the medical team – (Member was timed out.)

4.15
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Moyo District and on my own behalf, I would like to support the motion of paying tribute to the late Dr Mungherera who passed on recently. As it has already been said by my colleagues, Dr Mungherera was a team player, a role model in the health sector and she exhibited professional proficiency as well as a lady of integrity. 

She was selfless in her service of humanity. However, Madam Speaker, I am kindly and humbly requesting our current health service providers, doctors, nurses among others, to emulate Dr Mungherera. Recently in Arua, in one of the health centres III, a nurse abandoned a pregnant woman; that was not good and in Mityana, a similar scenario happened. Let us help our pregnant women and those in the emergency wards, that way, Dr Mungherera will turn happily in her grave.

There are also issues to do with money; let us first help out these pregnant mothers and those in the emergency wards and then the issue of money will come later. That is why I have been standing here to express this view – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please speak to us about the cancer machine, it is what the people would like to hear.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Achieng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion to pay tribute to Prof. Margaret Mungherera. As you have heard, she was an icon in the health sector and we shall remember her for her passion and dedication to her patients, her passion for better and quality health services. 

We shall also remember her as a strong advocate for the welfare of the medical personnel, a teacher and a mentor who supported health workers in their work and many universities to develop. I pray that her soul rests in eternal peace.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to give information on some of the issues that have been raised. I will start with the aspect of early screening. While it is true that we have challenges in the Uganda Cancer Institute, I would like to appreciate this House for making the cancer institute an autonomous institution. With this autonomous status, we shall be able to pay health workers much better and also attract back those who had left the country and also train more.

The Uganda Cancer Institute opened a training centre at Kayunga but as you have heard, there is a lot of stigma and the cancer institute together with the Ministry of Health, plan to intensify education. In our survey, we found that only nine per cent of the population knows about cancer. We have also opened another centre in Mbarara and Arua.

The Uganda Cancer Institute is planning to have a centre in all the regional referral hospitals. Regarding reduction of referrals abroad, allow me to inform this august House that there is already a plan in advanced stages to build an international specialised hospital at Lubowa and as soon as we are done with the issues surrounding the land, the construction will start. The plan is in advanced stages, the design and what is necessary is already approved.

THE SPEAKER: What hospital is that at Lubowa?

DR ACHIENG: International Specialised Hospital; it is a facility by the Government of Uganda for the people of Uganda. It is for various cases; a facility which will have over 600 beds and will offer services for the heart, cancer, orthopaedics – we need it here. Madam Speaker, as you are aware, we also commissioned one last Friday for children at Entebbe –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: We are here trying to make sense of what has gone wrong with our health system and demanding something simple. Is it in order for the minister to talk about something more sophisticated before the House yet we just want to hear about the cancer machine?

THE SPEAKER: I think, she thinks you want to know about her programmes broadly. However, my trouble is that all the facilities have been concentrated here in Kampala. Everybody from Karamoja, Kisoro and so on must come to Kampala. We have Mulago here, Kiruddu, Kawempe all in Kampala; what about the rest of Uganda?

DR ACHIENG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I mentioned, centres are being opened in all the regions and that is what we refer to as the regional referral centres. 

We have 14 regions in the country as designated by health. We have opened centres in Mbarara, Arua, the next will be at Gulu and Kabale, and then we shall move on to cover all the region referral hospitals.

Madam Speaker, regarding the Cobalt-60 machine that the honourable member is asking about – and I was coming to that issue - first, allow me to explain why it took so long. You will realise that this is a radioactive substance. 

It is not only a danger to the health of the health workers but also a potential risk in all circumstances that I will not mention. Therefore, it needed adequate planning to remove this source, secure and protect it.

Madam Speaker, we had a lot of discussions with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which advised that the source of the radioactive substance should be removed by the manufacturing country. That machine was donated to us in 1995. It took a while to discover the manufacturing country because it was a donation to Uganda.

When we discovered the manufacturing country, there was a catch - the manufacturing country was only willing to remove it on condition that we procure another one from them. Therefore, the International Atomic Energy Council had to come in and remove the source. This happened in late October last year. 
After the removal of the source, the second step was the renovation of that bunker, which is in advanced stages. It will be completed by the end of March this year.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda did pay for the Cabolt-60 machine. This machine is being manufactured. It will be delivered to the country on three conditions namely: 

    i. That the renovation of the bunker is complete;
    ii. The Atomic Energy Council certifies that the bunker has been renovated to the satisfaction of IAEA; and
    iii. The IAEA comes and verifies.

Madam Speaker, as I have mentioned, all these processes are in progress. I would like to inform this House that by end of May, we should have the Cabolt-60 machine installed. 

MS OSEGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue, as we are all aware, has taken quite a while as members raise concerns on the Floor. If I remember correctly, Government came here and gave us an explanation about the bunker and they said they were constructing.

Now, we are hearing the minister saying that they are renovating. If I remember correctly, they also said the machine was already procured. Now the statement is changing.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is a matter of coming to make statements to soothe us. How can people in positions of responsibility and after observing that the situation is getting dire in the country just come and lie to this House and the country?

If we extracted the statements from the Hansard, they are different from what we are hearing today. So, is it procedurally correct for ministers and Leader of Government Business to come and change positions in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, I direct you to retrieve the Hansard records so that we can check what Government said last time about this issue so that we understand where we are. 

However, honourable members, we had planned for 45 minutes - we have almost taken two hours on this debate. Can you please conclude, honourable minister? However, that other matter will come back; what was said last time and this time.

DR ACHIENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was moving systematically and coming to the issue of the bunker.  On the issue of the new bunker, it is under construction at Uganda Cancer Institute. The old bunker is situated in New Mulago.

The new bunker, Madam Speaker, has a capacity to accommodate six linear accelerators. It is not for a Cabolt-60 machine. This means the construction has to be done very carefully. The construction started and we are now about 45 per cent done. It is on-going by ROKO Constructors and it will be handed over to us at the end of this year.

Madam Speaker, allow me also to inform the House that the Government of Uganda secured a loan - and I want to thank this august House for that - to improve on Uganda Cancer Institute in three areas:

    i. Capacity building; we already have five oncologists being trained to run the Uganda Cancer Institute; and
    ii. Transformation of Uganda Cancer Institute into a centre of excellence. This will also begin shortly this year where a new home that is able to handle patients as well as training and research will be constructed.

Madam Speaker, while it is true that the budget for Uganda Cancer Institute for medicine is quite small, it has been increasing progressively from Shs 4 billion, in 2012 to Shs 12 billion now.

However, the cost for cancer medicine is quite high. It varies from Shs 300,000 to over Shs 400,000 for each viral. Each patient is supposed to receive a combination of three to four drugs. You can imagine the big burden that is. However, I would like to appreciate this House for increasing that budget in a progressive manner. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I just wanted to know whether you have signed the instrument of commencement of the Uganda Cancer Institute Act.

DR ACHIENG: Yes, Madam Speaker. It was signed in January for commencement on the 20th January.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)



THE SPEAKER: The question is that this House do approve a motion for paying tribute to Dr Margret Mungherera.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now instruct the Clerk to extract today’s Hansard and the tribute and send it to the family of Dr Mungherera. Thank you very much and may her soul rest in eternal peace. She was a great person.

Honourable members, we had received a report on the public accounts, if we could complete it and then go to to agriculture -I was proposing the PAC report but the members want agriculture to come first.  

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, with all due respect, I think we presented this report first in December. However, when it came for mention in this House, members said that they had not read in spite of it having been on the Order Paper and on the iPads.

Honestly, if we want to encourage the committees to do their work - there are seven reports on the way. I kindly request that we dispose of this report.


THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a report was presented and we are ready for debate today. Can I put the question? 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I propose that the question be put. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems that members are satisfied with the work of the Committee of the Public Accounts on the health sector, the report of the referral hospitals. I now put the question that the question be now put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Public Accounts Committee be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Public Accounts Committee; we are waiting for the other seven more. 

4.33
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. We have passed many reports from the accountability committee but the treasury memoranda are still missing. We do not know whether Government wants to quietly sit on those reports. 

Madam Speaker, may I, through you, ask the Leader of Government Business to give us feedback on all the reports of accountability committees that were passed in this House so that it does not become a ceremony. 


THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I think this session you have not brought any Treasury Memorandum. You did bring a few of them in the Ninth Parliament however, in this first session we have not seen any.

4.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS: (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, it is the intention of Government to put to optimal use the reports from the accountability committees. We will organise and inform the House and the Speaker as to when Government will come and say its position. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I believe the minister of agriculture has come in so let us go to item 3 (i). I hope that members have copies. Honourable minister, people would like to hear about the issue of food. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STRATEGIC POLICY ACTION PLAN ON FOOD SECURITY IN THE COUNTRY

4.35
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is information to the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda on the Strategic Policy Action Plan on food security in the country. 

Madam Speaker, you recall that at the 19th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the First Session of the 10th Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, you directed that a joint statement on the strategic policy action plan on food security in the country should be presented to Parliament on Tuesday, 14 February 2017.

Madam Speaker, the food security situation is getting worse, for example, the population that needed food relief increased from 1.3 million people –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is presenting but we don’t have copies of the report because some of our iPads are not opening. When we saw those papers being circulated we thought that is where we are going to read from. 

The Prime Minister had said that the minister had gone to make some copies and have them circulated - I wonder whether we are proceeding when some of us do not have those papers. 

THE SPEAKER: The minister says that the report was uploaded on your IPads. If there is any defect, let the Clerk check it. This issue is so important and we have been waiting for it since September. Minister, please proceed. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, the challenge is that quite a number of us cannot access information on the iPads. For close to two months now my iPad has failed to access information. 

I went to the IT Department last week and they promised that they would inform the service provider to avail us network. Today I went back again and instead they retained my iPad. 

The challenge is that we are in the House but cannot access the very important information that the minister is about to present. 


A few of us could be having the privilege of accessing the information but quite a number cannot. Personally I cannot access it. I wish you could guide on this matter.

THE SPEAKER: How many members cannot access information on their IPads? Honourable members, I also checked with the IT Department and got to realise that when they conducted the training, some of you did not go. (Laughter) Can we defer for 10 minutes while we receive a report from the National Economy? What do we do?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I suggest that the minister can proceed to read while the Clerk’s office helps us with copies to be circulated in the process.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the food situation in this country is really serious. I do not think we can continue pushing it. I ask the Clerk and her team to quickly find papers and make more copies for the members as the minister proceeds.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you. Madam Speaker. As I was saying, you recall that at the 19th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the First Session of the Tenth Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, you directed that a joint statement on the Strategic Policy Action Plan on food security in the country should be presented to Parliament on Tuesday, today, 14 February 2017.

Madam Speaker, the food insecurity situation is getting worse. For example, today a population that needs food relief has increased from 1.3 million people in November 2016, to 1.58 million people in January, 2017. This situation requires urgent Government intervention before it goes out of hand.

Madam Speaker, you may also wish to note that the Minister in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees presented to Parliament an information paper on food security situation in the country. 

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister constituted a multi-sectoral team comprising the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Water and Environment; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and the Office of the Prime Minister represented by the Ministry in charge of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to prepare a strategic policy action plan on food security.

The purpose of this information paper was:

    1. to notify the honourable members on the magnitude of the food insecurity situation in the country;
    2. to notify Parliament on the strategic policy actions for the food security situation in Uganda, which is categorised as immediate, short, medium/long-term; and
    3. to notify you that the strategic policy action plans on food security is costing Shs 8.475 trillion for the next four years.

Status of the food, water and pasture security in the country

Madam Speaker, you are aware that under the General Social and Economic Objectives part XIV(b) and XXII of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, food and nutrition security is a fundamental right of citizens. 

The food security applies to a situation where all people at all times have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to maintain a healthy and active life as stated by the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), 1996). The current food security situation in the country is worrying, ranging between minimal and the crisis level. 

The national food security analysis report of January 2017 is shown in the map attached and is based on five phases of food security, namely:

    i) Phase one – minimal; 
    ii) Phase two – stressed;
    iii) Phase three – crisis;
    iv) Phase four – emergency; and
    v) Phase five – famine

The report also indicated that 26 per cent of the total population in the country facing stressed food insecurity, that is phase two, has minimum adequate food consumption. They are employing insurance strategies and unable to afford some essential non-food expenditures. 

All regions in the country – and please note this honourable members - have a stressed population with east and central having the highest population (1.88 million) followed by south-western (1.24 million), Teso (1.1 million) and West Nile (1.04 million). 

The five per cent of the total population in the country under crisis – that is phase three - has widening food consumption gaps with deteriorating dietary diversity and high malnutrition rate. They are found in the central (0.58 million), Karamoja (0.12 million), Teso (0.2 million) east-central (0.38 million) and south-western (0.31 million). The affected population includes the poorest households with poor food consumption score, low meal frequencies of up to one meal a day and a low dietary diversity of less than three food groups.

The same report indicated that the total population that was in need of relief food stood at 1,586,184 people in the sub-regions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bukedi, West Nile, parts of Busoga, Isingiro, Bukomansimbi and Kalungu.

The worsening food security situation is attributed to the effect of the 2016 La Nina event which resulted into drought, causing reduced crop and livestock production. 

There has also been excessive sale of food, resulting into reduced household stocks and high food prices. Resurgence of crop and livestock pests and diseases contributed to reductions in production. 

The increasing demands from external markets has induced food price increases, making it difficult for poor households to access food from the markets.

Deteriorating water and pasture conditions, mainly in the cattle corridor, have resulted into migrations of livestock keepers, reduction in livestock production and increased spread of livestock diseases. 

Livestock keepers have been reported to migrate from Karamoja to Lango, Acholi, Teso and Elgon competing for pasture and water. 

The overwhelming influx of refugees from South Sudan has also increased the demand for food and services in the West Nile region. 

The water and pasture stress is compounded by the Turkana from Kenya that have crossed with over 66,000 animals to Kobebe Dam. In addition, the Toposa of South Sudan have also crossed to the dams of Kaabong District.

Factors that have contributed to the food insecurity in the country include:

Honourable members may be aware that the agricultural development has stagnated mainly because of overdependence on the rains. 

You are also aware of the frequent incidences of prolonged dry spells and floods in the country due to the impact of climate change. 

The current dry spell has continued to devastate most parts of the country since late November, 2016 and rains are expected in south-western Uganda in early and mid-March 2017. 

In the lake basin, the rains are expected in mid-March to early April 2017 and in northern Uganda and Karamoja, the rains are expected in mid-April 2017. 

The rains in Karamoja will be below normal, but the rains in south-western Uganda and central Uganda as well as around the lake basin, will be more than normal. 

The weather forecasts will be presented by the Minister of Water and Environment on Friday, 17 February 2017 at the Media Centre.

There are numerous other factors that are responsible for the negative food security situation in the country. These include pests, vectors and diseases, declining soil fertility, soil degradation and land fragmentation. 

The others are low fertiliser use, over selling of food, high food prices limiting access to food by households, rural-urban migration where the most productive age brackets especially the youth, are getting less involved in agriculture. 

Also on the list are: destruction of wetlands, low use or lack of mechanisation, limited use or lack of homestead and community storage facilities, inadequate knowledge on water harvesting and use of water for irrigation, sports betting and gambling, over consumption of alcohol and the negative attitude towards work among others. 

All the above factors have caused the food crisis that we are experiencing now. Government is taking measures to address the food situation in the country.

Madam Speaker, addressing these factors shall require partnership with all sectors, communities and the private sector in the areas of production like provision of inputs, mechanisation and irrigation, post-harvest handling, value addition and structured marketing. 

I would like to thank Parliament for its continuous support to the agricultural sector.

The strategic intervention for food security

The strategic policy action plan will, if well implemented, enable the country to become food secure and improve the livelihoods of the people of Uganda and enable achievement of the national aspirations of reaching the middle income status by 2020. 

The current threat to food security in the country calls for urgent formulation and implementation of a strategic policy action plan, to mitigate food security impact.

The economic assessment of the impacts of climate change in Uganda, by the Ministry of Water and Environment 2015, determined the cost of inaction under climate variability and change for the agricultural and water sectors amongst others. 

Between 2010, 2020 and 2050, damages could amount to somewhere between $140 and $260 billion, for these two sectors alone of which irrigation accounts for 70 per cent of the cost.

Madam Speaker, there exists policy frameworks in the country that address matters of food and nutrition security.  

The first is the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which recognises the fundamental rights of citizens to food and nutrition security, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGS), the National Development Plan (NDP) 2015/2016-2019/2020, the National Food and Nutrition Policy 2003, the National Agricultural Policy, 2013, the National Water Policy, 1999 and the National Trade Policy among others.

The main objective of this action plan is to improve the availability, accessibility/distribution and utilisation of quality food for all the households sustainably in the country.

The specific objectives and strategic actions under this plan are highlighted below:

    i) To provide food and water to vulnerable households and communities through, the provision of food relief and the provision of water service.
    ii) To increase availability and timely access to quality agricultural inputs, which include seeds, fertilizes, fish fingerlings, livestock breeds among others through the provision of seed, planting and stocking materials like crops, pasture, fish, livestock and horticulture.
    iii)  Supporting use and access to fertilizers and feeds.
    iv) To increase availability and access to water for agricultural production in order to increase production and productivity. This will be done through: design and construction of dams and valley tanks for water for water storage and harvesting, procurement/acquisition of new equipment and accessories for development and construction of valley dams to be deployed at regional level countrywide, the design and construction of micro and small-scale irrigation systems and water distributed to farms by gravity, solar, wind and electricity grid technology.

It will also include the design and construction of medium and large scale irrigation systems, design and construction of mega irrigation systems for bulk water storage, catchment planning and water shade management will be emphasised and soil and water management.

v)	To increase availability use, and access to agricultural mechanisation. This will include; equipment, machinery to implement technologies, components, assembling and local manufacturing through the provision and promotion of local manufacture of hand hoes, implements and tools, support the use and training of the communities on animal traction and power technology -(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I patiently listened to the minister right from page 1 - in fact, I started reading the document before he started reading it. We have now come to the end and I have even looked at the table. The minister appears to be reading a document prepared by a consultant giving a theory of what the sickness is and what needs to be done.

However, what the House is expecting from the minister is to diagnose the problem and I think he did very well by saying that this one is extreme or this one is straight, this one can be handled.

Madam Speaker, I expected the minister to tell us - because we already looked at some of the money, which has been disbursed for emergency relief. He should be telling us that in such an area, we have spent lots of money. We present those people and this would help us to tell you whether we received the money or not.  You can then tell us what you are doing now and so on.

However, as of now, you are just telling us what you need to do - we need water, fertilizers among others.  When is this going to be done?  By the time you put those things on the ground, I believe most of our people will have died. 

Can you tell the Members, who are supposed to make sure that the emergency is handled to save life - what is it that you are telling us in this paper which is going to save life of people who are watching us right now? I have really been very patient.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for the minister, to continue or would you give him another chance? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in his opening remarks, the minister said the purpose of this information was, among others, to indicate the immediate, the short and medium and long term strategies. I think he is going towards that.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am coming exactly to that. Should we go into the proposed interventions?

THE SPEAKER: You head to page 9. Members can read the others.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the Members on page 9, the interventions are proposed under immediate term strategies, which is within the next three months. Short term is in the next financial year. Medium and long term strategic actions are to ensure domestic food security and exploitation of available regional markets.

The immediate actions include:

Provision of Food and Water Reliefs

On this, I would like to report that the Office of the Prime Minister through the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees will continue to provide food relief to the tune of Shs 52.56 billion to the vulnerable households for a period of three months, which already started from January to May 2017. So far, the Office of the Prime Minister has received Shs 10 billion out of the Shs 52.56 billion. The rest will be provided in a phased manner. The food is being procured from internal sources. 

Meanwhile, early this month, we met the Uganda Grain Council in Entebbe and they confirmed that they have 50,000 metric tonnes of maize in their stores and warehouses. They also reported that another 150,000 was available in the stores of the private sector suppliers whom you can call the aggregators in the villages. 

It is known that there are seven major exit border points of food where it is estimated that there is outward movement of food equivalent to 100 metric tonnes daily, while through the formal outlet, takes about 700 metric tonnes per day. 

An equivalent of food outflow is estimated to be going out through other minor border points in the country daily, which can also take the same amount of maize a day hence, amounting to a total food loss of 1,400 metric tonnes daily. Therefore, in one month, the estimated food exit through these routes is at a total of 30,800 metric tonnes. From the above, it is clear that the country can sustain its food security and the exports of food to the region. 

However, there are sections of our population that cannot afford the food prices due to low purchasing power. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Water and Environment will respond to the water crisis in the most affected areas, using Shs 56 billion through, transportation and treatment of water to the communities, which include the silting of the dams.

We are going to provide the fast-maturing disease and drought resistant seeds –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him finish and then you can contribute?

MR SSEMPIJJA: We are going to provide fast-maturing and drought resistant seeds and planting materials which include maize, beans, cassava, banana planting materials and cow peas for the rehabilitation of the food production system for the first season, starting March 2017. Government has provided Shs 27.53 billion for this.

There will be continuous provision of food and nutrition surveillance and awareness campaigns on food security. This will take Shs 2 billion. 

MAAIF will promote the production and consumption of indigenous food security crops and underutilised food resources such as coco-yams, pumpkins, cassava, plantains and climbing yams at Shs 2 billion.

Therefore, the short term actions will be:
    i) To initiate a subsidy programme for sustainable availability and access to quality farm inputs. This will take Shs 286.7 billion; 
    ii) Acquisition of farm equipment for agricultural mechanisation will take Shs 136.8 billion;
    iii) Provision of water for irrigation for agricultural production; that is, livestock and horticulture, will take Shs 70 billion;

    iv) MAAIF will continue pasture improvement for increased diary production currently piloted in ten districts through the provision of tractor and pasture seeds at Shs 67 billion. In fact, we are going to use this Shs 67 billion to import 168 tractors by the end of December this year;

    v) Strengthen information, knowledge management, research and development and extension services. Madam Speaker, Government has already provided Shs 56 billion for this purpose;

    vi) The establishment of the agriculture fund is estimated to cost Shs 35 billion. This is the money that has been going to the agricultural credit finance, which will form the agricultural fund; and

    vii) There will also be creation and networking of markets and linkages both domestically and internationally will take Shs 45 billion. 

The medium and long-term intervention measures are detailed in the strategic policy action plan matrix attached here. Let me say that we shall look at the matrix and I will guide you through.

Budgetary Provisions

Madam Speaker, the budgetary provisions are contained in the four-year strategic policy action plan costing Shs 8.47 trillion as detailed in Annex 1. Thirty per cent of the budget is planned to be met by the private sector through the Public Private Partnership arrangement. 

Implementation Arrangements

The framework for the co-ordination and implementation of this strategic policy action plan will include:

    i) The Cabinet’s sub-committee on food security chaired by the Prime Minister, comprising of the Ministers of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Water and Environment, Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and Finance, Planning and Economic Development for policy direction; and

    ii) There will be an inter-ministerial technical committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries also comprising of the permanent secretaries of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) also comprising of the permanent secretaries, senior technical officers from the ministries of agriculture animal industry and fisheries, water and environment, trade, industry and cooperatives, relief disaster preparedness and refugees and finance, planning and economic development.

The implementation will be mainstreamed within the respective ministries, departments, agencies and local governments. These will be responsible for the day-to-day execution of the work. Similar frameworks will be established at the local government level to coordinate and implement the policy.

Monitoring and evaluation will follow the national monitoring and evaluation framework. Specific monitoring indicators for outcomes, outputs and activities will be developed by the implementing MDAs. 

The communication plan will be developed by the implementing MDAs and will be implemented under the guidance of the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, a point to note is that the leaders at all levels are expected to take lead in the levels of production, storage, food security and exports within their areas of jurisdiction. This calls for massive mobilisation for collective action to ensure food security at all levels countrywide.

Conclusion 

Government assessed and is aware of the magnitude of the food insecurity in the country and is taking collective actions. Government will continue monitoring the situation and provide regular updates.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, climate change is real and it is affecting agriculture and food production in the country. I would like to urge the private sector and individuals to invest in irrigation and get involved in farming. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all the honourable members of Parliament for the continued support to the agricultural sector.

I would like to guide the Members on the strategic action plan matrix for sustainable food security in Uganda. We would like to –(Interjections)– I have not gone through it but at least the heading at the top indicates the strategic intervention in the first column, the actions that are required for that intervention to be implemented, the responsible institutions, and the money that has been budgeted for in financial year 2017/2018. This is the immediate.

The next dark column shows the funding gap, if any, and the available funds and the next is funding gap but because this was for emergency, Government had to look for money and there is the money that Government mobilised. However, for the next financial years 2018/2019, 2019/2020 and 2020/2021, the funds will be availed in that manner.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I have just two areas of concern. One, you avoided talking about storage. I do not see the issue of storage. It has not surfaced anywhere.  

The second is that you are throwing it to the leaders to deal with the issue of exports in their areas. Supposing people in the East said that they are not selling food to go to Kenya, but those in West Nile said they want to sell and those in Bunagana said they are not sure of what to do - why are you not providing direction on this issue, honourable minister?  Those are issues.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, if you can look at the matrix – see paper four. Honourable members –(Interjections)- yes objective seven on supporting efficient post-harvest handling, storage, processing, value addition and marketing -

THE SPEAKER: Where is that?

MR SSEMPIJJA: The second last paper on the matrix - see 7.1 –(Interjections) - thank you very much. It is about supporting post-harvest handling, value addition, marketing, and storage infrastructure and storage facilities for 2.5 million households.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we decided to start with the homesteads and community storage because this is where the problem lies. Most of the losses that we face today on post-harvest are at homestead level. So, we are talking about supporting 30 per cent subsidies for provision of storage silos at household level to promote - the farmer will bring 30 per cent and Government will support 2.5 million households. The budget is Shs 215.03 billion and it goes on. In fact it is one of the biggest funded areas in this plan.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Point of procedure, Madam Speaker. In the interest of what we are going to debate - (Interruption)

5.20
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I thank you for - (Interjections) - hon. Kakooza respect. I have read hon. Ssempijja’s document - first of all, from the onset, hon. Ssempijja you have a problem. The country has gigantic problems because if one read through this document, they clearly will see no coherence of presentation of issues. Absolutely, it is a document that does not come out in a specific manner to address the problem. I would like to be very brief because many Members would like to speak and there is no time. 

One, those of you who come from the cattle corridor know that cows are dying. We wanted a clear, short and immediate remedy indicating where the acaricides are imported from –(Applause)– either from Europe or the moon. Did the factories close?

Hon. Ssempijja should come out unequivocally and tell us that he is bringing the acaricides next month so that cows can stop dying in this country. That is what we expected to hear.

Secondly, in September, we attended hon. Peter Ogwang’s function in Katakwi and we saw the complete absence of food; there were no gardens. When people talk of irrigation in a peasant situation like ours, I sometimes ask myself how we are going to ensure water for someone who is here and another who is on the other side. Irrigation survives in areas of plantation agriculture but in the peasantry setting, how are you going to ensure irrigation, hon. Ssempijja?

On page 4, you correctly identified some of the problems like stagnation of agriculture. In 4.2, you also talked about factors responsible for the negative food security: pests, vectors, declining soil fertility, degradation and fragmentation. When you come to prescription of how to address these problems, the answers are not satisfactory. Your answers are really lacking. 

You talk of sports betting – I will request the indulgence of the Speaker, at an appropriate time, to come here with a paper on sports betting in the country. The minister, throughout his paper, does not come out to tell us how to address it and even how to address mechanisation. 

You talk of valley dams and this reminds me of one of your predecessors, and my big sister, the former Vice-President. The money for those dams went into the drain. I hope this will not be another type of situation that we witnessed during the Sixth Parliament.  

I do not want to talk too much, in the interest of time, but this document needs a lot of surgery and proper chronology of how to address the problems. 

Food is being bought and externalised by Kenyans and Tanzanians. I do not want to sound as if I am not East African but the little food that is there is being taken away. What measures are there to stop this hemorrhage?

MR KAKOOZA: Procedure, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I will come to you, hon. Kakooza. We are here in the middle – the cows in Gomba? Even in Kamuli. There is someone on the Floor. You cannot give information from the air. Honourable member, please sit.

5.25
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister for his report. However, it has a lot of things lacking and there is no clear answer as to what we are going to do to save our people.

Madam Speaker, we attended a meeting about two weeks ago with the refugee hosting communities and it was found that instead of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees giving food as it used to, the implementing agencies now give money to these refugees to buy food in areas where there is no food. 

The locals do not have access to food and the refugees are given money to buy food from the very scarce source. This has increased the state of famine in this area. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: You are harassing the honourable member. Let him make his contribution. Let him finish first and then I will come to your procedure. I have your name.

MR ETUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection. We found that the money given to the refugees has in fact caused more disaster to the local communities because we expected the United Nations High Commission for Refugees –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Quickly complete the issue of the refugees.

MR ETUKA: We expected the United Nations High Commission for Refugees to at least get food from other places where there is food because the local community does not have where to get food from. This is a very big problem and it has worsened the situation of food shortage in West Nile. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, what was the issue? Let us hear the procedural issue. There are too many of them here. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the minister. However, the intention of Parliament was an immediate remedy to what is happening. The paper given to us is a national strategic plan for four years and not the action plan today. In the current situation, people are dying. If the minister does not have money, what resolution can we take to prevent this situation from happening? 

What has been read here is the extract of the policy statement within the National Budget Framework Paper of three or four years ago. Therefore, the question is, what are you doing now and what remedy can we have to prevent people dying of hunger, lack of water and others? Those are the questions.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a procedural matter. 

Two months ago, in this very House, we moved a motion that the Government adopted in regard to coming up with a food security sustainability plan in the country. The resolutions and prayers that were adopted by Government were very clear: short term, mid-term and long term. 

Today, I expected the honourable minister to have looked at those resolutions that were adopted by this House and give us a way forward on how to implement those resolutions.

When you look at the minister’s paper, it is lacking in regard to the prayers that this House adopted. In the short term, we had resolved that an inter-ministerial meeting be immediately convened between the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Office of the Prime Minister, the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness under the Office of the Prime Minister.

This inter-ministerial meeting was to resolve particular issues including aid to areas that are in dire need so that they can be supported with short term strategies like relief items. I have not seen that in this report.

Secondly, we also said that food relief is not sustainable because it addresses the short term. In the long run, the Minister of Agriculture should come up with clear and concise measures in terms of addressing issues to do with irrigation instead of waiting for rain for a year.

The minister has just presented the reasons why there is food scarcity in the country, one of these reasons being negligence but I do not think that is the situation because all along, Uganda has been a food basket to most of the neighbouring countries. We have been having comparative advantage in agriculture. 

Today, we are talking about climate change. I expected the Minister of Agriculture to tell us, in case there is no rain in Teso, Karamoja and northern Uganda, what strategies have we put in place in the short term to address the calamity so that people can continuously –(Member timed out.)

5.33
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago County North, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I got a copy of the statement of the minister, I made reference to what was on the Order Paper and I made reference to the day you directed him to come with a report.

Madam Speaker, we have a very serious problem. The country has suffered drought that has no precedence. I am 64 years old and I do not know of any situation in this country where nearly every part of the country has suffered drought. What we expected is that the minister, as we had requested, would come with a simple position paper to clearly quantify the extent of the challenge, secondly to clearly tell us what our Government has put in place to address that challenge. 

It is not in this report. If we go on with the debate and the rest of the country and many people who are hungry and have no food watch us debating this statement of the minister, I do not know what they will think of us as a Parliament. 

My simple proposal is that Government goes and comes back with a statement about what they are going to do about the food situation in this country for the next six months because in the next six months, there will be no crop harvest except perennial crops, assuming that it will rain.

I am amazed that the minister talks about allocating money to buy beans. From where? We have had drought and the little maize that we had has been taken out of the country. It is really unfortunate that what we are seeing in this statement is total neglect of responsibility on the part of the people in Government.

I beg that we do not even honour this document with a debate and ask Government to come back with a clear report on what they are going to do in the next six months to address the food shortage situation in this country, otherwise - (Member timed out.)

5.36
MS JOVAH KAMATEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to thank my colleagues who have expressed what we expected the minister to come up with.

The minister told us, right from the beginning, that all parts of Uganda have been affected by the drought but then he said that Government will continue to give relief to households, which are in dire need. I would like to ask the minister, which households are these? Have they been identified throughout the country or are we just looking at pockets of places in this country and assuming that this is where households in dire need are? We thought that the minister would come and tell us that so far they are supplying relief in so many households in Uganda in such parts.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the minister rightly pointed out that we are able to feed ourselves but some of the food is being exported. What are we doing as a Government to ensure that this food does not go out? As hon. Amongin said, this House should pronounce itself on what should be done.

The honourable minister said that there will be an inter-ministerial committee. We thought that this inter-ministerial committee should have been formed a long time ago. We have been with the drought for several months now. What is it that we have been doing? Why are we still allowing food to go out? Why can’t the Ministry of Agriculture sit with Ministry of Trade and the Prime Minister’s Office and agree on an immediate strategy? Madam Speaker, what we are crying for is an immediate workable solution that will stop our people from dying. I beg to submit.

5.38
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity. I am coming out to speak on behalf of the people within the cattle corridor. We are suffering so much. Actually in my constituency, whenever the constituents see me, my name has become synonymous with the request for water or for water bowsers. We do not have water and we need de-silting of our existing dams as a stop-gap measure.

What we are looking for are priorities within priorities. Some of the dams exist but they need to be de-silted before we get new dams. We could also have bowsers given to us, which we could use. I looked at the table on 1.1 and only one bowser was brought to Gomba but it has already gone back and people still need it.

The crops in the gardens have dried up and instead are being given to the animals to eat, which was not the purpose for which they were planted. The cows are getting sick because they all collect at one water point and so the ticks continue spreading. 

We are really badly off. We are looking for first aid in terms of agriculture for priorities within priorities, like I have stated. Mr Minister, although this is a commendable document, it cannot work for now. It will find our cows dying even more and our crops will have dried up completely. We need immediate intervention. Thank you.

5.40
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving a motion, under our Rules of Procedure, to have this statement of the minister thrown out and the grounds are that having perused the statement, it is silent on areas that are of emergency as categorised under 3.3 and the areas and families that are under famine.

It is silent on the immediate actions to be taken, including not quantifying the food requirements for the entire country other than merely stating that so much is going outside the country.

It is contradictory, under paragraph 5 because paragraph 5(1) says, “The current threat to food security in the country calls for urgent formulation and implementation of strategic policy action plan to mitigate the food security impact.” When you look at the proposed immediate actions, they are inadequate. 

Therefore, I move a motion that this statement be thrown out and the minister should come with a proper action programme failure whereof, Parliament moves under Article 110 to urge Government to declare a state of emergency. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, your proposal is for financial year 2017/2018. The Members’ interest is financial year 2016/2017. That is what they want you to address; the period between now and July and not the other long term plans.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I appreciate the concern but I also want to remind the honourable members about what we agreed on the last time the Speaker instructed me to go and bring a comprehensive action plan. It was not only for the short-term. It was for short, medium and long term.

For the short term and immediate –(Interjections)- let me explain, honourable member. I am equally concerned. In fact sometimes even much more concerned.

When you go to page 9, item 6.2, the heading is, “Immediate actions that we are going to implement”. For Members who want to know exactly what we are going to do, this money; Shs 52.56 billion was not in the budget of 2016/2017. This money has been mobilised by Government to handle the issue of relief. That is my first point. 

We go to item No.6.2 – (Interjections) – let me inform you, sir. We go to page 10 – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Honourable minister, I am seeking clarification on that Shs 52 billion. You informed this House that of the Shs 52 billion, Shs 10 billion has already been released and we are aware of it. What have you done with that Shs 10 billion? How much food have you supplied and how much more do you need? How soon are you going to receive the balance to save Ugandans? That is what we want to hear.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek further clarification from the minister. Honourable minister, from your statement, you said that the supply would be between February and May. Right now, February is ending. Can you tell us what plans you have and what exactly you are going to do in February?

As I speak, people are suffering and others are dying. We need immediate intervention. What are you going to do in February, which is almost ending?

MR SSENGO KALULE: Madam Speaker, on page 9, the minister is talking of food that is going out and at the bottom, he says, “Therefore, in one month, the expected food exit through these routes is a total of 30,800 metric tonnes. From the above explanation, it is clear that the country can sustain its food security and export of food to the region.”

How can you export food when people are starving? I would have expected the minister to tell us that they are going to stop the outflow of food so that we can feed our people but instead, the minister is saying that we can sustain the region.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I took issue with the proposal on page 12 that says, ”Leaders at all levels are expected to take lead in the levels of production, storage, food security and export within their areas.” I do not know whether I am supposed to deal with exports in Malaba, Kitgum or Arua. I do not know why Government is running away from this. Bite the bullet and tell us what to do.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, regarding the Shs 10 billion out of the Shs 52 billion – this Shs 52 billion that has been earmarked is going to be released in phases up to May. We agreed that this money will sustain the vulnerable families up to May. Now, the mistake - (Interjections)- let me come to that, please –(Interruption) 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Yesterday, I carefully watched the NTV news that was showing us the situation on the ground. In Karamoja, people are drinking boiled water without any food substance. The older ones have resorted to taking tobacco as a way of mitigating hunger. The children are dying because of lack of food and now the minister is here telling us that what they have is to cater for the vulnerable people. I want to know if he is in order to neglect the people of Karamoja who are taking boiled water yet they are not included among the vulnerable communities?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think that he has given us the names of the vulnerable communities. Maybe Karamoja is one of them.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the list of areas that have been supplied by the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Karamoja is among the areas that we are serving. I will bring it on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are not helping us because when we instructed you in September, we were clear that the Ministry of Agriculture should take the lead together with the ministries of Disaster Preparedness, Trade, Finance and Water. That is why the Order Paper is talking of a joint statement. 

Now the issue of these areas, which are served is not here. That is the problem we have. We asked you to do it jointly. I do not normally write after Parliament but I wrote to the Prime Minister as a follow-up to our debate. Now we do not have sufficient information -

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I request the Members to allow me to bring the details on Tuesday. I have the details.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– I am on procedure. Madam Speaker, I thank the Members for the submissions and input. We are all interested in making sure that Uganda is food secure. We have noted the concern and the improvements made by various Members on our document and – (Interjection)- yes, the improvement. By your submissions, you were improving and guiding. 

I, therefore, want to request that I take back the statement, as requested by many Members of Parliament. (Applause) I have listened to you, the presiding officer, and you have also raised concerns. Let us go and sit with the existing committee; the Cabinet sub-committee and hopefully, we shall produce a document, which has taken into account the concerns of the Ugandans, through their representatives who are the honourable Members of Parliament. We will come back to the House on Tuesday, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The debate is deferred to Tuesday next week but please, we would like to have a complete joint - not filling in the gaps. It must reflect your progress.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we are doing it jointly and I am a witness to some of the meetings, which I attended with the Ministry of Trade, Agriculture and Office of the Prime Minister where we have Disaster and Refugees and Ministry of Water. We are doing it jointly and we will continue doing this.

THE SPEAKER: Debate is deferred to next week.  

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I am aware that your indulgence has already prevailed that this debate must be deferred. However, the point of procedure was to guide on how to proceed. Since we are talking of the short, mid and long term and what seems to be most touching is the short term, what are the most immediate interventions? 

My concern would be if they are reporting back to the House on Tuesday, I think that the short term interventions should be given more priority than the interventions that tend to look at when Uganda will attain middle income status and Vision 2040.

Madam Speaker, the reason is that on an empty stomach, we cannot even wait for the middle income status so the most immediate should be the short term interventions. Otherwise, as I talk, in my constituency –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate has been deferred and I hope that the ministers are listening. The Hansard is also there.         

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 17.1 MILLION (US $24 MILLION EQUIVALENT) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL  DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA HIGHER EDUCATION CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE PROJECT

5.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $24 million from the International Development Bank of the World Bank Group to support the Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centres of Excellence Project. 

In considering this loan request, the Committee on National Economy held various meetings. They also received briefs to Parliament on the loan proposal and we also received confirmation of the availability of counterpart funding from the Government, a letter from Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Director-General of the OPEC Fund for International Development and a brief to the committee by the Vice Chancellor of Makerere University and Mbarara University of Science and Technology and the minutes together with the report. I beg to lay them on the Table.

Madam Speaker, the members of the committee considered the request by Government to borrow $24 million from the World Bank to support the Eastern and Southern Africa Higher Education Centres of Excellence Project, spearheaded by the Ministry of Education, in accordance with Rule 166 (2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, this report is uploaded on the iPads and people can easily follow and I will skip some parts.

Background

Higher education system in Uganda has experienced expansion in the past decade in terms of enrolment and institutions. Despite the impressive growth in enrolments and institutions, the sector is not sufficiently oriented towards the development needs of the country. It is largely input driven and historically funded with inadequate attention to performance and results. The system produces low numbers of graduates, particularly in science, health, agriculture and engineering with less than 30 per cent of graduates majoring in these fields; just 10 per cent for PhD students in Science and Technology fields with female rates being even lower. 

The lower number of higher education graduates impact on the overall teaching quality, teaching force including research and capacity within these disciplines at lower levels of education - (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are about to make a major decision to borrow and when I look at the House, today being 14 February and this day is called Valentine’s Day, majority of us have left our red ties and red skirts at home.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you allow us to go and put on those ties so that we can deal with this report tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Can we just listen to the report and then debate it tomorrow? Allow us to receive it then we go for Valentines.

MR BATEGEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I was taking you through the background of higher education. Basically, higher education is grossly underfunded – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Karamoja, where many students seek for education, to leave the House when they are presenting the loan request when he knows that he must be here to listen?

THE SPEAKER: No, the minister should remain here while we discuss higher education. Please come back. 

MR BATEGEKA: Higher education quality in Uganda is also undermined by the low pace of faculty capacity development and qualifications. Many universities in Uganda do not have sufficient number of qualified faculty, which in turn prevents them from providing relevant higher education, training and research mentoring. 

They are also constrained by the small number of PhDs produced each year who are candidates for faculty recruitment or to lead research hubs or centres. To ensure high quality in higher education and research, the production of Masters and PhDs must be increased. 

Independent research capacity is extremely low. Most of the research outputs in Uganda are reproduced with international collaboration. Only 30 per cent of publications in Eastern Africa and 20 per cent in Southern Africa are the result of national or regional collaboration. 

Although international collaboration is important, it may result in the research agenda being driven by international partners, including their interests. Regional collaboration on common development problems remains the most efficient way of solving the region’s development challenges. Regional collaboration is however impeded by low researcher and staff mobility, leading to insufficient cross-regional collaboration for addressing development challenges. 

The limited engagement with the private sector is reflected in the mismatch between the labour market needs and competencies of graduates. Despite the fact that enrolment in higher education has been on the rise in the region, business surveys continue to highlight that firms cannot find sufficiently skilled workers, particularly those with scientific skills. 

An example is the growing but unfilled employment need in sectors such as extractives and railways. The lack of engagement between the industry and universities also hampers innovation. As universities have limited engagement with industry, industry has little confidence in the capacity of universities to generate graduates as problem solvers for their specific problems. 

The barriers to university industry linkages include: the lack of universities’ knowledge of industry needs as well as the industry’s lack of knowledge of the universities’ research capacity, limited knowledge of how to engage with industry, a lack of capacity to broker agreements or contracts with industry and a lack of knowledge of how to showcase research outputs and implications.

The African Centre of Excellence project is a regional project involving eight countries namely: Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The project seeks to promote regional specialisation among participating academic institutions within areas that address regional development challenges through strengthening the capacities of higher education institutions of learning to deliver high quality training and applied research. Applied research is a big issue there.

The higher order objective of the project is to meet the demand for skills required for Africa’s development such as skills for the extractive industries, agriculture productivity, among others. That is a big matter. 

Furthermore, the project will contribute to the strengthening of the best African institutions in science-based education in areas such as Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM), health and agricultural sciences. All the above interventions under the project will greatly contribute to addressing the above highlighted challenges facing the higher education system in Uganda.

Regarding the objectives of this project, Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, I think that we have had justification. Just go to the components and the observations. 

MR BATEGEKA: Okay, you can read the rest. I have left project linkages to the country strategy.  

Project Components

Basically, this project has three components. Component one, which takes the biggest proportion of money, is to strengthen African Centres of Excellence. In our case, these centres of excellence are located in three universities: Makerere University, Mbarara University and Nkozi University.

Just for summary, the World Bank invited proposals - many universities presented proposals and they were evaluated by the present evaluators. Makerere University got two projects: one is to do with the centre of materials products development and non-technology at Makerere University and the other one is to do with crop improvement at Makerere University. 

The other one was at Mbarara University of Science and Technology to do with farm bio-technology and traditional medicine centre. 

The third is Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi where one project was successful; the African Centre for Agro-Ecology and Livelihood Systems. These are the ones we are talking about in Uganda. The others are for the other countries.   

The second component or project is capacity building support to African Centres of Excellence through regional interventions. That project will take little money; about $3 million. 

The third intervention component is facilitation, coordination and administration of the project implementation, which is also about $5 million. Most of the money is to develop capacity of these institutions. 

Project Financing

The overall regional project cost is estimated at $148 million of which the World Bank has agreed to avail $24 million to Uganda. I think the financing for the other countries does not concern us here but you can read about them. 

The loan amount is $24 million and the maturity period is 38 years, including a grace period of six years. The commitment charge is 0.5 per cent on un-withdrawn credit balance and service charge is 0.75 per cent on withdrawn and outstanding credit balance. 

The Current Debt Situation of the Country

The loan will of course increase Uganda’s total nominal public debt that is currently standing at $8.5 billion as at the end of June 2016. External debt contributes 60 per cent of the total debt while 40 per cent is domestic debt.

The Debt Sustainability Analysis conducted in November, 2016 revealed that in both the medium and long-term, Uganda’s public and publically guaranteed external debt is sustainable, standing at below 50 per cent. Therefore, we are debt distressed but this will not make us fail to manage our debt.  

Committee Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that inability by companies to find adequately skilled manpower, institutional inability to conduct high impact research, low research output and patents, inadequate quality of education across the region, minimal training engagements for students in the private sector and inadequate number of qualified faculty with few faculty members with PhD degrees is a major concern in Uganda and within the region.

The committee therefore recommends that Government should ensure a strong stakeholder involvement, participation including the private sector in the implementation of this project. This will ensure that project skills development initiatives are relevant to the labour market, which will enhance generation of higher innovation in manufacturing, health diagnosis, among others; development of a fully functional material product development and nanotechnology lab, developed new collaboration networks regionally and internationally, increased joint submission for research findings, product value addition and product development and increased number of qualified faculty members with PhD degrees and Masters’ programmes. 

The committee noted that the project will enhance institutional capacity to provide quality post-graduate education with relevance to the labour market - the issue here is relevance to the labour market because we are talking about applied research - conduct high quality applied research relevant to addressing key development challenges/priorities, enhancing partnerships with other academic institutions (national, regional and international) to pursue academic excellence, enhance partnerships with industry and the private sector to generate greater impact and improve governance and management of the institutions, and set up role models for other higher education institutions. 

There is a weak relationship between the private sector and research institutions, which has led many interesting research findings to remain in libraries without being commercialised.
 
The committee recommends that the partnership between researchers and the public sector should be strengthened in order for researchers to understand the market needs. Government should ensure the existence of strong stakeholder involvement between the private sector and the generators of knowledge in the implementation of this project. This will ensure the relevance of the project skills development initiatives to the labour market in the country. Government should also expedite assistance to research centres and institutions to commercialise the many research findings, including patenting the products.

There is no close relationship between host institutions and African Centres of Excellence projects where these projects are stand-alone and cause distortions in the institutions. That collaboration will close the gap. 

The committee recommends that Government should, as much as possible, partner with regional member countries in such ventures. In the past, the generation of research has been grossly underfunded, particularly applied research, which is a foundation for development. The committee noted with appreciation that this funding is going to address this matter.

Government should find or source for more money for funding research that will lead to innovation. The way these loans are won is competitive. This is an opportunity for centres of excellence to become attractive to the region. Government should increase investment in centres of academic excellence to enable them to be more competitive. Government should also intensify the regulation of mushrooming universities to ensure persistent quality to regain Uganda’s glory as the centre of excellence in the region.

Primary and secondary schools are the sources of candidates for centres of excellence but they are not equitably distributed nationwide. Government should ensure equitable distribution of universal primary and secondary schools as per Government policy and also pay special attention to areas with peculiar needs like hard-to-reach and hard-to-work areas.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that subject to the above recommendations, the request by Government to borrow $24 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to support the Eastern and Southern African Higher Education Centres of Excellence Project be approved. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and Members of the Committee on National Economy. I have examined the signatures and they are adequate. However, at the end of last year, when we had the national day of prayer, this year was declared the year of the family. Therefore, I am obliged to allow Members to go and enjoy their Valentines today. (Laughter) The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 15 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)

  




