

Thursday, 8 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.54 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. In the public gallery we have members of the Bagungu Community Association from Buliisa. You are welcome. (Applause) 

Honourable members, you have heard their representatives raising complaints about their status on the Floor of this House a number of times. Among the things they say is that they are the hosts of the central processing facility. The biggest part of the oil is in Buliisa and they are complaining that they have not yet seen how they are going to benefit from this oil. They have not been briefed about the likely environmental impact of the exploration developments of the oil. They have also complained about being invisible in Government; that they are not in the Cabinet, among the permanent secretaries or even the resident district commissioners.

Their main petition will be brought on Tuesday but I thought I would mention a few points so that they know that their concerns have arrived. I would like to ask the Government to take their interests into account: sensitise the population about what is happening because they just see people moving back and forth and they have not been consulted.

Let us make an effort to move closer to the population on all those issues. Otherwise we welcome them, thank you very much.

There a few Members who had matters - hon. Rosette Mutambi

2.58
MS ROSETTE MUTAMBI (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the increasing number of patients with Multi-Drug Resistant TB (MDR) in Mbarara District, particularly in Ndaija sub-county.

Mbarara District has registered 27 multi-drug resistant TB cases and out of these, 15 of them are from Ndaija sub-county. They were 16 but one of them died recently.

Ndaija sub-county is along the highway and some of the town councils on that highway are a hub for long distance trucks. The district is facing constraints because there is a health centre IV taking care of all the 15 MDR cases but they are understaffed. Out of the required 19 staff, they have only nine. They are sharing only one mask that they are using as protective gear. You can imagine caring for 15 patients using one mask. They have no motorcycle and the district has no vehicle for follow-up. 

We know that MDRs are not only difficult to treat but costly to us as a country: about Shs 10 million per case. This is very serious and needs urgent attention. Whenever there is a case of MDR, the facility is supposed to follow-up this case so that people that the patient has been associating with are also encouraged to go and test in order to identify other cases. However, this is not being done in Ndaija and we fear that this could be contributing to the increasing number of MDRs.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Ministry of Health takes this as an emergency and puts in place measures to support Ndaija Health Centre VI with a motorcycle and more protective gear as well as increase the number of staff working here because they already have an HIV/AIDS day and now a TB day. This is despite the regular patients that come in. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will ask the Ministry of Health to address the emergency situation in Ndaija sub-county. 

3.02
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance and one is about the stinking Lugazi Municipality due to chemicals and gases emitted by Lugazi SCOUL and Hope Trading Company Limited. Several interventions by my office and Lugazi Municipal Council, including NEMA, have all failed or have been intentionally averted by management for more than two years now.

When you pass through Lugazi Municipality, the whole municipality is stinking. These chemicals used by SCOUL and Hope Trading Company Limited in Lugazi can stink on various days in the whole of Lugazi Central for hours, causing expectant mothers to vomit and people to close their businesses. 

We see passers-by vomiting through the windows in their vehicles, some of them holding their noses and others could even develop cancers in the long run due to the heavy stench and gases that they keep inhaling.

It is my prayer and that of the people of Lugazi Municipality that you direct a committee of this House to investigate and report on the way forward. Members who come from the east can bear me witness that sometimes when you pass through Lugazi Municipality, it is stinking. 

Secondly, I had a meeting with Kawolo Hospital management during their end of year party that was held on 2 February this year. The Medical Superintendent, Dr Kiberu and team noted with thanks the on-going Kawolo Hospital renovation and re-equipment. However, they requested Parliament to give special consideration for the eye care services as people suffering from blindness, which is preventable, are on the increase countrywide. It is their prayer that we give this special attention when handling the Budget process.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to instruct the Committee on Natural Resources to visit Lugazi Municipality and examine the source of the effluence and report back to the House. 

I would also like to ask the Ministry of Water and Environment and National Environment Management Authority to take an interest in what is happening there as well. 

Concerning the eye clinic, we will ask the Minister of Health to update us on what is happening regarding eye deficiencies and optical needs.
  
3.05
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue concerning the 52 retirees of the air force whose benefits were not paid. They went to court and their benefits were calculated to be over Shs 6.7 billion.

The counsel that stood for them was Bashasha and Company Advocates. I have a letter written by a one Geoffrey Madete for the Solicitor-General, directing the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs that such a huge sum of money be deposited in the accounts of M/s Bashasha and Company Advocates, Bank of Baroda Uganda Limited A/c No.95010200001153.

The issue of contention is that this account is not the payee. There are 52 people who are payees and are entitled to their benefits. If this money is sent to the account of the counsel, there is likelihood that they may not receive this money. 

Madam Speaker, the people we are talking about are senior people of different ranks and I may not read all their names. However, we have a major general, three lieutenant colonels and one of them is hon. Col. Tom Butime. We also have about 12 majors, captains, lieutenants, two warrant officers, sergeants and the last one is Pte Simon Onyait.

Madam Speaker, I am raising this as a matter of national concern because this House should be able to inquire from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs why such monies should be banked in the account of the counsel and not in the accounts of the 52 affected personnel.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether this matter can be handled by this House. We have taken note, I will study it and see where best to channel it because this was a matter, which was heard in court and I do not know what they agreed with their lawyer. However, we can maybe contact the court but I do not know whether it is in our domain to collect debts.       

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, this is urgent because this payment is expected next week. They are very affected and that is why they came to me and other Members. We need to streamline, as a House, and pronounce ourselves on whether that retirement benefit can be tampered with and not put direct into the accounts of the retirees. May I lay this document on the Table for the record of the House?

3.09  
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you have said and certainly as a lawyer, sometimes clients have their lawyers and they can decide where their money should be paid. However, if this is an issue that has come from them, we will get in touch with the Attorney-General before that payment is made so as to sort out that issue. 

However, as you have said –(Interjection)– order for what? Have you come for a solution or –

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, the same firm we are talking about was given money for the compensation of those who were affected by Umeme power extensions. The minister is aware that, that money was not delivered to the beneficiaries. Therefore, they have a track record of not delivering money to the beneficiaries and that is why these members are so hurt and they seek for the intervention of this House.

Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to assert that there is a form of understanding between these clients and their counsel yet they are complaining against the same counsel? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the relations between a lawyer and client are confidential. It is very difficult for us to say what happened. As I said, we have noted the matter and we shall follow it up. However, I think part of that is an issue for the Uganda Law Society to handle. If they are taking people’s money, the Uganda Law Society should get involved.

3.11
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which I would like to bring to the attention of this House. On Monday, over 100 houses were burnt down and people’s property destroyed in Mabanga C, in Buikwe District by military operations.    

We are aware and in support of the Government programme to fight bad fishing on the lake but not in such a manner where children and women were left crying as you may have seen on television. These people were given minutes to vacate the place. Their property was thrown out as if they are not human beings. As I speak, majority of these people have nowhere to go. 

Recently, we had a similar crisis where fire gutted Kimi Island and it was Government that came up with support. These people also need support because they are in a terrible situation. When they come to us the leaders, we have no answers. 

Recently, the islanders met His Excellency the President on how best we can help the poor living on the islands without using bad fishing methods so that we can support them through SACCOs and so that they can also compete with the tycoons. 

It is my prayer that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees intervenes to help these innocent affected people because they have nowhere to start from.   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Muyanja, was it because of fishing that they were ejected? Who ejected them, anyway?  

MR MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, it was the military and we watched this on television. (Interruptions) Can I give a chance to the fisherman first?

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, hon. Muyanja, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have always cried about the same thing; that Government has not come up with any special programme for the fishing community. Government is witch-hunting us and we have nowhere to hide. 

The President deployed the army in Buikwe to fight illegal fishing. The army is very limited on the lake and they do everything to ensure that even when they are not in a particular area, their presence is felt. 

If the army goes to an area, say about three times, and ask people to stop illegal fishing and the people persist, at the fourth time, they can torch the whole landing site to ensure that these people vacate it. This is actually a forced vacation - the scorched earth policy. That is what happened in Buikwe and in Kalangala. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to visit and support those people. 

Concerning the conduct of the military, I also received complaints from Namayingo, Buyende and some parts of Buvuma about the way people are being treated. I had occasion to discuss it with the President and brought these concerns to his attention and he said there is going to be a meeting to discuss this situation. 

However, I would like to appeal to the army to treat these people as human beings. If I live near the water, why do you want me to just leave yet it is where I have been brought up?

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, there are so many ways through which the military can evacuate or force people to leave. They can take all the boats away –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What has been happening along the lakeshores - because I have landing sites in Mitundu, Bukakata sub-county and Mutemante - is that people were evicted with reasons that some of them are practising bad fishing. 

That would not be the problem but our major worry is that after evicting these people from villages where they have lived for ages, then we see people taking over their land. I think there is something beyond bad fishing, which must be thoroughly investigated so that we get to know why people are being evicted along the lakeshores. 

We live in suspicion of what is underneath the ground, which could be the reason people are being evicted. 

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I would like to make clarification on this on - I am also a fisherman from Obongi –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: If all the fishers speak, what work shall we do?

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, what we need to understand are the terms of reference given to the troops deployed there. Are they to stop illegal fishing or to evict people? You can stop illegal fishing without evicting people. 

Illegal fishing is about the methods; the gear used to catch the size of fish which are said to be immature or unfit to be caught. The solution to this is to give people the right gear. If they have the wrong fishing gear, stop them from using it but do not evict them from their homes or from the landing sites. Thank you.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to add is that we should really get concerned about what the work of the army is in this country.

As I speak, in Nwoya District, the people supervising demarcation of land or putting mark stones are the army. We interact with members of the National Forestry Authority (NFA). The army has taken over the work of NFA. I wonder what kind of work they do but along the way at night, you hear people walking along the road complaining about the same. 

Therefore, we need to find out exactly what is happening because we know it well that the work of the army is to fight the enemies of the state. However, they turn - without proper methods - to fight the very people they are supposed to protect. We know that they can supplement the work of the police and other government agencies but if they take charge, we should get concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I do not know whether we are to ask the Minister for the Presidency because I do not know who is in charge of those soldiers. Is it the Minister of Defence or of Agriculture who will brief us on what they are doing? 

We have heard that they are breaking boats, some of which are for transport, collecting water or taking children to school. If you have not lived on the islands, you may not know that that is the only means of transport for the people. These boats are being broken yet that is the life of those people.

We need to summon the Minister of Defence to give us an update on what they are doing and what their mandate is. 

3.21
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the Uganda Certificate of Education examinations (UCE) results that were released yesterday.

Results for about 4,500 candidates who sat UCE were withheld by the Uganda National examinations Board (UNEB). This is about 70 UNEB centres countrywide. The reason given by UNEB was that there was massive examination malpractice after leakage of some papers last year. The leakage is evident because some of the papers were seen posted on social media like on Facebook and WhatsApp. 

Madam Speaker, 4,500 is a big number. UNEB gets funding from the taxpayer and direct from the candidates to administer examinations up to the last point. There must be something that then went wrong.

There are two points to note:

    i) Why did UNEB go ahead to give out papers that it was well aware had leaked to the public instead of giving out emergency ones so as not to suffocate our young learners and parents who would then have to contribute school fees for another whole year?

    ii) 4,500 Ugandans is quite a big number. At universities and other institutions of higher learning, there is what we all know - a retake. I am asking the government, especially the ministry responsible whether it has any arrangement for these Ugandans to have papers administered to them before the end of the year so that we do not have to suffocate parents?

THE SPEAKER: I have not understood your proposal.

MR KASIBANTE: At some institutions of learning, especially the universities and tertiary institutions, we do retakes where someone has failed an examination or there has been a problem in administering the same. Instead of waiting for a whole year, a candidate is subjected to a retake paper. 

Therefore, I am asking why Government shouldn’t have such an arrangement instead of having a whole year lost to the candidate but also a burden to the parent who has to foot school fees for three more terms. 

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, hon. Kasibante, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the honourable is that before that solution that you forwarded, one wonders why always the implicated schools are that category of schools which harbours students from unprivileged families. 

If you look at the 112 centres that are implicated, they are those upcountry schools and even from within town here, that you would rate at a lower level than all the other schools in the community. For example, I got calls from parents of Makindye Crested Secondary School that their students’ results had not been released and they were crying. They have some issues with the district education officers. They allege that their school is being pinpointed because of problems with the neighbouring schools and all sorts of excuses. 

However, Uganda employs more than 4,000 invigilators, examiners, scouts and supervisors to supervise that process at a time when these people are sitting exams. What happens to these peoples who were specifically sent to invigilate?

THE SPEAKER: Are you giving information or are you making a contribution?

MR SSEWANYANA: The information to hon. Kasibante is that the implicated schools are not those from the high class but the unprivileged schools in the local areas. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports is directed to come and explain whether it is possible to give supplementary examinations in situations where exams have been leaked.

3.27
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are all aware that the Government of Uganda has put in place an institutional, legal and policy framework for efficient use and governance of our natural resources. 

We have laws like the National Environment Management Policy, Uganda Forestry Policy, Uganda Energy Policy, the National Environment Act, the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act. Despite the existence of all these laws, there is very low level of compliance in most parts of the country.

Weak governance, policy implementation and corruption coupled with high demand for wood fuel including in the steel industry have forced our country to be deforested. 

Madam Speaker, on hourly, daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis, Northern Uganda has now become a net exporter of charcoal and we have observed this along the roads each time we travel to West Nile, where you see trucks ferrying charcoal towards Kampala. This is not only limited to the districts but it has been extended to the national park.

The Murchison Falls National Park, which I am reliably informed is one of the largest national parks, is being depleted of forest cover yet we pride in tourism as one of our major foreign exchange earner.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now engaging in debate on the benefits of national parks. What do you want us to do?

MR ACIDRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the Ministry of Water and Environment urgently brings a statement to tell us how they intend to stop further depletion of the forest resources in Northern Uganda.

Secondly, we want the ministry to tell us exactly how this legal policy and institutional framework is going to function. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe to add to what hon. Acidri has said, I think the minister should brief us on how far they have gone on the commitments made in Paris in 2015. They undertook certain activities, to do certain things to improve on the forest cover of this country.

3.30
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the 100 schools to which this Parliament appropriated money and up to now, they have not gotten money. I have been checking the list and I can see about 89 districts affected. These are the sub-counties where there is no Government secondary school. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at these correspondences - if you allow me I can lay them on the Table - where the finance ministry and the Ministry of Public Service directed the Ministry of Education and Sports to make sure they recruit these teachers and between July and October, the Education Service Commission went ahead to recruit the teaching staff and non-teaching staff in these 100 schools. I have even seen Kamuli District where your school is - it has no funding.

The concern now is, while we appropriated money and these people went ahead to recruit, the teachers there are volunteering and we do not know their fate. My request is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should tell us the fate of these people because they were the ones who directed the Ministry of Public Service and that of education to continue this process - (Interruption)

MR LOKII: Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue that has been raised by hon. James Kaberuka is a serious issue. It is affecting Ugandans and therefore the labour force in future. 

Between July and October last financial year, there was recruitment of teachers. To date, these teachers that were recruited have not been issued with their appointment letters. Most teachers are volunteering and are not getting any payment. What the schools have done is to charge extra money on the parents who send children to these schools and because some parents cannot afford these extra costs, the children drop out of school. This is a serious matter which I think the Ministry of Education and Sports should attend to urgently. 

This Parliament is available to pass any supplementary budget to be able to provide for that gap that has been identified. Thank you.

MR KABERUKA: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the ministry of finance was on the Floor of Parliament when the issue of university funding arose. That is when the money meant for these was channelled. I think the understanding was that we pass this money, that they provide the money for this financial year so that the schools can operate. 

These are schools which are in sub-counties without any operating secondary school. Where should these children go? You have said that you have already issued a warning letter to those schools you have been giving support that for term one, senior ones and senior fives will not be facilitated.

THE SPEAKER:  We shall ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us. Where is the money? Are you going to give your response to the House next week?

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, if the money was appropriated by this Parliament, then it should be sent to the schools. If we gave permission to the Ministry of Public Service to recruit without funding, which I am not quite sure about – I am going to crosscheck and come back to the House. Otherwise, if the money was appropriated, that can be rectified if they have not got it.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PROPOSED TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE FOR THE CHAIRPERSON, VICE CHAIRPERSON AND THE MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC SERVICE TRIBUNAL

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service.

3.35
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Johnson Muyanja): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings and the report.

This is a report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the terms and conditions of service for the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and the members of the Public Service Tribunal.

Honourable members, you already have this information. Page 1 gives the introduction and background to the report. Page 2 talks about the methodology used, findings and the observations.

Madam Speaker, I will go straight away to the observations.

The committee observed that the names of the members appointed by the Public Service Labour Unions and the name of the chairperson appointed by the Chief Justice were approved by Cabinet. The Public Service Labour Unions nominated their two representatives to the council accordingly and the members were dully appointed by the Minister of Public Service.

On page 3, you will see the name of Justice A.R. Rwamisazi who is the Chairperson of the Public Service Tribunal and the others are on the list.

Madam Speaker, in the interest of time, I will go to the recommendations. The committee recommends as follows:

    1. The members of the Public Service Tribunal be approved subject to the proposed terms and conditions of service listed below:

    a. Terms of Appointment

The chairperson, vice chairperson and members of the tribunal shall be appointed on part time basis.

    b. The functions of the Public Service Tribunal

The functions of the Public Service Tribunal will be:
    i. to hear and arbitrate in accordance with the provisions of the Public Service (Negotiating, Consultative and Dispute Settlement Machinery) Act, any labour dispute referred to it by the minister;
    ii. to make awards or recommendations to the Government on labour disputes referred to it; and
    iii. to ensure harmonious labour relations in the public service.

    c. Allowances:

The chairperson and members of the tribunal shall be paid a retainer fee and sitting allowances as when the funds are available.

    d. Duration:

The members of the Public Service Tribunal shall be appointed for a period of three years, subject to renewal on mutual understanding between the minister responsible for Public Service and the member.

    e. Other duty facilitating allowances

Other duty facilitating allowances such as subsistence, lunch and transport allowances will be paid in accordance with the Public Service Standing Orders and administrative instructions issued from time to time.

    2. The Ministry of Public Service should make sure that the Act is popularised by carrying out sensitisation. This will create awareness of the Act.

    3. The responsible officers should take appropriate action to constitute consultative committees in their organisations since it is a legal requirement. It will also act as a forum for promoting harmonious working relations at the work place and involvement of public officers in policy issues that affect them.

    4. The Public Service Labour Unions should become more vigilant in mobilising and recruiting more members into their respective unions.

    5. The Ministry of Public Service should put in place mechanisms for effective monitoring of the consultative committees.

    6. The Ministry of Public Service should issue statutory instruments to effect the terms and conditions of the Public Service Tribunal.

Conclusion

Madam Speaker, it is important that the terms and conditions of service for the members of the Public Service Tribunal are approved in order to get the tribunal operational. As reported, the consultative committees in the Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs) and Local Governments are in place and the national negotiating and consultative council which is required to forward unresolved disputes to the Public Service Tribunal is already operational. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and members of the committee. I am seeking clarification from the chairperson. On page 5 of the report, you have said that they would be paid allowances as and when the funds are available; meaning that I may come, sit and not get paid for a whole year and I have to look for you to pay me because the funds are not available.

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, what we are trying to avoid is that in the past, many councils used to sit when there was no money but they demanded for their allowances. You know that when the financial year has closed, you cannot demand for allowances. We are saying that they should plan and sit when funds are available.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, this is a tribunal to deal with issues of the workers. Are you saying that if money is not available then they should not sit? I do not know. Let us first hear from the workers representative.

3.43
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that there is a lot of conflict in Uganda between public service officers and Government. I would like to inform you that there is already a National Negotiating and Consultative Committee. Although, it was constituted by the Minister of Public Service, up to date, they have not handled any serious matter.

We need this committee to be operational so that they can handle conflicts between the Government and public service workers. You are also aware that Public Service workers cannot utilise the services of the Industrial Court. That is why it was recommended that the tribunal is established so that it can handle their issues. They have already mentioned that this committee will be led by a Justice of Court, I think. For you to appoint somebody and put a condition that he or she will be paid at your wish would be unfair.

I would request that we be very clear on this matter; that the committee will be paid. Maybe now they are going to have a budget, which will also establish how many meetings they can handle - maybe quarterly - so that they are paid. Their money should be budgeted for and they should also be – you cannot appoint a committee which is going to work at other weaknesses of the government and you think you also want to violate their own rights by not paying them.

I would request that Parliament recommends that the budget be clear for the tribunal so that they can sit as and when need arises. Thank you.

3.45
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to page 5 and add on what you were saying about allowances. The chairperson of the committee seems to be convinced that people can sit and not be paid. I think these sittings should be demand-driven and not resource-driven. I believe they sit when there is need to do that. So if they sit, you expect them to be paid. 

On the retainer, normally retainers are on monthly basis. I think we should define the payments clearly. You are paid when you sit, not when you get funds because this is supposed to be demand-driven. Thank you.

3.46
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that we should take the issues of workers seriously. If we are saying they can only be paid “as and when”, that reflects already that we are not committed. 

Therefore, we must be committed because these are people who are serving the government and they are also representing other workers. The issues of workers are very many and this has not been in operation because I was supposed to be on that committee for four years, but it did not come into operation. The names were submitted but nothing happened.

I feel that we should be more serious and impress it upon the government to make sure that it is operational. Otherwise, the old attitude comes up again where we think that for them, they can sit “as and when”, but it does not matter much. They should be committed. 

That is why some public servants have never been promoted. Benchmark promotion was abandoned and they were saying, “No, they can volunteer and they get the titles, minus the money.” And these were teachers; they are also workers. I am saying we should take it seriously. I thank you.

3.48
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the approval of these terms and conditions of the tribunal. Operationalisation of this Act will help to reduce the backlog of protracted disputes that are in districts. Districts have numerous disputes which have culminated into civil litigations that have actually caused financial haemorrhage to these districts.

This tribunal would help a great deal in dealing with some of this backlog of disputes. The remuneration part of it is not clear as per the submission of the report - that they will be paid “as and when funds are available”. That would mean that it will even exacerbate the accumulation of the protracted disputes. The committee should come out clearly because they are talking of retainer fees and allowances. Entitlement of retainer fees is only to two officers; the chairperson and the vice chairperson. The other members only get allowances and that is even worse because this will have no motivation at all to sit and determine these disputes. 

In my view, the committee is lacking in every aspect of being clear on how these members will be remunerated. It should be clear. Thank you very much.

3.50
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A tribunal is a court and a court is supposed to sit every day to hear cases. The reason why there are many civil servants going to court or some of them even returning to their villages without being heard, is because there is nowhere to go. Sometimes, these courts take long time.

The tribunal, if it is a court, must sit every day. Since we are going to pay them a retainer, which is like a salary, they must sit and work. The people who are going to be there must be full-time workers. Take an example of the tax tribunal; they have a registrar, a court and you take your cases there. Uganda Revenue Authority takes - they only formed it for URA. 

What about the entire Public Service? Public Service consists of the District Service Commission, the Health Service Commission, the Education Service Commission and the real Public Service. The reason why it came up is for this purpose. I want us to appropriate money to make these judges to sit every day to hear cases to avoid any problems.

These courts are very interesting; the longer they stay the more dangerous and corrupt they become. At an appropriate time, I want us to amend it to say that they will be appointed only first term; then the next term for three years, non-renewable, again for only two terms. Otherwise they also become dangerous, as you are aware. (Interjection) When you say that every time we leave it open, it will be very bad.

The Workers’ MP said the report is very good - which I was happy about - but then she says there are things which have not worked. Where have you been? Negotiating is supposed to have been here long ago. In fact, there would be no strikes in Mulago if the negotiating committee was working. That is where you go first before you go for a strike in civil service. 

If the Workers’ MP is right, that even that committee is not working, then it is very dangerous. We have a whole law and I think a standing order about the negotiation committee - something like “negotiation machinery in Public Service”. It is a lacuna in the law. (Interjection) If it is not there and the Ministry of Public Service has not implemented it, it is very wrong.

The other point I wanted to put across is about – for me remuneration I have no issues. They must be paid. The other one is about these commissions; they are very many and some of them are making mistakes. For example, if a Mugisu came to Kamuli for a job, he will not get it. Likewise if a Mugisu went to Sironko, he will not get it. These District Service Commissions have become tribalistic and we are now doing zero grazing. The boys grow there, they are trained there, they remain there, even the manners they have are from those villages. 

I want us to make these service commissions really national, so that if I want a job in Kamuli, I should really qualify. Yes, they will shortlist me, but when I go there, they might speak Lusoga and I am left out. There must be – (Member timed out.)

3.53
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for having done a good work. However, I think this tribunal should work unconditionally. We should also get clear budget lines for the tribunal so that they are not dependent on anybody taking a decision as and when they have to do certain things. Maybe sometimes, if that is not properly done, they will be working in favour of whoever is guiding them. 

Also, we need to know where they are going to be located. The public, too, need to know where they are found so that they can take disputes to them. Madam Speaker, I have ever worked with Kampala City Council and there are very many problems the workers are facing. Without the tribunal, it has been very difficult to address issues concerning workers. It is timely this tribunal starts working unconditionally. Even the payment should not be taken for granted. They should be paid as they work. Thank you very much.

3.55
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the committee for the work well done although that issue of the tribunal sitting “as and when funds are available” shows we are not serious.


Madam Speaker, we have had such other committees that have been instituted but not properly financed. A lot is desired. For example, the Local Council III Land Committees have never been financed and there are a lot of questions about the work they do. It is because regardless of the urgency of the matters that are brought to their attention, sometimes, they do not sit. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we have to also consider the fact that public servants in this country, in most cases, have been mishandled. They have a lot of issues but they do not have any chance to express them. They do not have such a channel where their issues can be tabled and looked into. 

If, therefore, we are coming up with a tribunal to look into the affairs of the public servants in this country, we should do it with one heart and make all things possible for it to perform so that we can have enhanced productivity. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.57
MR JOHN TWESIGYE (NRM, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the facilitation and the duration of the term of the members of the tribunal. 

On the side of the facilitation, honourable chairperson and your committee, I would like to thank you for the report in the first place. However, I am wondering how the Standing Orders of Public Service which are meant for the full-time civil servants are going to guide on the allowances of the members of the tribunal. Unless you are saying the members of the tribunal are going to be full-time civil servants, then that can apply. 

Secondly, on the duration of the term of the members that are going to be appointed to this tribunal, they can either serve for three years and end there or their term be renewed once. However, this business of saying they should first come and sit with the minister to negotiate and agree - to me, that is not appropriate. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

3.59
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This tribunal is a very important organ of government to deal with disputes which are very common with our public servants. The members of the tribunal are people of high calibre with money and their standard of living is very high. Therefore, they must be well remunerated. It is because they are doing work for which if they are not well paid, they will be compromised. 

Once you have established a structure, there must be a budget line for it. Why wouldn’t you give money to them when you know they are very important? Therefore, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it is important this tribunal is in existence and you must pay them in time when they do their work. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.58
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to support the committee, particularly, on the setting up of the tribunal. Now, being a part-time tribunal, I would recommend that we improve the terms of reference so that they discharge, as much as possible, all their duties to make sure they are a respected and sustainable tribunal.

The other thing I wanted to say, which has already been said, is on the duration of their term. It should not just be pegged to the negotiation with the minister. I do not think that is right and we should amend that part saying, “...the members should have a mutual discussion with the minister.”

Lastly, I also would like to add my voice on the remuneration. When you look at the vulnerability and the problems Uganda has with jobs, this exposes these people. We have to remunerate them well so that there is no temptation even if it is a part-time tribunal. I thank you. 

4.02
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine still goes to the duration of the members’ term. I have no problem with the three years but where the recommendation says “subject to renewal, a mutual understanding between the Minister of Public Service and the member”; I find this peculiar and it may breed corruption, if not, sectarianism. I was of the considered opinion that we may paraphrase it to read “subject to the quality of its performance of set targets”. That one makes sense because our interest is justice and it can only be attained –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Who will measure the quality of service?

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much. Of course, your concern takes me to the second part of my submission; that the minister should also now start thinking about proposals to amend the principal Act. It is because in the first instance, it is not detailed enough. For example, it does not specify the next step where you are supposed to seek justice after the tribunal. Section 5 has its obligations. For example, we need now access to the next route of justice. Therefore, it is important the minister here takes cognisance of that part to amend the principal Act because it is not in tandem with what is happening in the country today.

Therefore, to avoid those concerns, we need to revisit those recommendations. Otherwise, I find no problem with the three years’ duration. I thank you.

4.04
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was looking at the membership of the tribunal, considering the chairperson and vice chairperson. I consulted my neighbour here concerning the name Justice A. R. Rwamisazi; whether it is a male or female name. I was informed it was a male name.

I was concerned that both the chairperson and vice are male. I am wondering, from this list, there are women; couldn’t any of them qualify even for the position of a vice chairperson? Next time - because there is duration for their service - when they are bringing on board new members, we should take into consideration women to at least to be in the leadership positions.

The committee has listed some of the ministries and local governments that have constituted this consultancy committee. I am wondering because the ministries and local governments are few. Is it a matter of doing it at will or it is a legal requirement? If it is a legal requirement, there is need for the minister responsible to ensure that these committees are constituted in all those agencies and local governments for them to help us in solving disputes in those respective areas.

On allowances, they say responsibilities go hand in hand with benefits. Therefore, for us to say that these people will be paid “as and when the funds are available” - I don’t think it will work. It is not realistic. For example if one of these members comes from Gulu and they are called for a meeting, do you expect that person to fly over here without a cost to this end? We need to be realistic on that.

Finally, on the duration, I do not agree with the committee when they say that renewal is subject to a mutual understanding between the member and the minister. This will promote corruption and nepotism. It should instead be based on good performance and not on understanding between the member and the minister. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Adeke comes, honourable minister, hon. Nauwat has raised a very important point in the composition of the leadership of that committee. Suppose there are disputes that involve sexual harassment; the chairperson and the vice chairperson are both men. How do they deal with that type of situation? Has this been cast in stone? You can think about it. 

4.07
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to voice my concern about the issue of putting in place this tribunal on a part-time basis. Of course you know that labour disputes arise in the course of employment. And unless the employment of public servants is going to be part-time, I do not see why this tribunal should be part-time. 

If the workers are going to work from 8.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. then they are bound to have challenges during the time they are in employment. Therefore, the tribunal should be full-time, available for them to access. Otherwise we shall witness a miscarriage of justice because some of these disputes can be overtaken by events. Therefore, it should not be on part-time basis. I suggest that it is done on full-time basis.

Secondly, in light of remuneration, we have all noted that we have not budgeted for this tribunal. However, in my view, it does not make sense because if it is an institution we are operationalising, then we should rightfully budget for it. Otherwise the tribunal should not be in existence if it has no budget to fund it. Therefore, as Parliament, we should dedicate ourselves to budgeting for it because the workers need it. 

I also noted that the committee made reference to strengthening the labour unions within the Public Service. That is a very important thing to note. And also it noted that the Act should be popularised among the public servants.

I would like the minister to tell us the progress about this because this Act has been in force since 2008 and we need to know how much they have done. What efforts have been undertaken to make sure that the workers know about this and that they are participants in these labour unions? 

One of the reasons why these labour unions are not active is because of constant interference from Government and yet they are good negotiation machinery for the public servants. Thank you.

4.10
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson. It is very important for us to have these organs because they serve as check systems and enhance the levels of effectiveness and efficiency in government systems and processes.

However, my worry is or rotates around the appointment because, I would look at appointment as a process and the people appointed as products. Yet we know that it is a process that determines the product. I wonder when this Parliament will begin encouraging government to focus on competences, experience, capability and seniority. I say this because it diminishes the value system of hard work that says that when you work hard, you will be rewarded.

4.11
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues that the committee or the minister need to clarify. One is that we are now operating in a decentralised environment and the essence of this tribunal is to ease access to justice. I would like to know how this tribunal will be structured so that if my mother in the village has to access their services, she can easily do so. If we are going to have it based here in Kampala, it could become very costly for some people to access their services. I want to understand how you will structure it.

In the committee’s recommendations that deal with the functions of the tribunal, there is where I read that it will resolve disputes referred to it by the minister. My thinking is that the tribunal is supposed to get complaints from any aggrieved party. Is that a preserve of the minister only?

What happens if I am not satisfied with an interview process and I want to complain? What happens if I am a worker and I am not happy with the way I have been treated? Why must it be a preserve of the minister only to refer complaints to the tribunal? Thank you.

4.13
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am perturbed because since I came to this Parliament, there are particular tribes which have been gazetted that they must appear on every board, tribunal and everything. And there are those tribes that have been excluded and must never appear on any tribunal or board. I don’t know why – (Interruption)

MR WERIKHE: I have listened to my colleague who has kept on saying that certain tribes are gazetted to be on all boards. Is he in order to say that without substantiating what he is alluding to? If not I request that he abandons that line.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, can you substantiate that serious allegation?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you read the names of the members in this tribunal just to begin with; this is the name which normally comes first on any tribunal, board in this country whenever these boards are being constituted.

These names from those tribes - just read the name and you will know where they come from. Ever since I came here, you can bear me witness, which Mukonzo has ever appeared on any tribunal or any board that has been constituted in this Parliament? That is why I am perturbed and not happy with all this arrangement. 
When you go to number five, it was noted that there are rates of allowances to be paid to the members of the tribunal, based on Government rates and that the committee was informed that due to budgetary constraints, only the chairperson and deputy chairperson are to be paid a retainer fee.

The other members will earn per sitting, transport allowances and per diem. What kind of work can members of such a tribunal do? In order for them to sit, they must have quorum and yet the chairperson and the vice chairperson cannot constitute a quorum. I do not think that the members who do not have a retainer can make dedicated decisions in good faith because they know that they are being cheated. 

Madam Speaker, it would be fair for this tribunal to do its work clearly if all the members of the tribunal were treated equally but not having the chairperson and the vice chairperson only on a retainer fee; as the rest receive allowances and yet they do the same work.

I must clearly say that this country belongs to all of us and all Ugandans from the east to the west, north to the south pay taxes. To be nationalistic enough we must have a balance of tribes, regions and capabilities so that we know that we are standing as one Uganda, one people. 

I have been privileged to work in a number of organisations; and when you go to the civil society, the recruitment there is premised on merit. Even then, you will see a balance of almost all the tribes in Uganda. The onus is upon Government to ensure that they reduce friction among the people, regions, and academia by making sure that a balance is done; or else we are headed for danger.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Syda comes, minister of Public Service, hon. Nzoghu has raised a very important point. From my perspective in the appointments committee; we have heard representations from the Uganda Land Commission that the only person who is full time is the chairperson the others only come for meetings. They told us that they even have no time to read because they just come to attend meetings and they are given files. 

The Judicial Service Commission has said the same thing; they are called when they are not well prepared to a meeting and go away. I do not want to spoil this but I would like you to think about it. That is the experience from the appointments committee.

4.19
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two points. The first one is from what hon. Nauwat talked about. Women are known to be the best managers, counsellors, negotiators and arbitrators. This Parliament is very well managed because there is a woman at the helm. Women are soon exceeding men in public service. I would have loved to see the minimum 50 per cent of women on this tribunal. 

My second point is on the re-appointment of the members of the tribunal; if you leave it to a personal negotiation between the minister and the members, it will not augur well. The President has been saying that they have been approved and cleared by Cabinet and Parliament. And it is not the first time a tribunal is being formed in this country. Why don’t we borrow a leaf from the existing ones to see how the re-appointment of members is done so that we have consistency in our way of doing work? Thank you.

4.21
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report, although I have some few queries; the report does not show us the qualifications for the people on the tribunal. However, here they are saying that the chairperson must not be a lawyer but when you get down to the appointed members, the chairperson is a Justice. That shows there is something wrong.

My other area of concern is that assuming the tribunal is constituted and a member does not get justice; where does he go next? I need that clarification. The final area is on the fulltime basis; it would be very important for the committee to work on fulltime basis. These tribunals sit when there are problems. You cannot wait for the problem to come and sit again. That means there will be backlog. Therefore, I think it is important for the whole committee to work fulltime because Government has allocated money for them to perform their duties. Thank you very much.

4.22
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about the work basis for the tribunal. We have had cases where boards and tribunals are not handling cases and at the end of the day, we end up with backlog. If the tribunal is not employed on a fulltime basis, we shall end up with a similar scenario. 

I have a concern on the membership; we have had grievances from the public officers and where many of the excuses are related to the medical practitioners. This particular case is where the tribunal will be receiving the same excuses and we do not have any expert to analyse that situation because the individual officers will be presenting the same problems. I am of the view that we include a medical worker who will be able to interpret the medical documents that may be related to the cases being handled. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 20 Members have contributed to this report; I will see the rest in the following discussion. In the public gallery, we have pupils of Kumi Child Development Centre in Kumi Municipality; a charity and faith based community organisation. Can you stand up please if you are around? Yes, they are on both sides of the House and you are welcome. That charity is supporting 318 underprivileged children. They are represented by hon. Silas Aogon and hon. Monica Amoding.

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I have a few comments. It is true that this tribunal is constituted according to the Act; the chairperson is appointed by the Chief Justice and the members are appointed by the Labour Union and Government and approved by Cabinet. The terms and conditions have to be approved by Parliament. By the nature of the work, the tribunal handles cases which are referred to it; labour disputes from time to time.

However, we have consultative committees in the ministries, departments and agencies and local governments which handle most of the cases. It is not that the tribunal has to handle cases all the time. Most of the cases are handled at the lower levels. That is the reason we had proposed for the tribunal, the chairman and vice-chairman to have their terms on part time basis.

We would like to concur with most of the submissions from Members that the statement of paying them a retainer or an allowance when funds are available does not augur well. They will be paid allowances, retainer sitting and allowances when they sit not as when the funds are available. For the duration of the tribunal, yes it is good practice –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and minister for giving way. I would like to inquire about this issue. When you said that there are committees which handle conflicts at lower levels in our districts, can we know the specific committees that are already established and have the capacity to handle these issues? This is because most of the districts have been dragged to courts. Thank you.                

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of committees has been in our interest as a Ministry of Public Service to ensure that ministries, departments, agencies and local governments have these consultative committees constituted to perform those functions. Colleagues who have worked at the districts or local governments, you realise that most local governments have the consultative committees for dispute resolution –(Interruption) 

MS ABABIKU: No, I worked at the district local government level for 10 years before I became a Member of Parliament in 2011. I have never realised existence of this committee to the level of handling serious disputes. Can the minister tell us the specific structure, how they have been facilitated and how they manage their programmes? 

Madam Speaker, I have never witnessed existence of such a committee or consultation. Can the minister give us the composition or a progress report of their performance because this leaves a lot of doubt about what the minister is telling this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I must also confess that I am hearing this today that there is a consultative committee somewhere. I am inundated by complaints from the civil servants and I do not know where - we would be happy to hear where this body is and its composition?

MS KUNIHIRA: Madam Speaker, the committee was established but Government has made it redundant. You have heard, of recent, Government talking about increasing workers’ salaries but it is negotiated in the Cabinet yet that committee was meant to negotiate with Government. The committee is the national negotiating and consultative council.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Watongola used to be in the council; maybe she can tell us. 

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. What my colleague, hon. Kunihira, is talking about is not at the district level. I was a councillor for three terms at Kumuli District. 

Madam Speaker, you have also got problems with the workers in your district. We have never heard of that committee. May we inquire from the minister, at what level is that committee and when was it established? Thank you.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, as I have said, some local governments have not yet operationalised these committees. However, as a ministry, we are encouraging all those ministries, departments and agencies and local governments to ensure that those committees are in place.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we would like to help you. For instance, if you tell us the composition, maybe we would help our districts because I have never heard about these committees. Tell us about the composition so that we can assist our districts to organise?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to also find out from the minister because by him insisting that these committees are there in some districts and his insinuation is that some districts have not yet put these committees in place. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister; did the ministry send a circular because usually when there is a policy or action agreed upon by a ministry, you send circulars to districts. Did you send circulars or standing orders to districts regarding the committees and some districts have not formed these committees?
          
MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the minister said that there are gazetted committees in lower levels, I do not understand. There is no gazetted law to establish alternative dispute resolution avenues in districts and lower local councils. I do not know what he is meaning – because in the districts resolution mechanism, the chief accounting officer sometimes appoints some people to maybe first handle the preliminary stages of disciplining a person until he is referred to the service commission. I do not know whether those are the ones you are meaning. Are those the committees you are calling tribunals? Are they also called tribunals down there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please take the Floor.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I think I would request the House to give me time to come back with the constitution of the committees and how many MDAs and Local Governments are complying as of now. The ministry can produce that list.

MR KATUSABE: This should be incorporated, of course, depending upon the wise leadership of the Speaker. I am basically and painfully noting that when you go to Kasese, there is only one story that you hear about the authorities; the government agencies and commissions. I have never heard a single name of a Mukonjo and if you find merit in this, I will request the minister to at least come up with a catalogue of authorities, commissions and agencies of government so that we are able to dissect the composition in a microscope. People, especially those in Kasese, keep wondering; are we part of Uganda? Don’t we have people that have gone to school?

Madam Speaker, if you find merit in what I have just presented, I will ask that you include that to be incorporated in what the minister has to submit to this House.

THE SPEAKER: In my communication from the chair, I was also talking about the Bagungu who are also complaining that they are not anywhere. Therefore, it is matter for merit.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Speaker, I was still submitting on the duration of the tribunal whose Act is silent. As the ministry, we do not have any problem with the recommendation of the committee. I also would like to talk about the issue of the chairman. A member has raised the issue that the chairperson is a judge. The Act says that the person appointed in that position of a chairperson does not necessarily have to be a judge, but they can be. He just has to have enough knowledge on public service. I beg to submit.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have seen the list having a judge. I have also seen public servants being on the committee. Is this person you have appointed the chairperson a full-time judge of whichever court or is he a retired judge? If he is not retired and working in the High Court, why do you pay him two salaries? Why do you pay him in the High Court as well as when he comes to work here yet he is paid to work for 30 days in one place? 

When he comes here for four or five days, he gets paid for all the 30 days and an extra pay for 35 days. Are those civil servants from public service also on a pay or not?

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my submission, I said the tribunal chairperson and the vice chairperson have temporary terms. I would like honourable members to realise that we have an industrial court which handles cases beyond - it is not that when you have a tribunal, you expect someone to be there and that if they are employed they will be drawing salaries from two sources. It is a retainer or an allowance and if it is an allowance, it is a duty facilitating allowance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that there are some of you who are directors in some boards but you get paid here and there. 

Honourable members, there are two areas to amend on page five. Remove the words, “As and when the funds are available” so that they have “A retainer and an allowance”. Is that okay?

The second one is on the term of office. After “Three years”, we add the words “Renewable once”. Isn’t that okay? - [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes”]- fine.

Honourable members, with those amendments, I put the question that this proposal be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

You will have to go to the Act, isn’t it? I think they want to address the Act.

MR OGUZU: My concern is that it cannot only be the minister to complain. Let any aggrieved party be able to raise complaints to the tribunal. The committee has recommended that only the minister can refer.

THE SPEAKER: What is in the parent Act? That is where you need to check. You can follow it up and you update us. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE PROPOSED INCREASE OF THE SHARE CAPITAL OF HOUSING FINANCE BANK (U) LIMITED

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm something. The last time we were here and that issue came up, I raised an issue that there was a minority report. The Speaker then said that the chairman must attach it. 

Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is, is the chairman of the committee aware that there is a minority report? He could easily present and run away and say there is no minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are speculating. Allow the chairman to present and then he will tell us whether he knows or not –(Laughter)

4.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. A motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to increase the share capital of Housing Finance Bank Uganda Limited was presented to the House on 24 May 2017 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 25 July 2017 in accordance with rule 185 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development has considered the motion and it is now ready to report back to the House. I beg your indulgence not to read the background and the methodology and I straight away go to the shareholding of the bank and the observations. 

Madam Speaker, the shareholders of the bank are Government of Uganda, represented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, with 49.18 per cent, National Social Security Fund with 50 per cent and National Housing and Construction Company Limited with O.82 per cent.

The bank's share capital is currently constituted of 6,100,000 fully paid up shares of Shs 10,000 each. The bank's asset base needs to be increased by Shs 60 billion to about Shs 680 billion, to enable the bank to continue to expand mortgages in line with Government policy, and to deal with other capital requirements of the bank. The NSSF which is a major shareholder in this company has already paid up 50 per cent or Shs 30 billion of the total required capitalisation, and Government is required to pay the balance of Shs 30 bi11ion, making a total capitalisation of Shs 60 billion.

What are the Strategic objectives of the proposed capitalisation?

    1) To extend mortgages to the general public at a lower interest rate compared to other commercial banks and extending outreach.

    2) To increase the capital base of the bank to extend mortgages at affordable interest rates. Given their nature, mortgages require significant capital base for interest rates to be competitive.

    3) To provide long term capital to the bank that is more suitable and affordable for mortgage lending. A large portion of the bank's mortgages are financed by bank deposits, which are short term and therefore not appropriate for this kind of investment.

    4) Expanding mortgage and increasing resilience of the bank. The real estate sector has suffered an economic downturn which has impaired the balance sheet of the bank. This has reduced the bank's profitability in the real estate sector. Capitalisation is therefore required for the bank to continue expanding mortgages and remaining resilient to economic and financial downturns.

    5) To increase the capital/liquidity buffers of the bank. In view of the current performance of the financial sector, the Bank of Uganda which is the regulator for the banking sub-sector now requires banks to have significant buffers beyond the statutory capital and liquidity requirements.

Madam Speaker, justification for increasing the bank's share capital is as follows;

Uganda has been rapidly urbanising, at 5.1 per cent per annum, and is expected to be amongst the most urbanised countries in Africa by 2050. Even with the potential to become one of the most urbanised countries in Africa, Uganda still faces great challenges in housing, particularly with formal supply of housing not keeping up with the growth of the population. Moreover, affordability is out of reach for most Ugandans, which increases vulnerability for most households.

It is a Government policy objective to improve housing conditions in Uganda. According to the 2Ol4 National Housing and Population Census Report, the number of people sleeping in a room is a major determinant of crowding and hence affects the health of household members. About 47 per cent of the households resided in dwellings with one room for sleeping while 29 per cent resided in dwellings with two rooms. Urban areas had higher percentage of households using single rooms for sleeping of about 57 per cent compared to rural areas of 44 per cent. 

It is a national goal to improve the socio-economic welfare of all Ugandans, including by providing adequate and decent shelter for all. This goal is also included in the UN sustainable development goals to which Uganda subscribes. To make financing of housing accessible and affordable, it is imperative that government continues to influence the cost of financing for mortgages by providing an alternative financing window through the government owned Housing Finance Bank. The poor housing conditions currently prevailing will be improved through sustained government interventions by availing relative cheap capital to individual Ugandans. The Government also plays a demonstration role in the market to give a signal that lending for housing is feasible, and helps to reduce the perception of risk by other financial institutions.

The current capital base of Housing Finance Bank is inadequate to make a significant impact in housing and to offer diversified products to meet the needs of the population in their various income brackets. In view of this, it is necessary to increase its product offering to a wide spectrum of the population, by increasing the bank's paid up share capital through injection of additional Shs 60 billion by the shareholders.

Besides the need to improve the housing conditions in the country, there is a prudential requirement by the regulator of the banking sector, the Bank of Uganda, to increase the minimum core capital ratio for commercial banks to I2.5 per cent of risk-weighted assets (RWA) compared to the current minimum of 8 per cent.

The proposed new capital injection will enable the bank to be well prepared when the implementation commences. This will necessitate increasing the capital of the bank to meet this requirement while at the same time expanding its clientele in housing mortgages.

Benefits of the proposed increase in the capital base

THE SPEAKER: Can’t the members read that? You go to the source of funding and the impact.

MR MUSASIZI: Members can read the benefits. Let me go to the sources. 

The financing for capitalisation of HFB will be a transfer within the Bank of Uganda - Shs 30 billion from the sale of pool houses collection account to the paid up share capital account of the bank. 

Therefore there will be no additional resources required from the government consolidated fund and there will be no new debt obligations created as a result of this transaction.

The committee also pointed out the impact of the previous capitalisation which occurred in 2006/2007. However, I would like to beg Members to read it such that I can be able to move very fast in the interest of time. I will now go to the observations. The committee made a number of observations among which are the following:

The capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank will enable civil servants to access mortgages from the bank. The money to be used for capitalisation was raised from the sale of Government pool houses; the mortgage rate will be 17.5 per cent.

The increase in share capital of the bank will increase the return on equity by 2l per cent by 2021. This will in turn increase corporation tax of the bank to about Shs 100 billion, every financial year, thus increasing Government’s revenue and pay shareholders approximately Shs 60 billion by 2021. The capitalisation will also expand the branch network bringing on board an extra 50 employees thus creating employment for Ugandans.

Housing Finance Bank is one of the few locally owned banks and can be used as an instrument through which Government can influence its policy on improving housing in the country.

Interest rates have continued to be high on loans. This affects long-term borrowing where mortgages fall, making it difficult for many Ugandans to afford decent housing. Government should look for ways of providing funding specifically to enable citizens acquire decent housing at affordable interest rates.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the motion for a resolution of Parliament to increase the share capital of Housing Finance Bank Uganda Limited, be approved by the House.

Madam Speaker, before I lay on the Table the minutes and other documents that the committee used in the consideration of the motion, I am made to understand that one of the Members raised a minority report. At an appropriate time, I would like to beg that he should be given time to present his minority report. I beg to lay on the Table the following documents:

    1. The original copy of the committee’s report together with the minutes; 
    2. A copy of the audited annual financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2016, for Housing Finance Bank Limited; 
    3. Annual performance report by Housing Finance Bank Limited for the year ended 2016. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson, Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and your members. Who is the Member with the minority report?

4.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a correction because I heard the chairperson say that a member of the committee has a minority report. I would like to clarify that there are three Members with dissenting views and one of them is in the House; hon. Niringiyimana.  

Madam Speaker, I have a schedule which we have attached. The reason we decided to have a minority report –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can I have a copy of your minority report? I did not bring my iPad today.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to increase the share capital of Housing Finance Bank Limited was presented in the House on 24 May 2017, and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on 26 July 2017 in accordance with rule 177 of the rules of procedure of Parliament.

Pursuant to Rule 202 of our Rules of Procedure, we the undersigned members of the committee do hereby dissent and recommend to the House to stay the requested capitalisation until critical issues are resolved. 

Government has already injected over Shs l00 billion, additional capitalisation to Housing Finance Bank over and above its shareholding, and Government is not reflecting this in the books but we are going to prove this. Effectively, Government is already a majority shareholder in Housing Finance Bank but it is still considered a minority shareholder - I can see why the chairperson said it is owned by Government. It is National Social Security Fund (NSSF) which owns the bank. Government has 49 shares while NSSF has 50 shares. Government is a minority shareholder and does not own the bank. I would like to correct that statement. 

This bank is not owned by Government but it is –(Interjections)– page four of the majority report says “Through the Government owned Housing Finance Bank.” This is not a government owned bank. I would like to make it clear that the bank is not owned by the Government. 

Government is still considered a minority shareholder and hence ceding its legitimate control to other shareholders at the expense of Ugandans. All capitalisations that Government has so far injected into Housing Finance Bank must first be recognised and brought into account, in order to determine the extent of the needed additional capitalisation.

Without this, this House is being pushed into passing a motion without a full account and information on funds already injected into Housing Finance Bank. This House must not accept to pass a motion based on incomplete information.

This minority report would not have arisen if the committee chairperson had given us a chance to express our concerns during the committee sitting. The committee denied us the opportunity to argue these issues during its sitting of 8 January 2018 –(Interruption) 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The majority report, which I have just presented, is duly signed by members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Member, who dissented from the majority view, for one reason or the other, opted to write a minority report. 

Is it in order for this honourable member, instead of presenting his minority report, to make allegations that members were denied opportunity to give their views in the committee, when actually he based on the majority views to even prepare his minority report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you just focus on your dissenting areas instead of making allegations? Focus on your dissenting opinion.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, sometimes it is important to speak facts and I am here saying a Member – I have hon. Kaberuka behind there. Has he denied? He should stop referring to the Member. Why we are raising – I do not like minority reports –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that you sent us on recess. On the day of return, I was in Mpigi. I saw a message on the WhatsApp group of our finance committee with the chairman inviting the committee to a sitting and sign the report, which we had not internalised.

We came running – actually in one of the chats it was indicated thus: “Please, can you stay the sitting such that we meet tomorrow because we are coming from our villages?” We rushed, communicated on our forum but the man insisted with his clerk - I found the chairperson in the committee room with the clerk and – hon. James Kakooza, whom I had invited via the forum; they were two and we asked them, “Why are you rushing this? What is the emergency?” The chairperson insisted that he was bound to make sure he makes the report and that it was so urgent although he never clarified the urgency. 

I think it is proper, chairperson of the committee, that we swallow the pride and really move together because if it passes, it should be in our interest.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if this report was sent to you on 24 May 2017, would it not be urgent that you complete it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are aware that Parliament has been involved in many things –(Interjections)– yes. Please listen. We have not had a meeting to discuss this. The problem is some of you just sign reports without even reading.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, present your report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Kaberuka has said it all. We were denied the opportunity - that is why we have raised this minority. The reasons are these – Government can choose to capitalise a company in one or more of the following:

    1. By ordinary share capital;
    2. By preference share capital;
    3. By a long-term debt loan;
    4. By debenture; 
    5. By preferential terms of trade;
    6. By interest-free or low-interest loans; and
    7. By tax waivers or low tax base, whatever the case. I want to confirm what was applied here.

Madam Speaker, in the current request, Government wishes to apply the deposit from the sale of pool houses collection account number 9900051114, in Housing Finance Bank, towards capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank Limited. 

According to the policy of the Civil Servants Pool Houses of 1993/1994, pool houses were sold to the sitting tenants. The payments received therefrom would be used to assist those civil servants who had not benefitted from acquiring houses.

By then, it was the National Housing Company, which had been given the authority to do so. In fact in 1994, Housing Finance Company was allowed to access the collection account with funds amounting to approximately Shs 15 billion at an interest rate of four per cent per annum, which was interest payable to Government and this rate has remained the same since 1994. 

This money was from a pool of houses. It was supposed to be taken to the Consolidated Fund in Bank of Uganda. They decided that no, let it be in the Housing Finance Company so that other civil servants would benefit from it. In short, there is a collection account for Government money in Housing Finance Bank.

Observations

The interest rate charged by Government on Housing Finance Bank of four per cent was much lower than the Bank of Uganda fixed deposit rate. In 1994, the rate was more than four per cent, which has been charged on yearly basis to date. The rate remained the same yet inflation has been depreciating the value of funds. 

At that time, the deposit rate was 13 per cent, which meant that if you removed four from 13, the reminder would be nine per cent. That was the way they wanted to capitalise the bank. This clearly shows that in the 23 years since 1994, Government has lost, on average if not claimed, nine per cent per annum, which gives us a total of Shs 190 billion. This is a benefit injected by Government into Housing Finance Bank. Madam Speaker, we have given you a Schedule, which shows that.

On the collection account - this account should have remained a collection account with collections getting transferred to the Consolidated Fund account. However, due to the need that these funds were basically to finance houses for civil servants and other people, it was prudent that the funds remain in this collection account and be utilised for the purpose intended. That is, to assist other civil servants who never benefitted from acquiring the houses and nothing else. 

In addition, the none-withdrawal basis - which was further a benefit to Housing Finance Bank; the money remained there and that is why we are saying the bank is free to use the money. Some people are saying, “No, the money is being used by the bank.”

Emerging questions

    1. Did the civil servants who were supposed to benefit from the pool houses access these funds to assist them to acquire houses? Our findings indicate a no. On the contrary, the money was diverted and lent to the public at a commercial rate. If it was lent at a commercial rate, the benefit from the commercial rate goes to Government.

    2. Why did the rate remain fixed at four per cent over 23 years to date, yet the interest rate was supposed to be the Bank of Uganda fixed deposit rate, which fluctuates every year? That will be answered by the minister.

    3. Having fixed the rate at four per cent per annum, who benefitted from the difference of an average of nine per cent per annum for the last 23 years, which translates to approximately Shs 190 billion? That is what we are saying - we need that money for the people of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, from the foregoing, it is clear that in addition to the share capital, Government has extended a loan at a low market interest rate. The subsidised rate of 4 per cent granted to Housing Finance Bank and the provision for non-withdrawal of this deposit on the account by Government were meant to capitalise the bank. These facilities extended to Housing Finance Bank constitute capitalising the bank, using taxpayers’ money. 

The additional Shs 190 billion now constitutes additional capitalisation already injected by Government in Housing Finance Bank. This now effectively makes Government the major shareholder in Housing Finance Bank. However, Government has so far not created any record to document this fact.

Therefore, the statement that the bank is run on short term loans does not arise. The bank has already been capitalised by amounts that have not been accounted for by Government as shown above. This matter must be resolved first before any further call for additional capitalisation. 

Madam Speaker, as we speak, according to the ledger, which had not attracted interest by 2017, it is only worth Shs 38 billion. However, this ledger cannot be worth only Shs 38 billion. It should be more than that and we need the Auditor-General to look into it. 

Recommendations

The Auditor-General should conduct a forensic audit on the collection accounts for pool houses and make findings and recommendations to this House to inform any debate on the matter regarding these houses. 

The Auditor-General will determine which additional capital has already been raised and injected in the Housing Finance Bank arising from the low interest charged before any capitalisation is considered. This amount, as I already said, is estimated at Shs 190 billion.

Madam Speaker, looking at the chart I gave you, by 2007 when the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) came in, the retained earnings were Shs 23.6 billion and the collection ledger for pool houses was Shs 33.5 billion. This came to Shs 57.2 billion. This meant at that time, before Government called in NSSF, its standing in the bank was Shs 57 billion. At that time, Government had 66 per cent shareholding and if NSSF brought in Shs 30 billion, it would have had 34 per cent shareholding. That is the reason we are saying that that bank belongs to us.

We also recommend that the civil servants who never benefitted from the pool houses scheme should be given due opportunity to borrow these funds at the agreed terms by Government but not at commercial rates. They should borrow at 4 per cent, which is being paid by the current beneficiaries of pool houses. Madam Speaker, this was done so that those who have not got pool houses would be given money at those rates. We believe if a civil servant is sure of a house with 34 per cent mortgage per year, corruption will go down.

Madam Speaker, we recommend that Parliament adopts the above recommendations to be implemented concurrently. We urge the House not to make important decisions on matters with far reaching consequences on citizens based on incomplete information. 

The Auditor-General, as recommended, will assist the House to take a prudent decision on capitalization, including confirming that the Government of Uganda will emerge the majority shareholder once all the capitalisation efforts have been updated.

In conclusion, we have a consolidated account in Bank of Uganda. The person who audits that account, even if Bank of Uganda appointed Ernest and Young, is the Auditor General- (Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: The information I would like to give to the House is in regard to Article 163(3) (a) and (b) of the Constitution. Clause (3) (a) reads as follows: 

“(3) The Auditor-General shall-
(a)  audit and report on the public accounts of Uganda and of all public offices, including the courts, the central and local government administrations, universities and public institutions of like nature, and any public corporation or other bodies…” -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the way we always proceed here is that if the chairperson of a committee is reading a report, a member of the committee does not give information until the chairperson of the committee is done. Now, there are two reports and hon. Nandala-Mafabi has not yet concluded his.  We also know this honourable member is a seconder; can’t he wait for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to first finish before he gives supplementary information instead of interjecting and interfering with his presentation? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to wait and give a rejoinder as a seconder?

THE SPEAKER: No, even that would be wrong because when the chairperson of a committee reports, the other members of the committee do not speak. That is their spokesperson speaking to us; it is us to speak. So, members of both sides of the committee, keep quite.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is a nice one, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, we request that the capitalisation of Housing Finance Bank Limited be stayed until verification of the funds relating to the sale of pool houses is concluded. Meanwhile, the civil servants who never benefitted from the scheme should also be allowed to borrow as recommended. 

Madam Speaker, there is no rush because the money is already in the bank and the bank is free to use it. You heard the chairperson saying that it is now going to be a book entry, where you move the money from this account to the shareholders’ account, because it is already there in form of equity. Madam Speaker, I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard both reports. Are there any contributions?

5.21
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba County West, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to increase the share capital of Housing Finance Bank Limited. 

First of all, the financing of the capitalisation will merely be a transfer within the bank of Shs 30 billion from the sale of pool houses collection account. Therefore, it will not have any additional resource requirement from the consolidated account. 

Secondly, having been a civil servant, I know that several civil servants in the past benefitted from mortgages given by Housing Finance Bank. Prior to that, the Government pool houses were being occupied by civil servants and that was a great blessing. We found that very little of the money we were being paid - Around 1990, we were receiving Shs 3,000 as salary and for those who had the houses, about Shs 500 would go towards them. Eventually, those who purchased them stayed on in the service for much longer. Therefore, it is a great incentive. 

I know that civil servants will be enabled to continue accessing this and it would strengthen the security of tenure, because it gives them the confidence to stay on and handle their work knowing that favourable conditions have been put in place for them. You will have a reduction in the attrition rate and an increase in productivity because the civil servants will have settled minds. 

I know Bank of Uganda provides their staff with housing and for that reason, their employees stay on. This is a way of increasing productivity in the public service and it is the major reason I would support the capitalisation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.23
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee has clearly indicated that the money the Government wishes to use to increase the share capital has been at the disposal of the institution. Therefore, they have been able to use the same money because it has been in their pool.  In my opinion, they are trying to rename an account. This money has been at their disposal and they should have used it. Therefore, there is no need to increase the share capital.

He is trying to portray that the institution would make profits of Shs 330 million by 2021 using this additional funding, which has been at their disposal. Apparently, with the same amount of money, they have been able to make Shs 18 billion. Therefore, in my opinion, based on my financial knowledge, they are trying to rename this fund to their own benefit. This is because it will not create any impact, there will be no transfer of funds or increase of funds in the bank; the bank will remain with same amount of money that it has been having.

Therefore, it is my prayer that this increase of share capital is stayed until we do a further study. (Applause)

5.25
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the resolution of Parliament to increase the capitalization because we are already in this business. Secondly, NSSF has already paid the Shs 30 billion and we are left with the Shs 30 billion.

We all love to have better housing in this country. However, we need to be updated on the performance of what we inject in. This is about an increase, but how did we perform with what we had injected in previously? We need that report.

One of the reasons given for this increase is the high rate of urbanization. I would like my Government to handle the high costs of urbanization in this country because better opportunities are centralised in urban centres. Many of our people migrate from the rural areas to settle in our main city because of the challenges they are facing. Unless Government prioritizes urbanization, putting in more money in form of capitalization will not help us. Our regional centres must be developed so that people are able to stay happily at the regional level.

Madam Speaker, it is true that the source of this money is going to come from the sale of Government pool houses, but we need to know that leaders come and go. When these houses were sold, some of us were not here. Can we get a comprehensive report by the minister on the houses which were sold? This is important because whenever we move around, we are shown places where the Government pool houses were but we cannot give detailed information to this country on how we have benefited or how individuals who were targeted have benefited from this sale of the pool houses of Government. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: If I wanted to build a house in Kidera, deep in Buyende, I want to know whether Housing Finance Bank would accept my land to get a mortgage on this money. I want answers. 

5.28
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start from what you have said. I went to Housing Finance Bank to acquire a mortgage and I was told that the property which I had and needed to develop could not qualify because of the distance.

The Government of Uganda is committed to end poverty and attain a middle-income status by 2020. This can only be done by facilitating the 68 per cent of Ugandans, who are engaged in subsistence farming, to shift to commercial farming. This can only be done by facilitating them through Uganda Development Bank and not the Housing Finance Bank by way of mortgages.

The Government of Uganda committed itself to recapitalize Uganda Development Bank with Shs 500 billion. This has been approved by the President on several occasions while giving speeches on budget day and the State of the Nation address. However, only Shs 5 billion has been extended to Uganda Development Bank.

In 2014, Uganda Development Bank had approved loans worth Shs 36 billion to finance Ugandans who would improve their standards of living. When you look at the rates of Uganda Development Bank vis-à-vis Housing Finance Bank, Uganda Development Bank is at 12.5 per cent for long term loans, 13 per cent for medium term loans and 14 per cent for short term loans, which is cheaper compared to 18 to 23 per cent from commercial banks including Housing Finance Bank.

It is my humble opinion that instead of recapitalising Housing Finance Bank, we put the money in Uganda Development Bank to help our Ugandans who are farming down there in the villages. I beg to submit.

5.31
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion to increase the share capital for Housing Finance Bank. 

I am happy that both the majority and minority reports are not in disagreement. They both support the proposal to increase the share capital. The only point of divergence is: at what point do we do it? I would like to take this opportunity to thank the authors of the minority report because we do not disagree with the capitalization. They are only raising question for which we need answers before we fully support the resolution.  

I like their recommendations. I am convinced by the argument of the majority report. All the arguments are convincing especially due to the fact that we do not need any external funding to support this capitalisation. Yes, Housing Finance Bank already has the money, but the questions raised by the Members who authored the minority report need to be answered, and the clear answers will come when we have a clear audit report. In that way, we are able to understand. 

Look at the collection account for the pool houses, look at the exchange rates they have been reporting for the last 23 years and look at the money we could have lost if we continued with that. Therefore, I support the recommendation of the minority report that we stay this process until we have clear answers from within. I thank you.

5.33
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the observations made by the committee and those in the minority report. 

When you look at the observation No.1 of the majority report, you realise that they are recommending that the mortgage rate will be 17.5 per cent. When this programme was initiated, the mortgage rate was 4 per cent and it was for the benefit of civil servants. The money collected was supposed to be put back into the system so that the same civil servants or others benefit at a mortgage rate of 4 per cent. 

Honourable members, we know the salaries of civil servants and the incomes of our citizens; can they really manage a rate of 17.5 per cent? I do not believe that this is tenable under the circumstances. In any case, the intentions are going to be defeated. I would definitely go in for the majority report’s recommendations based on this. Thank you.

5.35
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the major objective that was set when Government decided to sell the pool houses. One of the major requirements was that the resources that would be generated would go back to help the civil servants acquire additional housing. If we look at the books, we may not be able to see that since this money was collected, it has been put back to help the civil servants in that regard. I strongly feel that the diversion of these resources for any other purpose without giving us a report on what we have done to help other civil servants is definitely not called for.

Secondly, I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for his presentation. It is rare for any shareholder to just throw in money to any venture without an equal equity in the investment. Therefore, this whole process, if you look at it, is quite suspicious in its own way. I, therefore, strongly feel that if Government has to put in more money, there should be equity on the other side in form of increased shareholding.

In the worst case scenario - We are only talking about a book entry and I am just trying to emphasise what hon. Nandala-Mafabi said. This money is already with the same entity and they are using it or loaning it out to make money. We simply want to move an entry from one side to the other, and I think it is uncalled for. Instead, we should insist and ask the bank to put this money where it is supposed to be. Thank you.

5.37
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion that Government should be able to increase the share capital for Housing Finance Bank. 

Currently, there are three shareholders; the Government of Uganda has a share of 49.18 per cent and NSSF has 50 per cent. What is being asked for is that the Government of Uganda should now be able to also give 50 per cent of the required capitalisation support, so that it can have an equal voice like the other shareholder has. Once we have that opportunity to voice ourselves by giving in 50 per cent, we shall then be able to control the interest rate as well. Therefore, even as we say that we should increase, we should also be able to ask them to reduce the interest rates so that people can benefit well.

The strategic objectives are very clear, and this will also follow the benefits. I therefore request that we accept that the shareholder capital be increased so that we can have a voice. Thank you.

5.39
MS JUDITH AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of capitalising Housing Finance Bank has been long overdue. The pool fund was established when I was a student. I studied, finished studying, worked and even retired without benefitting from it. I will support this motion when you put into consideration the minority report. 

While interacting with witnesses from Housing Finance Bank, we put too much pressure on them as to why they were not performing. They wanted to give us information in camera -

THE SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee? 

MS AMEEDE: I am a member of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS AMEEDE: Perhaps, these were some of the issues they wanted to raise as to why they are not performing to their expected capacity. It is my considered opinion that we capitalise Housing Finance Bank but the issues surrounding accountability must be first addressed.

The 17 or 18 per cent proposed mortgage is still too high for the ordinary civil servant compared to what they earn. There is a correlation between corruption and the dreams of workers. I trust that if this mortgage is brought down, you will see a reduction in corruption. I did some research on corruption in the civil service and one of the arguments was that people have to find where to sleep. 

Madam Speaker, please, let us take this minority report into consideration. Thank you.

5.41
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion because it concerns improving the housing of Ugandans. However, what is the target group? For whom is this money being sought? 

In their observation, the report talks about a family sharing one or two rooms as one of the justifications. However, when you look at the interest rate, it does not rhyme with the justification and the kind of people they are trying to target. This leaves a lot to be desired. Are we targeting people who already have or the people who are sleeping in one room? (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Let me put this on record. A primary school teacher can only get a loan of Shs 2.5 million from a bank for a period of three years. Can that teacher go for that kind of mortgage?

LT COL BYEKWASO: Before we pass this, we need to move into some kind of arrangement where we target the right people. I am thinking about my soldier who earns Shs 380,000 getting this at 17 per cent per annum; can they benefit? 

You are talking about Government wanting to improve. A scenario where Government is only targeting improvement for isolated cases of the “already haves” - the 17 per cent is only affordable to us who can manage. I support the motion but before we pass it, we need to go - (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: I would like to inform the Member on the Floor that soldiers are not civil servants. 

LT COL BYEKWASO: They are Ugandans.

MS NAMAYANJA: Are they targeted?

LT COL BYEKWASO: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the shadow minister, they are talking about Ugandans here and soldiers are Ugandans. If anyone –(Interjections)- Can you allow me finish? Whatever the case may be, I even get scared if someone is not interested in the welfare of soldiers. That will be for another day. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to add that these soldiers are among those who sleep many in a room, and this is their money.

5.45 
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minority report that is rejecting the motion. I base my reasons on section 6, which talks about the justification for increasing the bank’s share capital. They are talking about percentages, which the previous speaker has also mentioned - 47 per cent sleeping in one roomed houses and 29 per cent in two roomed houses. At the same time, they talk about civil servants with mortgages accessing this loan but at high interest rates. 

My question and submission is: How is this affordable to the older persons who live in poverty? Poor people, who cannot even access the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) are still lamenting. How will the orphan headed households benefit? I come from an area that was severely hit by HIV/AIDS and children are staying on their own or with very old grandmothers. How do they access these funds? 

Madam Speaker, you talked about people who stay deep in rural areas. How will people suffering from HIV/AIDS, who spend every coin that they have to access Antiretrovirals (ARVs) and it is not enough, benefit? The honourable minister stood here on the Floor and deceived this nation that ARVs are available and yet people are crying up to now. I have been receiving phone calls that ARVs are not available. How will these people be able to access this loan facility to build their houses?

This is meant to enrich those who are already building houses on those hills, maybe when they run short of funds and need more money. However, this loan facility will not benefit the very poor who live in poverty. The people we represent have always been left out and I do not think this motion is necessary at this time. We better think about a development fund that would increase farming, which one Member talked about; for example, increasing money for the elderly so that they can meet their basic needs. We do not need to add money to those who are already consuming the money of this nation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.48
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a problem somewhere. The contribution of NSSF in 2007 was Shs 30 billion and the contribution of Government was Shs 57,201,770,000, which gave Government 66 per cent and NSSF 34 per cent. This clearly shows that Government is the biggest shareholder. 

However, when you look at the presentation by the chairperson here, he told us that NSSF has 50 per cent of the shares, Government has 49.8 per cent and from nowhere, Housing Finance Bank is getting 0.82 per cent. I do not know where 0.82 per cent comes from. Maybe they are being rewarded for the sale of the Government houses.

If you add the contribution of Government and NSSF, that already comes to 100 per cent. From the sale of the houses, we have Shs 190 billion. All these years, this money has been getting interest and this money has been kept by the same bank. I see a problem. 

I heard the chairperson talking about the annual statement for 2017. I oppose this motion on condition that this House demands for an annual audited report for 2007 before NSSF was taken up. It is a move by mafias to see that Government does not have more powers in this bank, so that Government cannot make decisions more than other shareholders. If we go according to 2007, Government is the biggest shareholder in this bank.

We have a problem. Our civil servants are suffering in this country. That is why we have strikes from teachers, doctors and the Judiciary. It is because they do not have access to cheap loans. They are suffering because they go to money lenders, small microfinance institutions, and yet Government has alternatives for them, which are not being utilised. 

The conditions for accessing Uganda Development Bank funds are so hard that an ordinary civil servant cannot afford them. In this bank, why are we talking about 17.5 per cent interest rate for mortgages? Yes, it is true interest rates are normally determined by market forces but if you look at the various banks here, they give loans at different interest rates. We have banks, which give loans at 21 per cent, 20 per cent and Housing Finance Bank gives at 19 per cent and if you negotiate well, you can get at 18 per cent. Why don’t we change from mortgages and we give –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: I would like to give some information briefly. If you read the submission of the committee under “impact of previous capitalisation to Housing Finance Bank”, in 2006/2007 Housing Finance Bank transformed from a mortgaging company to a commercial bank. Its total share capital at that time was increased from Shs 10 billion to Shs 21 billion. 

The performance is already visible since it became a bank, and we have been borrowing from this bank. I, Sssewungu, borrowed. Let them bring their records here. I borrowed at 19 per cent in the Ninth Parliament. Let them look at the interest rate I was given and what they gained out of me and multiply this with what they got from other Members of Parliament and others I do not know. That alone shows that they are making money. They should not even be given more share capital because they are at the level of other banks now, after support from the bank –

MR ODRIA: Thank you for that information. I am very much aware. Currently, Housing Finance Bank has over Shs 600 billion as capital. I am also aware that at least they have used about Shs 300 billion in loans. Therefore, they have excess of Shs 300 billion, which is still there and has not yet been utilised. Now, why are they coming for another Shs 30 billion? 

My prayer is that instead of putting the interest rate at 17.5 per cent for mortgages, let this come to support civil servants for other loans. We should make sure those civil servants -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, please conclude. I do not know what my Hansard people are doing; this is more than three minutes.

5.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the majority report has given some recommendations and at the same time, the minority report has also raised some fundamental issues, including the performance of this fund, which is audited every financial year and the reports are available. At the same time, Housing Finance is a bank supervised by the Central Bank. 

We have a contradiction, which we have to harmonise because the national audit says that where Government invests money, the Auditor-General should audit. At the same time, the Central Bank, which is a supervisor of these banks, also has a mandate to audit these banks. However, there are issues I see that are going beyond those on the table, and these include issues of service delivery, what we do with the civil servants, urbanisation, housing policy and the issues to do with the pay for civil servants. 

It is important, therefore, and probably I request this House, that we go back and get more information so as to fully inform Members. I can see the destination of this motion from the mood of the House. Therefore, it is very important that we request to go back and package this. I would like to beg that we postpone this debate and then move on. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we have a Speaker of Parliament duly elected by the Members in accordance with the rules. I also believe that the debate has been flowing well because we are looking at the two reports in order to arrive at the appropriate decision. What I fear is for the minister to stand up and say that he has now seen that there is need for him to go back. All this time, had he not read the report? Had he not seen the gap?

Madam Speaker, public funds are being abused and it is high time the Minister of Finance actually pulls up his socks. If the minority report had not unearthed some of the issues that we have read, how else would we have known this, other than through the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning?

Secondly, much as the minister is willing to withdraw this report, I am interested to know why the leadership of the committee did not want the minority report to be tabled and discussed by the committee. This is an administrative matter, which is eroding the power that we have given the committee. Therefore, the committee must explain to us why they were not willing to allow the authors of the minority report to move and have the matter debated first at the committee before coming here. The report is here and they are saying that they were blocked and if that is true, it is a matter that we need to also clear.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, are you suggesting that the minority should subject their proposal to the main committee to debate and decide?

MS OGWAL: No, that is not what I am saying. I am concerned that the leadership of the main committee was not willing to have the report tabled as per the report. I am reading the report; I am not cooking stories. I am reading the report- (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we always respect our mother in this House but sometimes she goes beyond to intimidate us. This issue, which was raised by hon. Kaberuka and hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was actually discussed here when the Deputy Speaker was chairing. They raised all these allegations and we debated, and the chairperson responded and ruled that if you have a minority report, bring it and we debate it. That was the ruling.

There were many issues, which came up, including where hon. Nandala-Mafabi was at that time when he was sending a WhatsApp message? Some people were saying that he was at the headquarters of Forum for Democratic Change (FDC)-(Laughter)
Therefore, is the senior member of this House, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, in order to revive an issue that was debated in this House and concluded as if it is a new issue?

THE SPEAKER: No, she is out of order. Honourable members, I thought that we have gone digital and Short Message Service (SMS) is an acceptable way of communication? I do not know what the problem is. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance for having come up with very new innovative ideas today. It is very rare of him to come here and concede on the first instance. I would like to congratulate him. If he moved at this rate, I think we shall have better performance in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Now that he is conceding, I want to say that the House should allow the minister to go back. However, before the committee comes back with a report, we need to have a progress report on the performance of that bank from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, not from the committee. This is because there are issues, which have been raised here by the minority report - issues regarding the audit of this account and services. 

Some of us, like the Speaker said, have had concerns as to why Housing Finance Bank does not have this project cover the whole country. Even the operations of the bank; in Teso, there is no single Housing Finance Bank yet we contribute a lot to the bank. Also on the issue of houses, why aren’t they constructing in Teso, Gulu, Kitgum, Kamuli, Yumbe or Kisoro? These are some of the things that Members need clarification on.  

How will the poor benefit? We also need to know about the performance because we also know of some civil servants who got houses but have not paid up to date. The houses are being auctioned. Last month, I saw some being advertised. We want to know what is happening. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to welcome our High Commissioner to Ottawa, hon. Joy Acheng. She is a former Member of Parliament for Kole District. She is here with a delegation from Canada and they are taking interest in honey production in this country. If there are farmers of honey in this House, let hon. Acheng know. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add my point to what hon. Okupa has just said. It is extremely worrying and yet it is another fundamental issue that has to be looked at, probably even separately from the recapitalisation that we are talking about. Housing Finance Bank has strategic objectives of the people’s capitalisation, which are very well laid out. They are about extending mortgages to the general public, increasing, increasing capital base to extend mortgages and so forth. They are in the report under No.5. 

However, what I find very surprising is that in reporting on the performance of the bank, the focus has instead been on how it is increasingly becoming a commercial bank, how it has established more branches, increased its capital and is making more money. There is no report on how it is performing on the strategic objectives and why it was capitalised or why Government is investing money in it – (Interjections) – okay, it is not in the report which I am looking at. 

THE SPEAKER: Are we debating? Honourable members - 

MR KEEFA KIWANUKA: My point is that they need to report on the performance of this bank as part of an investment evaluation.

THE SPEAKER: This has been stated already by other Members. Honourable minister, you can go back. We defer debate on this matter. You will come back with a proper report on the performance and your audited accounts, especially of 2007, so that we know how we have been performing.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

6.06
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

The Parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure inquired into the mandatory inspection of motor vehicles by Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS) during the period Ju1y to August 2017. This inquiry was a referral on 29 June 2017 on the back of two ministerial statements and two matters of public importance raised on the subject of mandatory vehicle inspection. 

The thrust of the committee's inquiry was to appraise the Government policy on vehicle inspection, examine the procurement of SGS and the details of the contract, as well as the advancement of recommendations for the regularisation of vehicle inspection as a road safety strategy.

Madam Speaker, allow me to give a summary of the report. 

The re-introduction of mandatory vehicle inspection in 2015 followed a 2007 policy shift that waived road licence fees in favour of the fuel levy. Given that vehicle inspection was hinged on road licence fees, the waiver of the latter implied waiving the mandatory aspect of vehicle inspection. 

The re-introduction of the mandatory vehicle inspection through a private provider whilst intended to aid the stemming of road carnage ended up being rife with a host of public concerns, namely exorbitant pricing, inadequate coverage, unrealistic deadlines and general scepticism over the overall intention and  intervention. The terms of reference were carefully designed to cover the afore-listed public concerns.

In the execution of the inquiry, the committee met with 15 different groups of witnesses and well over 50 individuals from whom the committee elicited significant information as a basis of its decisions. Below are the committee’s findings:

    1. Procurement of SGS 

The committee notes that the procurement of SGS as a service provider for mandatory vehicle inspection took about eight years, spanning the period 2007 to 2015. This process was initially cancelled because of the use of wrong bidding documents prior to 2009. It was later marred by allegations of breach of ethics in regard to leaking competitor information and undue interference.

    2. Terms and Conditions of the Contract with SGS 

The evaluation of the contract that was signed on 15 March 2015 between the Government of Uganda and SGS revealed breaches by both SGS and the Ministry of Works and Transport with regard to the commencement date, payment of concession fees and its procedure, absence of a master test centre, and inept contract supervision. In response, the committee made a number of recommendations.

    3. Review of the Performance of the Contract 

A review of the performance of SGS since signing the contract in 2O15 inter-alia reveals failure to adhere to the contractual commencement date for vehicle inspection, inadequate national coverage and non-adherence to the timelines for payment of concession fees.

    4. Recommendations for the Regularisation of Motor Vehicle Inspection 

The committee notes the need for the strengthening of corporate governance at the Ministry of Works and Transport, including but not limited to the bolstering of the supervision of motor vehicle inspection. 

In light of the aforementioned findings, the committee explored all possible remedial actions, including termination and the costs of termination as per clause 7.8.5 of the conditions of contract, which states thus: 

“In the event that the contract is terminated by the Government of Uganda or the Ministry of Works and Transport for any cause, except as provided in this contract, before the expiry of the five-year term or any extension or renewal of such term, the Ministry of Works and Transport shall pay to the provider at law or in equity in respect of the termination of this contract 75 per centum of the value of total investment made by the provider or 100 per centum of the expected income of the provider for the services, whichever is greater, being the cost of demobilisation.”

It is noteworthy that the absence of a crash data system has impeded accident cause analysis in Uganda. While the various reports by the Uganda Police Force on the causes of road accidents cite vehicle conditions as accounting for 2.2 per cent of the traffic accidents, it should be noted that the absence of a crash data system renders such police accident reports unreliable because of their reliance on subjective rather than scientific methods. The actual contribution of vehicle conditions may actually account for far more traffic accidents than reported. 

This subjectivity often leads the police to incriminate motorists for offences such as reckless driving in a bid to apportion responsibility for traffic accidents. It is because of this that there have been various incidents of motorists attempting to flee traffic accident scenes to avert arrest. A crash data system would scientifically establish the actual cause of traffic accidents and aid the exoneration of such motorists.

The committee made a summary and I am giving a summary of some of the recommendations.

    1. The committee recommends that the implementation of the contract for mandatory inspection of motor vehicles be immediately suspended for a period of not less than three months to enable a review and re-negotiation of the contract by the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee went ahead to give the areas that the re-negotiations should cover:- 

    a) Significantly slashing the cost of inspection to make it more affordable and equitable. This will enable motorists present their vehicles for inspection more regularly, thereby progressively enabling the improvement of the condition of vehicles and ultimately reducing road carnage;

    b) Constitute a multi-stakeholder supervisory team that includes the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) and the Uganda Police Force. This will cater for the multidimensional nature of vehicle inspection that incorporates aspects of air quality, standards and enforcement;

    c) Institutionalise the role of the Auditor-General in periodically auditing the vehicle inspection exercise. These audits should focus on aspects such as value for money, physical performance and financial performance.

    d) Streamline information sharing in a manner that includes the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), the Uganda Police Force, NEMA and UNBS. This will ensure that the information accruing to the vehicle inspection exercise is effectively shared with other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) under whose mandate related policy matters are domiciled. 

Specifically, the synergy with URA will ease the verification of vehicle logbooks and contribute to the creation of a reliable motor vehicle database, which was one of the objectives of the policy.

    e) Establish a master test centre. This is a key quality control strategy that will ensure that the vehicle inspection results are independently verified for accuracy and reliability.

    f) Establish a crash data system. This will go a long way in aiding accident cause analysis and the storage of related information, the basis of which road safety reports and policies may be derived – (Interjection).

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is a very important report. You recall that it was the honourable member for Mukono and I who raised this matter. I also remember that time the Minister of Works and Transport failed to respond to these issues. This very important report has come to the House but we do not see any single minister from that ministry. Tomorrow they will come here and say “give us time” because they have not read the report. 

I am really disappointed with the Front Bench in regard to this matter. I see only the ministers of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport has three ministers and they were informed. We also know that that all of them are new in that sector and so they should have been here. 

Therefore, is it procedurally correct for us to continue    processing the report when the ministers responsible for that sector are not in the House and yet this matter affects everyone Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had not noticed that the responsible ministers for the works docket are all not here. 

This is a very contentious issue and a matter of concern to all members of this House and the public. I am sorry, honourable chairperson, because you may have to stop the presentation and we reconvene on Tuesday. (Applause) I want all the ministers for works and transport and also internal affairs to be here because it touches all of them. 

MS NAKATE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the three ministers for being here. However, in our current position, I do not even know who the Leader of Government Business is in the House. At least for the past few days, when hon. David Bahati was around, you would feel that there is a Leader of Government Business around. (Laughter) However, this business of not even having Gen. Moses Ali or hon. Kirunda Kivejinja around to represent in the House –(Interjection) - So, who is the Leader of Government Business? This is not fair. I rose on a point of procedure.

I have thanked the honourable ministers who are here. However, hon. Baryomunsi, when you go to Cabinet, take this Parliament as a serious institution and an organ of Government. I was here when hon. Amama Mbabazi was the Prime Minister. I know what happened here and what is happening now. Therefore, when I raise such a procedural matter asking who the Leader of Government is - This business of saying that you are going to talk to them is not fair. The Speaker sits here and she gives us time to present our reports but the ministers do not appear. For goodness sake, we have three Prime Ministers, with very good vehicles, escorts, allowances and airtime, but they do not appear in this House. This is not fair.

6.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Madam Speaker, I would like to apologise on behalf of my colleagues. Actually, the ministers in charge of works have been engaged in many activities and they requested those of us here to take note for them - (Interjection).

THE SPEAKER: Members of the Cabinet, I think it is courteous for a minister who is not attending plenary to inform the Speaker that he or she is will not come and so and so will be holding the docket. You are all there and I do not know who is taking charge of what. Honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 13 February 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

