Tuesday, 18 February 2014

Parliament met at 2.23 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

    1. Col Innocent Oula

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Col. Oula, you have just subscribed to the Oath of Allegiance and the Oath of a Member of Parliament. You have now become a full member of this House with full voting rights as the person representing the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and that is in the Constitution. (Applause)

It is my duty to welcome you to this House, to join the ranks of these people who have been pursuing the objectives of this country in terms of its political stability, economic advancement and all the things that we do in this House. You have been doing it elsewhere and it is now time for you to join us and we also do it here the civil way. 

So, I welcome you to the House and I hand to you two documents; one of them is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as of todate. (Applause) And the provision of that document is what you have just sworn to uphold and we expect you to do nothing less than that.

The second one is the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. You had other rules of engagement but now, you have a new set of rules of engagement when you are in this House. I invite you to internalise them, apply them and enjoy your presence in the House. You are very welcome. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I take this opportunity to welcome you back from a fairly long recess and I hope you had a good time with the constituency and your constituents and had a good holiday and now, you have rested enough to gather sufficient energy to move the agenda of the House forward in a rapid manner this year. 

In the VIP Gallery, I recognise the presence of Maj. Gen. Francis Okello who was a member of this House. He has come to witness the taking of oath by his colleague who has just joined in. (Applause) He was in this House and so, I recognise him in that capacity. I do not see the other ones very well but if I get information, I will recognise them as well.

Hon. Members, let me apologise for the inconveniences we are facing at the moment because of the construction work that is going on around. You can see that there is a lot of hammering and dust but this is going on for a short while now. It is only meant to make the spaces in this House better and the facilities better so that we can do our work in a more conducive atmosphere. But the inconveniences are deeply regretted and I do this on behalf of the Parliamentary Commission.

On the parking space, hon. Members, the ground floor which is actually the top of the five-storeyed parking space located in the South Wing is available for Members to park. It is only the top floor, which is the ground floor, that is available. I am sure that the circumstances, which I communicated to you last year as to why the underground parking cannot be used as of now are still subsisting. The security arrangements have not been in place to enable us access those places without any threats to your life and property. So, let us bear for the moment with the situation and time will come when that place will be accessible.  

Hon. Members, the status of business  - you remember last year, I created space on the Order Paper to allow the committee chairpersons report on the status of business before them and there were undertakings made by the chairpersons of the committees of reports that were going to be brought into the House immediately. Some gave one week, others two weeks because they were finalising the reports. I must say with a heavy heart that that has not changed; even the chairpersons who promised that their reports will be ready in one week, those reports are not ready and we have not seen them.

There is a lot of work that has already exceeded the 45-day rule and that is affecting the operations of Parliament. Hon. Members and chairpersons, we have a duty to the people of this country. We have a duty to this House as chairpersons and as members of committees. Let us just do those duties and follow the rules. We should be able to finish these work within time – 45 days so that the business of the House can proceed. 

The Parliamentary Commission has taken a decision of which details will be communicated in due course to impose sanctions on both members of committees and chairpersons of committees. Those who have not been able to report at the time allotted for them to report, there will be sanctions this time round and you know what those sanctions are and I do not want to say them. There will be sanctions and you can read my lips, hon. Members. These matters are serious. We should do these things within the timeframe allotted. 

But for the time being, all those reports that are pending will appear on the Order Paper as of tomorrow. All those reports that are pending will tomorrow be on the Order Paper and it is up to the Chairpersons to come and tell us why they cannot proceed with the report. Some of them are as old as 2011 and 2012. We should make this time to correct those impressions that are beginning to make us not look very good.

I will allow an amendment on the Order Paper to accommodate two things before I finish with my communication. The first one will be a statement by the hon. member for Ngora County – it is a personal statement under Rule 46 of our Rules of Procedure. 

Dr Francis Epetait will be making a statement about the status of his health. You remember that before we took the break, I communicated here and I was not very comfortable with the condition in which I had seen the hon. Member. But I am glad that by God’s grace, he is able to be here and it looks like he is smiling. (Applause) So, he will be making a statement immediately after item No. 3. After item No. 4 (III), we will allow the Minister for Finance to lay on the Table the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the financial year 2013/2014. 

Hon. Members, I received communication this morning from the Deputy Secretary-General of the Forum for Democratic Change to the effect that some appointments have been made in accordance with the Constitution and Administration of Parliament Act providing for the offices of the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and the Opposition Chief Whip in Parliament. 

“National Executive Committee of the Forum for Democratic Change sitting on 31 January, 2014 at the party headquarters in Najjanankumbi made a review of the leadership in Parliament and approved the following appointments made by the Party President, Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu:
    1. The Leader of the Opposition - hon. Wafula Oguttu Phillip. 
    2. The Chief Opposition Whip - hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 
    3. The Deputy Chief Opposition Whip - hon. Roland Kaginda. (Applause)

The purpose of this letter, therefore, is to communicate to you, Rt Hon. Speaker, the above decisions of the party.” It is signed by Augustine Ruzindana, Deputy Secretary-General.

These decisions are communicated to the Speaker of the House and it is for the Speaker of the House to make them formal to you. 

Under Section 6 (b) (iii), “A person elected Leader of the Opposition under this section shall take office upon a formal announcement by the Speaker.” So, the appointment takes effect now. (Applause)

If there are any other formalities, I am sure that they have already been handled somewhere else. But if there is need for it, I would allow some space for them to make those statements. That applies to the Chief Opposition Whip and the Deputy Chief Opposition Whip – we normally get the wordings wrong.  

So, congratulations to hon. Phillip Wafula Oguttu on your new appointment and congratulations to hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Roland Kaginda; Congratulations to you all. If the two leaders, the immediate former Leader of the Opposition wants to make a short statement, that would be okay. We congratulate him for steering the Opposition up to this point. (Applause)

2.42
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament and the public, first of all, I want to wish all of you a happy new year.

I want to take the earliest opportunity to congratulate my successor, hon. Wafula Oguttu, on his appointment as the new Leader of the Opposition. His appointment cements a culture that we so dearly cherish in Forum for Democratic Change and we desire for our country.

The culture of leaders to serve and go and as you are aware, we recently elected a new party President in FDC. It is a mark of a good leader to serve and go. A good leader must not succumb to cheerleaders and schemers who always call upon him or her to stay on. 

I want to assure you, Mr Speaker and Members, that the new incoming Leader of the Opposition is a distinguished gentleman, elder and a statesman. I want to assure him that he has my total support. If need be, he can call on me anytime, if he likes.

Leading the Opposition Parliament is a very challenging job and it requires dedication, courage, alertness and even patience. Recently, the former Prime Minister of UK in the Evening Post said; “I really sympathise with  Ed Milbrand” the current Leader of Opposition in UK. He said that he was in that position for three years and he knows how hard that job is. 

There is pressure to act in a dignified manner but yet, your opponents can act in undignified way, very provocative and almost in mob justice style.

I thank the almighty God who gave me good health, wisdom and the ability to lead the Opposition in Parliament for more than two and a half years. My special thanks go to the Speaker of Parliament and the Deputy, the Prime Minister of Uganda, the Parliamentary Commission, all Members of Parliament and staff of Parliament for all the assistance you accorded me while performing my duties.

In a special way, I am highly indebted to the FDC party and the FDC party President Emeritus, that is Col Dr Kiiza Besigye, for having entrusted me with such a responsibility to serve my country.

It was indeed a great honour for me from the slopes of Mt Elgon. As a leader, I had sometimes to make hard and critical decisions. I want to tell all of you, Members of Parliament, and the public to which I take full responsibility, I have fought for what I believe in, I have tried to the best of my ability to discharge those duties and meet those responsibilities that were entrusted to me.

I have spoken here in this Parliament as Leader of the Opposition, as chair of both Public Accounts Committee and National Economy Committee in which so many decisions were made that have shaped the future of this nation.

In all the decisions I have made, I have always tried to do what was best for this nation.

During my tenure of office, there have been achievements that we can all be proud of. These achievements, therefore, represent shared effort of members of the Opposition, NRM members, our colleagues the independents and the entire public.I want to state that the challenges ahead of us are equally enormous.

I am very grateful to the people of Budadiri West on the slopes of Mt Elgon in Sironko District in Eastern Uganda. I am very grateful to these people who called on me while I was working with World Bank to quit that job to come back home and serve them as a Member of Parliament since 2001.

I want to state that they have nurtured me as their child from the mountains of the sun and I am very grateful to the people of Bugisu for the opportunity.

My initial desire, which hon. Kiyonga knows, was to be a civil servant but I can tell you now that I am stuck here in politics. As I stated here, this journey started back in the Seventh Parliament as a young legislature when Parliament overwhelmingly voted me to be the Chairperson of National Economy. In the Eighth Parliament, I was appointed Chairperson Public Accounts Committee. In the Ninth Parliament, I have served as the Leader of Opposition and I am happy to handover.

Colleagues, in a special way, I want to thank team which propelled my name to Uganda and the whole World when I contested for the presidency of FDC in 2012.

I am heavily indebted to them and thank the people of Uganda who have supported me all along. I can assure all Ugandans that I am around and I will be coming to your respective areas soon to see you and thank you in person.


Today, the new Leader of Opposition is inheriting an office that has taken off as fully established and constituted institution by law and checking Government excesses.

Mr Speaker, as a democratic leader, I must show the lead as other parties follow. So, let us all join together in affirming our common commitment in helping the poor lady and gentleman in villages of Kyanamukaka in Masaka District, Nshwere in Nyabushozi county, Katerampungu in Kanungu District, Abule in Koboko District, Lyambuzi in Kamuli and Kalata in Amudat  to mention a few, to lead a better life.

Mr Speaker, I want to make a pledge to you that as long as I have breath of life in my body, I shall continue to fight injustice, dictatorship and advocate for equality for all.

I shall continue to work for the great causes, which have been dedicated throughout my years; for example, as a leader of Bugisu Cooperative Union, FDC member and a Member of Parliament. There is one cause above all, to which I have been devoted and to which I shall always be devoted to see that there is equity in Uganda.

The mission is not lost, the struggle continues and I want to say that God bless you and God bless Uganda. I thank you.

Mr Speaker in the same way, the left belongs to Opposition, the right belongs to the ruling party. I want to ask my friend hon. Wafula Oguttu to take that seat. Opposition stretches up to that end of the door. (Interruption)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order. It is on record and in the Constitution that this House has the ruling party, the Opposition and the independents.

In this very House, it is on record and on the Hansard pronounced by the Rt hon. Speaker that this side from the middle to the left is for the independents and from the middle to the right is for the Opposition. So, is it in order for the former LOP to change the sitting arrangement in this House?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A decision was taken by this House at the beginning of this Parliament. Those sitting arrangements were agreed as they are now. That is the status quo; nothing has warranted any change as for now. We will just respect the sitting arrangements as they were.

The former hon. Leader of the Opposition does not have the authority to make those statements anymore. We will wait for the next leader of the Opposition to make those statements.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I want the public and colleagues to know this. Under Rule 9; 2)“The seats to the right hand  of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of Government Business and the Members for the Party in Government. 

3) The seats to the left hand of the Speaker shall be reserved for the Leader of the Opposition and Members of the Opposition or parties in the House.” The reason I am raising this is because it was an agreed position. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the submission of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I wish him to continue and read clause 4 of that rule, which says that “The Speaker shall ensure that all Members of Parliament have a comfortable seat.”
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would have been happier if Members listened. They are saying that the Speaker of Parliament shall ensure that a member has a seat to sit on. For the rule was clear, it forgot something. But the arrangement of the independents was agreed to by the leadership of Parliament. What I was raising –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally correct for the Leader of Opposition Emeritus to continue wasting this valuable parliamentary time, when you have ruled on that matter and it is not in his power to reverse what the Speaker agreed with the Leader of Opposition?

To this House, the office of the Leader of Opposition does not depend on the individuals. We know that what he agreed with the Speaker still stands as you have ruled. Is it procedurally right for the Leader of the Opposition Emeritus to divert this House and insist on the view he is trying to put forward when it is already settled? Is it procedurally correct for him to challenge your ruling?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, first of all, the Leader of Opposition should take his rightful place as by my communication.

Then secondly, hon. Members, this is the Ninth Parliament. The Ninth Parliament started sitting on the 19 May 2011 and it will continue as the Ninth Parliament until it is dissolved after five years.

The arrangements that were agreed at the commencement of this Parliament are the arrangements that will continue with this House until it is dissolved sometime in 2016. So, please, let us leave that matter for now. If there are administrative issues, they can be handled the way they were handled before.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I was not saying that the independents leave. I had wanted you to give me an opportunity to conclude my statement. When I said left and right, this is what I was meaning, in that corner sits former leaders that H.E Bukenya and the rest. Since this is the left, now, this where I am going to sit because it belongs to us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are situations where laws are written but there situations where practice becomes the law. Custom becomes the law.

I am giving due notice to the hon. Member that in the past, the practice has been that Members of the Government side have been sitting there, so, might need to have some explanation as to why you are sitting in a place that is ordinarily known to be sitting for the rest of the front bench members of the government.

Hon. Members, let me recognise that in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have been joined by staff members working under the Public Relations Department from the National Parliament of Kenya. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. Thank you. (Applause)

On the statement from the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, former Leader of the Opposition, there are some responses out of a request from the former Chief Opposition Whip. We would like to talk about – First, maybe, we can talk about the Leader of the Opposition and then, I can allow – Let the new one make his statement. Please, Leader of the Opposition.

3.04
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and colleagues. Welcome back from one of the longest recesses that we have had in the season, which was also prolonged for another two weeks on the account that there were renovations taking place. I thought we would come back when the renovations are complete but the Speaker also forgot to inform us that the prolonging of the recess was to allow our colleagues to go to the bush for two weeks. In future, we should all be informed appropriately.   

Mr Speaker, I hope –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, a decision was taken by the Commission to extend the recess of Parliament to today. It was formally communicated, no other reason was assigned. It is not proper to draw the Office of the Speaker, which made the communication or the Office of the Clerk, which also made the communication to a matter that tends to be of a partisan and political party nature. It is not fair to the Office of the Speaker.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I hope we have come back from the recess with fresh and objective minds to debate and listen to each other in the interest of our country.

I stand before this august House today as the new Leader of the Opposition in this House, a position which I am aware comes with heavy responsibilities and great demands and challenges for me. I am sure that I am ready to shoulder those responsibilities and challenges with humility and dedication.

I wish to thank my party FDC for choosing me and putting trust in me. I hope I will not disappoint them. I hope to work with you all; the honourable Speaker and colleagues, in harmony and in a cordial manner.

I hope to continue building on the non-antagonistic relationship that my predecessors hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Prof. Ogenga Latigo have been nurturing with our opponents on the opposite side.

Let me take this opportunity to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for a job well done. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has not been moved or shuffled because of any shortcoming. He was not incompetent, he was very competent. He was not corrupt, he is almost incorruptible. He was not incapacitated in any way; he is not of an advanced age that he is too old. He is a star performer but in the FDC cherished philosophy of change, hon. Nandala-Mafabi had to move on.

We do not want our leaders to overstay in one office. FDC will never have a leader staying in one office for over 30 years, however good she or he may be.

Once again, let me thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi and assure him that FDC values him and we are proud of you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Mr Speaker, we start the second half of the Ninth Parliament with some urgent issues facing us. The issues include legislation on constitutional and electoral reforms. The reforms are a matter of urgency to us. We need them or they are needed for a new Electoral Commission to have legitimacy and sufficient time to organise credible, free and fair elections.

From past elections, Mr Speaker we have seen diminishing numbers regarding the turnout of voters. At every election, the numbers of those who go to vote has been reducing. Last time round, it was 58 per cent. If we do not have these reforms, I am afraid in the next election we might have 30 per cent turnout.

It is clear that the majority of Ugandans have increasingly lost confidence in our electoral system and the current Electoral Commission, which many see as partisan and totally controlled by the President, right or wrong. The population is, therefore, lethargic, disgruntled and withdrawing. It is dangerous for our country for a population to feel this way. It is dangerous for our democracy.

In the interest of our future, the future of our country and children, we wish to call upon this august House and all Ugandans to start taking a very hard look at the inevitable change and transition that is coming to our country after 30 years of one-man rule.

Most of the countries that have had the misfortune of going through a similar experience as ours have ended up in flames and in turmoil. I do not think and I do not hope for our country to go through that. We must, therefore, work hard as a country and ensure a smooth transfer of power when the time comes to avoid the chaos. 

Mr Speaker, last December, this House was convinced and a motion was passed to legalise our troops to South Sudan on condition that they were going to evacuate our citizens who were in danger in that neighbouring country. It turned out that the whole truth was not told to us. 

Available information shows that our soldiers in South Sudan are more or less being employed as mercenaries to keep an unpopular regime in power. I say this because I asked about who was going to meet the cost of our soldiers in South Sudan. We have heard unfortunate information from the Ministry of Defence of South Sudan saying that our soldiers in South Sudan are being paid and maintained by that country. Under what arrangement was that done? 

Our soldiers are being used to keep in power an unpopular regime in the neighbouring country; that is unfortunate. The other side, which opposes the regime in South Sudan are accusing Uganda of assisting the Kiir Regime to carryout ethnic cleansing. Ethnic cleansing means genocide. I do not know whether UPDF is engaged in that. But if it is true that our soldiers are engaged in ethnic cleansing, it is unfortunate and we hope that the Ministry of Defence is going to clarify on the things we have read in the media. 

The opponents of Kiir in South Sudan argue that they cannot engage in peace negotiations supposed to be taking place in Ethiopia because they have an occupational force from Uganda killing their people. Like many IGAD states have done and other friends of Uganda have done, we the opposition wish to demand that UPDF be withdrawn from South Sudan. That may not be immediate but we hope that the Ministry of Defence makes arrangements to withdraw our soldiers from South Sudan because we are not wanted there by the majority of the people in that country, by the region and the international community. 

Mr Speaker, we also wish to ask Government to begin considering our soldiers in Somalia. We have been in Somalia for close to seven years. We were told they would go for one year. We have done our duty as a country; we have fulfilled our international obligation as a country. I think that is enough. Let other people replace us in Somalia and bring back our boys so that they can get involved in the building of this country. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to state here that we are going to be firm and steadfast on the issue of choosing priorities for allocation of funds in the budget; and on value for tax-payers money and theft of public resources. The focus of the budget must be on wealth and income creation; on production and welfare of the lower sections of our people. 

The current design of our budget gives a little bit too much to the small so-called class – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, the indulgence, which I have granted you was specifically under Rule 46 to make a short comment about the position you have taken. Now, you are bringing substantial and controversial matters that need a debate. There are procedures on how we process these things – can we have some order. The indulgence I granted was to handle this transition – like personal statements under Rule 46. But when you bring in matters that require a debate, it is not fair to the rules and the person presiding; if you want to make a formal motion asking to present a formal statement – that is different. 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I was concluding my remarks. I was talking about the budget – I thought this was a chance for me to say the things that I will take as my priorities with my team as we come in. 

Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me this chance to talk to my colleagues. This is my maiden speech as the Leader of the Opposition.  Once again, I thank my colleague hon. Nandala-Mafabi for a job well done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I at this time ask the House to be properly constituted by the new people taking their rightful places? The Chief Opposition Whip should be sitting where the Chief Opposition Whip sits. We are now properly constituted. 

3.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. colleagues, I rise to extend a voice of welcome and congratulations to my brother hon. Wafula Oguttu, on attaining the status of Leader of the Opposition in Parliament; congratulations. I do not know the reasons the Opposition chose him but I have known him for a very long time and I believe they had good reasons to choose him as the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

I rise to very clearly and categorically state our readiness as Government – and as the ruling party, the National Resistance Movement – to pledge our total commitment to cooperating with the Leader of the Opposition in the performance of his role. Of course, we do expect that he will raise the standard of debate in the House; he will raise it beyond today. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the Opposition is very keen on Kyankwanzi but I am happy to take them there when they are ready. (Laughter)

We do expect hon. Wafula Oguttu to lead the Opposition in its role of offering alternative policy propositions to those of Government. I want to state very clearly that we have hitherto enjoyed very cordial working relationship with his predecessors – Prof. Ogenga Latigo was a very good and responsible Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has been a good Leader of the Opposition and we are very grateful for that great leadership they have offered. And we would like to invite our brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu to do even better. On our side, in debates in this House, when we take decisions, our first consideration is Uganda – we take Uganda’s interest as the first consideration in whatever we do and would like the Leader of the Opposition to join us to give Uganda the priority so that whatever we do, we do together in the interest of our country.  

We have gone far since this Parliament opened, in cooperating with each other under the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). We have made a lot of progress. In the last Parliament, under hon. Ogenga Latigo, we cooperated fully in the reforms that were required to improve our elections and we did. And I think we are making progress, not for ourselves as individuals but for this country and democracy as a whole. So, we would like to welcome you and to pledge our total cooperation in this respect.

Mr Speaker, I would like to – (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in regard to our sitting. It is a practice that ministers and shadow ministers are supposed to occupy the front bench. But I see space on the front bench of the Government side being misused; there are books on the bench and yet senior ministers are mixing up yet the issues we intend to raise will need their attention. Therefore, is it procedurally right for books to occupy the frontbench while the ministers are hiding at the backbench?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is up to the Speaker to ensure that members are comfortably seated. In the circumstances, I do not see any discomfort that has risen from people sitting where they are currently sitting. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, finally, I would like, on behalf of Government and the ruling party, to extend a word of welcome to our new member, hon. Col Innocent George Oula, representing the UPDF. (Laughter) You are most welcome. Again, we pledge to do everything possible to closely work with you to promote the interests of Uganda. Thank you.

3.30
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, I would like to thank the Members of the Ninth Parliament, the Clerk and her staff, the FDC party for the cooperation they have all given me during the time I have been the Chief Opposition Whip. 

I must report to this House that I did my job without any stress because most of you cooperated with me. The biggest challenge, which I encountered when I entered that office was giving Members office accommodation. I was given 43 offices, most of which were already allocated to the committee chairpersons, Leader of the Opposition, Opposition Chief Whip, Commissioners and deputy chairpersons. So, basically I had very few offices to give out. This challenge still remains because most of my Members still share offices and I hope this challenge will be addressed. This is because I would not want Mama Cecilia to become older than she is for thinking a lot on how to accommodate her Members.

I invite the cooperation of colleagues in the new assignment that I have been given, as you will later be informed. I request that the same cooperation you have been extending to me as the Opposition Chief Whip is the one you will extend to me wherever I will be. I also request that you give the same cooperation to Mama Cecilia.

Mama Cecilia, I thank you for the guidance you have always been giving us – actually you even played that part from wherever you were. The Government Chief Whip, I thank you; we have worked well together. I worked with hon. Migereko and hon. Nasasira and of course my sister hon. Justine Lumumba as Government Chief Whips. (Interjection) I do not know whether hon. Amama Mbabazi also wanted to be a Chief Whip but I worked with you very well and the Leader of Government Business and I want to thank all of you for the support you gave me.

My office encountered another serious moment when I was put on forced leave for some few minutes and I went for a by-election. When I went for this by election, all of you cooperated with me. I want to thank you, colleagues, for that cooperation that you showed me during that hard time. 

I want to thank my deputy who sat in this office and you know that time was very hard for her. The Leader of the Opposition was also very busy in his campaign contesting for the party presidency seat. So, I want to thank her. She did a great job and we have achieved whatever we have achieved because of her hard work and the effort she put in.

I want to thank all of you for the time you have given to us in the leadership of the Opposition in this Parliament. We continue to pledge to do our best to ensure that Ugandans get what is due to them. We shall ensure, in whichever capacities we shall hold, that the Ugandans are sincerely represented in this House and that we do what is required of us by the Constitution of Uganda, which we pledged, promised and vowed to uphold and protect. I want to thank all of you, colleagues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chief Opposition Whip, do you want to make a short statement?

3.34
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I am really touched by the mood in the House in witnessing peaceful transfer of power. Many of the Members in this House cannot see very well apart from reading what the Parliament of Uganda was a couple of years ago. The Sixth Parliament, the Seventh Parliament, the NRC and the Constituent Assembly had only one side. It was not a bi-camera House; it was a single camera House. There was no Leader of the Opposition but there was a shadow Leader of the Opposition; not official and not constitutional.

There were no parties but there were shadow parties. Today, I am the happiest person to see that I hold the position of a Whip officially and I am seeing two sides of the House; the Government side and the Opposition side.

Mr Speaker, this is history in the making and we must appreciate where we have come from. We must appreciate where we are and we must appreciate where we are going. This is very important.

I remember in the Constituent Assembly the Rt hon. Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi - Alphabetically his name is not far from mine so we were very close to each other. I do remember at that time that Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi was not as he is today. He was a true political activist; he was not willing to listen to even his nearest neighbour like me but today, we have learnt the game of tolerance. We can tolerate one another regardless of our political positions and for me, Uganda is maturing democratically and we must appreciate that. What we are fighting for is to see true democracy return to this country. That is my prayer.

The new LOP did not speak about himself; he spoke about the former LOP. It is important that we should know that Prof. Ogenga Latigo was the first Leader of the Opposition after several years; so, he had no reference point. He had to start and create that Office of LOP from nowhere. Whatever he did, everybody must appreciate. He did very well.

I must say that hon. Nandala-Mafabi might have adopted a different style all together and that is acceptable in management. You must always be conscious of the fact that I am trained in management and I am very observant. When somebody behaves differently, I appreciate it. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi might have behaved differently but they have both performed very well.

What I want to say about the new LOP is that some of you have said very much; some of you have doubted him but I want to assure you that Rt hon. Wafula Oguttu will be an asset to this House and more so, to the Opposition. He is a very well trained man, he is very clear minded, very sober, he is willing to listen and willing to work even with people like me at a very close range.

I appreciate that kind of nature and character and we claim ourselves glad to have him. He is a very well trained man in the field of management and in corporate governance and I believe he is going to bring that skill in trying to make sure that we perform professionally.

Allow me to say that it is not a question of being in the Opposition and I, for one, would not wish to be involved in shouting matches or in ridiculing one another. We are all Ugandans, we should respect one another. 

I have represented Uganda at the international fora; I was in ACP/EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly with hon. Dombo. I have been in Pan African Parliament and I represented Uganda and I want to say that the nationalistic spirit – the nationalistic spirit must be the driving force within each and every one. Before you think about NRM, think about Uganda. Before you think about anything else, think about Uganda first and that is what should drive us and that is what will close the gap between the Movement Side and the Opposition Side. 

At this point, I want to congratulate the NRM party for having put pressure on the President to sign the Anti-homosexuality Bill. It is a wonderful thing because we do not want to pretend. We all swore by the Bible and nowhere is it written that we swear by some sections of the Bible – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, some other Members affirmed by the Quran – 

MRS OGWAL: Exactly, I have read the Quran as well; the Quran does not differ from the Bible. They even believe that Jesus Christ is coming back to judge. So, I understand Islam, I have read the Quran and I can defend them on this point. I believe we all believe in God and we are obedient to what God says in the Bible and the Quran. 

Allow me to come nearer to home and say, if I am to perform well as the Opposition Chief Whip, I would appeal to all the Members on our side to be cohesive, to be united and to understand our mission. And I would expect the Government side also to know that apart from their party being different, they must also understand our mission; they must understand what we are here for. We are here to discuss issues that concern the people who sent us here. 

So, it is not about Kyankwanzi; it is not about Najjanankumbi; it is about what the people of Uganda are saying and what the people of Uganda want. All of us must be united on matters that concern Uganda. All of us must be united to condemn corruption; we must be united to condemn all sorts of wickedness that is going on in this country. (Interjections) Mr Speaker, I am the only one on the Floor, but I can hear so many people helping me to make my speech, from both sides of the House. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are the only one on record. 

MRS OGWAL: we have come a long way and we are happy that God has chosen us at this material time to lead our country and we must count ourselves blessed. 

I want to conclude by saying, unless we understand the power of the law, then it is difficult to understand why we are here. The Opposition must lobby the Government side and the Government side must lobby the Opposition side to ensure that we can come up with a united position on matters that concern our people; that is important. I appeal to you to be duty minded. 

Mr Speaker, one of the committees that I was in was always frustrated by lack of quorum and that part of the work of whipping – although I used to keep quiet, a huge number of the Members are on Government side. But when it came to attendance in the committee, the majority of the participants were Members of the Opposition –(Interjections)– I am talking about the infrastructure committee and if the chairperson from that committee is here, stand up and contradict me, because the records are there. 

We must all be aware why we are here; we are being paid to be here and you do not need the Government Whip or the Opposition Whip to look you up. You must only be reminded, but you must do your best to do what the people have sent you to do. 

Finally, I want to remind this House about the constitutional provision, Article 208, which talks about the army. I am not going to talk about army deployment; that is not my work as whip. But I wish they could give me that work; I would try my best. But I am saying, if you are to obey our Constitution, there is to be a special corner for the army. 

As the Chief Whip of the Opposition, I would have been more comfortable if I saw five soldiers on that side and five on our side. The army is supposed to be neutral and we are preparing to change Government. I would be very happy to see the army saluting my party when they come to power; and they must show that they are able to do that and the only way they can do that is – even if it means changing the rules, we must obey the Constitution. The army either be given a special corner as a sign of neutrality. When these people get out from that side, I fear to talk to them because I do not know how they will treat me. Mr Speaker, if they go to Kyankwanzi that is even worse.
 
I would like to appreciate you, Mr Speaker and the Rt hon. Speaker for the way you have conducted the House and I pray that the spirit that has led us this far will take us further. 

By the grace of God, this country will be a good example in the continent and together, we can do it. I am very proud to be on the Opposition; it is not about eating. In fact, it is better to be on the Opposition so that you can understand to be a clean leader in Government. 

I want to thank you and thank God and pray that you will support us both me and my colleague who will be appointed from that side to whip you. Please, support us so that together, we will succeed. May God bless you. 

3.15
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to congratulate my MP, hon. Wafula Oguttu for having got the chance to occupy that office. I would like to thank you FDC for elevating Bugiri to that level. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the outgoing Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala Mafabi.  

I want to thank you for the time you gave us as Government Chief Whip during the consultation and I want to request you as outgoing Leader of the Opposition that, as you have promised, keep advising my brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu because that office is not simple; it is stressful and challenging but I am glad you have made it.
I thank my sister, hon. Winifred Kiiza; she went through difficult times but there were also good times in that office.

I thank my mother, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the advice that you have been giving hon. Kiiza and I. As your daughters, we are very grateful.

I also want to take this opportunity to inform Members that hon. Cecilia Ogwal would take off time whenever things would toughen and bring the two of us together and advise us. Thank you very much. I welcome you to that office and pledge on behalf of the NRM Parliamentary caucus that we shall work with you because we are all striving to make this country better while serving it.

Hon. Members, especially those on the front bench of the opposite side, I thank you for all the attention you paid to the media, most especially when we were in Kyankwanzi because we kept receiving information from you and we were very grateful. Thank you for following the activities of the NRM Party Caucus. (Laughter) 

I thank everybody and I pray that as we begin this new meeting, we work together as leaders who were given the responsibility to lead this country for the five years we are in office. Thank you very much. I congratulate you but you have not communicated the next venue after plenary today. (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure; we have been on recess for a long time and one of the things we read about, which was widely circulated in this country, was an attempt to bomb the Speaker of this House using a letter in an envelope. Rule 44 of our Rules of Procedure requires ministers to make statements on various policy and action issues. 

When the Speaker of this House or any other Member of this House is under attack – especially an attack of this nature – for our safety and the safety of the nation, we would expect a statement, either from the Prime Minister or the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs. This would assure us of the measures taken to guarantee our safety and especially when we keep receiving parcels in our pigeonholes. 

The life of the Speaker is under attack – at least, going by the press reports – our lives are not safe. But we are receiving no statement from Government; are we proceeding well? And is this the way we are going to continue proceeding as an arm of Government when we receive terror threats of this nature and Government thinks this is not a matter worth giving a statement about? Please, guide me, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this matter has not been forgotten; it is serious and urgent but we have had consultations about what form this statement to the House should take. We are all concerned and I think the Rt Hon. Prime Minister might make a statement on this.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true this is a very serious matter, indeed. The threat to the life of anyone in Uganda – let alone a leader of an organ like this House – is taken seriously by the government. So, measures are being taken and I would like to say that we will be giving a statement on how far we have so far gone in the investigation of the matter on Thursday afternoon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is the consultation I had earlier indicated also. (Hon. Okupa rose_) On what matter do you rise, hon. Member?

MR OKUPA: Procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, procedure.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. On the day NRM was celebrating 28 years in power, on the following day, we read press reports that the President of Uganda had made an apology for the atrocities that were committed by the then NRA in Northern and Eastern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I am a survivor of those atrocities; I would have been happy if a formal statement was made in this House. I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to have that statement here or we can rely on what the media reported. But I would have appreciated if that came out on this Floor so that we debate it because in this House – Mr Speaker, I know that you are also a survivor of these atrocities. I think we have reached a time where we need to speak this out and reconcile because a number of people still hold that bitterness. 

I thank the President for coming out boldly after those years, to apologise. When he came to Kasilo on 20 August 2011, I did bring it to his attention – and he had asked to have a word with me on the specifics because the day I survived a firing squad, my three other colleagues were killed. I was the only one the commander, Capt. Kibuuka asked to be spared. And that is how I survived – by the grace of God. 

So, I think we need a statement from Government on this matter so that we debate it and possibly, forge a way forward on how we should be able to bring this matter to rest and also expose those who committed these acts; it was not the whole NRA that did it. We must be able to understand this, Mr Speaker. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear the Prime Minister’s response; it is a procedural matter but it is also a question of policy and decision of the Executive. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is true that when celebrating Victory Day in Mayuge, the President, in his statement, did say that it had then come to his knowledge that certain criminal actions had been reported in some period when we had instability in the North and East. And he did say that the matter was being investigated and he encouraged the public – whoever may have information on any criminal activity that may have happened anywhere and anytime – should feel free to bring it forth so that it is investigated and action follows the findings.

My expectation is that when this investigation the President talked about is complete, we will be ready to come and give a clear statement –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to clarify on the matter of where such information of atrocities committed by NRA should be taken and who should receive it. In Obongi, we have some living people like hon. Okupa who were thrown out for dead and others, who were buried alive but they recovered. I told them about this thing but they asked me, “so what do we do? Where do we go?” 

So, can the Rt hon. Prime Minister and this Parliament help me? Do we bring these people here to Parliament? Do we create a desk to receive the information from them? Where do we go? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we finish this? [Hon. Anywar: “Procedure”] Procedure to the Prime Minister? Let him respond to that. Procedural point is to the Speaker not to the Prime Minister. 

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The issue on the Floor is very touchy. As a country, we need to heal our wounds and indeed, there are many survivors out there and we are one of them. The steps that we want to take to heal these wounds should be as transparent as possible and those who can give the information, as the Rt hon. Prime Minister is saying, should come out and we get a middle point.

The point of procedure I am seeking is, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the Rt hon. Prime Minister comes out from the government side with that statement detailing how we can go about to get this information and how we can reconcile as a people who are already hurt to enable us to proceed? This is rather than him just standing here and giving us an explanation that the investigation is going on and yet, in the minds of us who are survivors, we are not yet clear on how to go about it. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we receive that statement, Mr Speaker?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, fortunately, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Government of Uganda, the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and all the security agencies of State have restored law and order in all the corners of Uganda. We have fully re-established government functionality at every level. Therefore, it is not a problem to know where to go in terms of having information that may have relevance to criminality - (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, we are dealing with a very sensitive issue. We are dealing with people’s lives. We are dealing with emotions that place our country towards a potential explosion that we may witness.

The Head of State has taken a very positive step upon, which I must congratulate him by saying - forget about whether it is belated or not but at least, he has moved a step. His would be representative in this House in form of the Leader of Government Business downplays it and trivialises the issue as if it is a matter where we simply walk into a police post in Mayuge or Obongi. I had expected the Prime Minister to say, we are establishing say a commission, if it is there or if it is not there, to be bold and man enough to tell us the truth. 

Is he, therefore, in order to trivialise the matter and vulgarise it to say, we have established law and order everywhere so you simply walk into any office of the State and report? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the Rt hon. Prime Minister had not finished. I was waiting for what he was going to say next. Can you say what you were going to say, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you for ruling hon. Sseggona out of order, Mr Speaker. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA LUBEGA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister to impute words and motives into your rulings, deliberately to  mislead the House that you ruled me out of order whereas not?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker’s ruling is not subject to comment or debate. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the President was talking about something that happened some time ago and obviously, this information was received through an existing structure. We did not announce that there was a special tribunal or anything of the kind or special investigation for that matter. In the UPDF army, we have structures that do receive information. We have structures in Government. 

It is not a triviality to say that the Police Force of Uganda or the security agencies of Uganda have not only established law and order that we are enjoying today but also the peace that we have. They have the capacity to handle everything including getting the information the President was talking about. 
Therefore, I would encourage hon. Members to encourage their people to use the existing means to convey that information. I thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am set aback by the impression the Rt hon. Prime Minister is giving on this very serious issue. It seems the good will of the President to heal the wounds is being down played. We, the people of Northern Uganda and Kitgum particularly, which I represent have been under such stressful moments and the face of the army is part of that threatening situation. 

We would want a situation whereby if we are going to reconcile and speak out our minds, it should be a neutral open place enabling everybody to go and give the necessary information. It would not be right for the government to expect people who fear – many fear for your information, Rt hon. Speaker – that if they went into the barracks, they might not be able to express their will freely.

I know that there is a saying in Luganda that being called to the kingdom is not because you are loved, which I want to relate to the situation of being called to the barracks for that matter. People do not understand-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order.

MS ANYWAR: I am raising it, Mr Speaker. For the Rt hon. Prime Minister to again send people who were threatened under a very stressful war time of atrocity to go to the barracks to give information really threatening- Is the Prime Minister in order to underplay the magnitude of this problem and the good will of the President to allow people to speak their mind; instead of coming here with a statement and allow us to talk, he is referring us to where we cannot talk. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this was a statement from the President; it was a Presidential statement in a public meeting. What is coming out is that there have been no policy arrangements to back that statement. If there is going to be a formal request for a policy backing that statement, then it can come at a later date, when it is properly channelled through the rules. But it cannot be through these points of order. 

The Prime Minister has said there are institutions that can handle this; the President got this information through those existing institutions; if there is addition information, it can be handled. If that is insufficient, then a formal proposal can be made properly so that we know how to proceed. But this one is not preceding properly, hon. Members. 

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is why I stood up here on a point of procedure. The Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business should make it clear to Ugandans. I would expect the Prime Minister to say, I will come back with a statement highlighting the issues. May be, if there is need to put up a policy and how it is going to be handled; but not to say, let them go and report to the police station; I do not take that lightly being one  of the many who survived what happened at that time. 

I would still demand that the Prime Minister comes back with a statement, where we would be able to input our contributions. That is what I would really plead for because H.E made his statement in a very good heart. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Prime Minister is not prepared to make a statement but you know in the rules, how you can seek out this information; you have the Rules of Procedure in your hands. 

PERSONAL STATEMENT

4.16
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I make a personal statement under Rule 46, a soft copy of which I have sent to all colleagues. I take this opportunity to inform you that for most part of last year, I grappled with a health challenge that initially manifested itself as general body fatigue, chest and back pain. 

After several medical investigations, I was told that I have a problem of multiple vertebral disc prolapse and nerve compression. Attempts to arrest the condition through a conservative approach of physiotherapy and medication yielded very little. 

By early September last year, I developed limpness of legs and could neither walk nor sit with ease. A decision was then taken by medical consultants of Mulago Hospital to have me referred for further investigations and management. I was referred to a senior consultant neurosurgeon Dr Raji Kurma of Fortis Hospital in Bangalore India. This was only made possible through the encouragement and support of the Parliamentary Commission. 

On 4 December, 2013, I was admitted at the said hospital and fresh medical investigations immediately commenced. The surgeons then concluded that I had a Chronic Degenerative Disc disease and that the only remedy was by surgical intervention to which I consented. 

I was also informed by the hospital that they had successfully attended to 42 different cases referred to it from Uganda in the last six months prior to my admission; that is from 1 June to 30 November, 2013. In fact, I found a nine year old Ugandan boy from Hoima District whom I later got to know and interact with called Kenneth Ainomugisha scheduled for an open heart surgery under the sponsorship of an organisation called Compassion International. He was successfully operated on and he returned home normal. 

From the time of admission and discharge, I received such close tender loving care from all the medical and non-medical staff of Fortis Hospital that in itself was a healing process for which I am highly indebted. 

The five hour surgical operation that I underwent which involved fixing metal clips and screws into my spin was done on the 10 December 2013 and I was gladly discharged on the 25 December – that was on Christmas day, last year. 
The good news is that whereas I went to India walking on clutches and groaning in pain and frustration, I returned to Uganda walking normally and beaming with joy. Glory be to the Almighty God. (Applause)

But colleagues, whereas Uganda has produced very knowledgeable and competent medical personnel in various fields, very little has been done to make this human resource effective due to lack of high tech-diagnostic equipment in our medical facilities. Our medical consultants have had to painfully refer Ugandan patients abroad for further investigations and management – in Kenya, South African, India, name it. 

It is also important to note that by the time a patient is referred for further investigation, the diagnosis will have delayed and probably more often than not, the medical condition would have progressively worsened. Many Ugandans needlessly die because of delayed diagnosis due to our ill-equipped medical facilities. Moreover, majority of Ugandans cannot even afford the cost of treatment abroad or access a sponsor for the same. 

Lack of equipment and medical facilities greatly demotivates our medical personnel. It could be interesting to compute the total amount of foreign exchange that Uganda spends for treatment abroad per year, be it by Government or NGO or individuals; such money could be saved if Government cared to increase our local capacity. 

Government ought to address this in order to address lives and stop losing the hard-earned foreign exchange. We can improve our national referral hospital; we can improve our health facilities in a phased manner; say, by focusing on one or two departments in a year making sure that they are up to the desired ultra-modern standards before taking on subsequent departments. After a couple of years, I believe that Uganda would become a destination for other countries to seek medical services. After all, we have the professional medical personnel. We can, if only we care to make sure that our medical facilities are up to the required standards. 
In the meantime, we need to embrace the public private partnership in health as a stop gap measure. I particularly encourage such partnerships with hospitals like Fortis, which have been our major destinations for complicated medical conditions. 

Hon. Members, I also had an opportunity to interact with a senior management and proprietors of that hospital after my operation shortly before I was discharged and discussed with them the possibility of a Public Private Partnership, informing them of how we would open our hands if such an opportunity arose and they were more than willing.

Mr Speaker, I am greatly indebted to the team headed by Dr Raja kumar that attended to me in Fortis Hospital in Bangalore, India. This could never have happened if it was not for the intervention of our consultant, Dr Mike Muhumuza and Dr Emmanuel Sseremba of Mulago Hospital and Prof. Ponsiano Ocama of Makerere Medical School, who managed my condition in Mulago Hospital before finally referring me to India.

Above all, the Parliamentary Commission, headed by the Speaker, played a major role in ensuring that I get another lease of life that I now have.

Hon. Colleagues, to you, you showed me love and compassion – praying for me and visiting me in hospital and home speaks volumes of comradeship. Please, be blessed. I am highly indebted to all of you for the prayers and the support that you gave me. 

Several of my constituents in Ngora travelled and visited me in hospital and at my home in Mukono. They conducted prayers for me in nearly all churches and mosques and in several other traditional ceremonies - - Yes, we have very many ceremonies during marriages – all those are prayers. Indeed, the great Lord heard their prayers and put me on a proper recovery course for which I thank them very dearly. 

Dear colleagues, I intended to make this statement short – no names mentioned – but several of you, although I could not mention by name – members of this House and friends outside really cared and prayed for me. I thank you for those prayers and for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we thank God for our colleague’s recovery so far. I think he has done very well. When I made the announcement here last time, you all saw that my face was sad. But I am happy that he is now in a better condition and we thank God for that.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

    (I) THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY INTEGRATION EDUCATION BILL, 2014

4.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the East African Community Integration Education Bill, 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

    (II) THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES BILL, 2014

4.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the East African Community Cooperative Societies Bill, 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Is it still a Bill? Yes, point of procedure. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, in Uganda, we have the Cooperative Societies Act. Now, this is the East African Community Cooperative Societies Bill, which will become an Act. 

The point of procedure I am raising is this: Is this one repealing the Cooperative Societies Act of Uganda? This is because Uganda is part of East Africa and each country has its own Societies Act. Why I am raising this is so that we do not waste time if this is not going to change the old one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, under the Treaty, this is supposed to be brought in for information; if decisions are eventually taken the implications will be assessed at that time. Let us move to the next.

    (III) THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY CROSS-BORDER LEGAL PRACTICE BILL, 2014

4.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Sarah Mwebaza): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, the East African Community Cross Border Legal Practice Bill, 2014). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. These particular Bills, as I said earlier, are for information. Of course, they will be housed at the Committee on the East African Affairs. If members are interested, they can come and look at them and when the debates begin taking place wherever they will be taking place – if you have interventions that you would like to make, you can contact our members to East African Legislative Assembly to give our input. That is where it is going to be housed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, where will these laws be applicable? This is because Uganda is part of East Africa; if it is for information and you are going to make them for people of East Africa. With the old laws in place, which of the two sets will be above the other? This is what I want to understand, Mr Speaker. This is because either they are repealing the ones we have or else we shall make redundant laws.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the East African Community is going through a process of harmonisation of laws; now that is a debate that is necessary. You are making those points because they have been brought to the House. And that is the debate that should be addressed to the appropriate people at the appropriate time. This is for information purposes and I think you can see that the information is important because you have already started your engagement with it. So, this is not the final position of this House; we shall not take a decision on this. But our members to the East African Legislative Assembly will sit and take advice from us about what should be done; the status of our laws and how that law will fit in the framework of the laws existing in Uganda. Those debates will be happening at the Assembly and we shall make our input.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am not objecting to what you are saying. Currently, I am one of the people on the consultancy to harmonise taxes in East Africa. And what they are coming up with are harmonised taxes and they are calling it “Harmonisation of Taxes”. Now, here we are talking of cooperative societies; is it harmonisation or just a new law? 

I would like you, Mr Speaker, to help me – because you are a lawyer – I do not want to waste my energy – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I am the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda and not that of the East African Legislative Assembly. These documents are laid here for information purpose; we now have them in this House and so, the discussion will begin. There is no way I can now say we should begin arguing whether it is fit or not fit because it will be addressing the matter in a wrong place. Let us have the next item.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I wish to beg your indulgence; I thank you for tolerating my “bad manners” of raising issues. Having said that, I want to beg the indulgence of the House that since I am the former Leader of the Opposition, I want to ask all of you to join me as I hand over the office, assets and staff of the Leader of the Opposition. The reason I am doing this is so that tomorrow you will emulate the right things as I am doing.

So, I am requesting you that either you suspend the House or –(Interjections)– I am begging you because these are parliamentary offices and I am going to carry out a parliamentary function. So, I am just asking you, in good faith – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, now you know that hon. Nandala-Mafabi will be handing over office at a place he has not mentioned. You are therefore at liberty to join the hon. Member in conducting the function he has just mentioned because we do not know the venue and the time. The next item.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The time is just now. I am asking the Leader of the Opposition that I can go and hand him the office and the Opposition Chief Whip. The Office of the Leader of the Opposition is just near here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please.   

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Privatisation) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, in accordance with Article 156 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, I wish to lay before the House the Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2013/2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. According to the procedure, that stands committed to the appropriate Committee on National Economy for expeditious handling so that this matter can be brought back to the House to help facilitate Government programmes. The next item.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE CONDUCT OF HON. KIPOI TONNY NSUBUGA, MP BUBULO WEST

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that this matter came to the House here and it was referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline and they are now ready to report and that is why it is on the Order Paper.

But for the record let me say that this morning I received a letter from Mbidde and Company Advocates raising a matter of a petition on hon. Tonny Kipoi Nsubuga against the Attorney-General – Constitutional Petition No. 4 of 2014. They are saying that this matter is before court and the issue raised make it difficult for the House to proceed. I would like to hear from the chairperson of the committee about the status is on this matter so that we can proceed with it. The chairperson?

4.35
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): I thank you Rt. Hon. Speaker. We investigated this matter and the committee handed over a report to the Speaker on the 20 January 2013. We are ready to proceed.

Yesterday, we also received a letter indicating that there is a petition; Constitutional Petition No. 4 of 2014 and among the prayers is the prayer that the committee investigations must be halted permanently. That, in our view, is redundant because the investigations are complete. 

That said, the main thrust or argument of the petitioners is that the Parliament of Uganda does not have the constitutional mandate to declare the seat of a Member of Parliament vacant – which is the only relevant matter raised in the petition.

Rt. Hon. Speaker, we have looked at the records of this Parliament and discovered that this matter has been canvassed in great detail and I have a copy of the Hansard of the proceedings of the Parliament of Uganda on the 20th day of November 2013. Of particular relevance to this subject the contents of pages 17 to 20. I beg your indulgence that I read them.

On the 20th day when we presented a report on the conduct of Gen. David Sejusa, hon. Odonga Otto rose up to raise the same arguments that are raised in this petition and this IS what he had to say: “I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter in relation to Article 83 and 86 of the Constitution, if I may read them. Article 83 states, “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament- (d) if that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting…”

However, Article 86 of the Constitution states, “(1) The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether - (a) a person has been validly elected a Member of Parliament or the seat of a Member of Parliament has fallen vacant.”

Madam Speaker, in the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005” –(Interjections)– I am reading from the Hansard. “Madam Speaker, in the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 - Section 86, this Parliament copied the same provision of the Constitution and put it in the Act. It says, “The High Court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question whether a member has been validly elected a Member of Parliament or the seat of a Member of Parliament has fallen vacant.”

In the circumstances, the procedural question I seek is whether this Parliament is conferring the jurisdiction of the High Court upon itself to move and declare hon. Gen. David Sejusa’s seat vacant. I am just seeking your guidance on the matter.”

Hon. Paul Mwiru then shot up and this is what he said: “Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have addressed my mind to the recommendations. The committee says we should proceed under Article 83 but just as hon. Odonga Otto has said, to determine whether the seat is vacant can only be done under Article 86. On that, I am fortified by the case of hon. Abdul Nakendo v Patrick Mwondha, Election Petition No. 9 of 2007, where Justice Katureebe said that to determine whether the seat has fallen vacant is a preserve of the High Court. 

So I am wondering whether even when we proceed under Article 83 as determined by the committee, we shall not be proceeding under a different rule, which does not deal with declaring any seat to be vacant. Madam Speaker, as you respond to hon. Odonga Otto, you could also respond to that. Thank you.”

There were not very ready submissions made by hon. Waira and then the Speaker of Parla8iment ruled as follows: “Honourable members, Article 86 relates to questions to be determined by the courts. It presupposes an election petition. That is what it presupposes. Yes, it presupposes that there is an election petition. If you petition the High Court to find out whether a seat has fallen vacant, that is when it applies. We are within our Rules of Procedure.”

The point I am trying to make is that this House has already pronounced itself conclusively on this matter. We have on record the decision of the Speaker and there is no good reason to depart from it. That said, reading of Article 83 (1) (d) can only lead us to one conclusion and if you permit me, I will read it verbatim. “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament - (d) if that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and -” The emphasis is mine, Rt. Hon. Speaker – “…is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliamentary committee for his or her absence.” It is our contention that this article of the Constitution confers on Parliament – on a Parliamentary committee the jurisdiction to try and determine whether a member has been absent for 15 or more sittings and therefore vacates his seat and by extension the House. 

The Parliamentary committee acts on behalf of the House. It is therefore our humble prayer that we proceed to receive the report of the committee and conclusively deal with this matter this evening.

4.43
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Mr Speaker, I have listened carefully to what my colleague has been submitting but also suffice to add that the Speaker seated in the chair at the time made a ruling on the matter and that decisions still binds the House.

It is also my view that indeed there is nothing that stops the House from considering the matter. I have nothing to add on what the chairman has submitted.

4.44
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. On the opposition side, I must first declare that I am a member of this committee on rules and discipline. I agree with the submission of my chairman except one; whereas I am party to the entire report and without any subtraction from all that we made, I think that looking at rule 64 of our rules of procedure is where we need to be careful.

It is upon the Speaker who upon reading both the rules and the pleadings presented that the Speaker forms an opinion that there is no likelihood of crossing the subjudice rule that we can go ahead comprehensively and conclusively deal with the matter.

As a committee we did our work and were never presented with any document from court and therefore there was no threat to Rule 64.

If you find that upon reading the pleadings that I have not looked at that there is no likelihood of crossing this red line, I would submit that we proceed.

But if you form an opinion that the issues we are dealing with now that there is a petition in court are substantially touching the marrow of the petition my submission would that it would be in error to proceed.

I would very much love and appropriately call upon the House to adopt the report that I participated actively in making. But I would invite colleagues to exercise the highest level of caution not to cross that red line in we are faced with that situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, that was the same point?

4.50
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I agree with the submissions of my friends and really suffice to add that before the formulation of these rules the scope of the application of the rule of subjudice was really limited.

These rules expounded on the application of the subjudice rule whereby detailed provisions that would guide the Speaker in determining whether the matter would be subjudice. For example, when you look at rule 64(3) (c) highlights areas where a case is an active case in court and the parameters that effect are well laid out there.

From the submissions of the chairperson and the members who have contributed on this matter it appears that that may not be applicable because those arrangements for the hearing have not been set or determined.

Now, in addition to that I am happy hon. Kassiano Wadri is here. He remembers very well his Maracha- Terego case where the constitutional court came out firmly and said that in order to enhance the principle of independence of the different arms of Government as I have said here before independence does not mean a shield against accountability but simply means an institution, person or body to accord that body or person the independence to make a decision.

In this case and in that case of hon. Kassiano Wadri Maracha- Terego the constitutional court was emphatic to say that please we as a court of law we cannot prejudice the deliberations of another organ.

We can only come in at a level of accountability. That is why there has to be a person who is aggrieved by the decision of that body and then we make a determination on the decision.
This is a process which is on-going and I think with all due respect I agree that this is a proper case where Parliament can proceed.

Where a committee receives reasons from an aggrieved person then he satisfies that person to be relieved of his position in Parliament, it does not end at the committee.

The committee is a committee of Parliament therefore the committee gives its report to the House which makes a final decisions or pronouncement.

MR WADRI: Thank you right hon. Speaker, having listened carefully to all learned men. I am under the impression that there seems to be a problem with this particular report of the committee.

This is going to be a report of Parliament in which case as an institution we are going to pronounce ourselves. But many of us are not privy to the contents nor did we follow the deliberations.

It is the learned Attorney General who has given me the impression that there is a problem or that there is a matter in court.

If my understanding from the explanations given by the learned deputy Attorney General is correct, I think as a House we will appreciate if the whole House would be brought into a clearer picture because at the end of the day we have to own the report.

Is there a matter before court and what are the ingredients of the matter before courts of law? That is the explanation that I would wish to beg from the chairman of the Committee on Rules and Privileges so that we are able to understand everything from the word go.

MR LUBEGA SSEGGONA: Like I said and I still say I very strongly stand by our report because it was carefully considered but is this not an opportunity to have this matter tested in court? Because it has kept coming up even after we pronounced ourselves as Parliament and I am party to that decision as a member of this House, member of this committee and with my active participation but it keeps coming up and it has a huge implication on future of the running and management of this House. 

One, whether we have the mandate to fire one of our own via disciplinary procedure. Is it not a matter, Mr Speaker, therefore, where we need to be very conscious and cautious and to seek to seize an opportunity presented to us to have a final determination of this matter in courts of law in terms of interpreting the Constitution?

You are also aware that we have another matter pending judgement in the Constitutional Court on our powers, and the powers of the Speaker to interpret the Constitution. How I wish we could urge our Learned Attorney General who is now party to the proceedings to find and try all ways of expediting this particular case possibly before we burn or threaten to burn our fingers to have this matter finally determined in court. That will also help us in enforcing discipline in this House - because there are people who do not attend proceedings of this House as they are required and I know of many on the other side and to an extent this side - because people would know and would be certain of the implications and ramifications of not attending Parliament.

Finally, Mr Speaker, now that this is in your hands, I would invite you to make a judgement that is going to enhance the proper management of this House; but the management and running of this House guided by the law as interpreted by the organs responsible for interpreting the Constitution of this country.

4.55
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make two points. The first point is to see if I have understood hon. Sseggona very well. He has made an excellent point that this matter should be tested out and I agree with him to some extent. Is he implying that we stand over the action in process as we test out this particular case? Because already -

MR SSEGGONA: I answer that in the affirmative, Mr Speaker.

DR KIYONGA: Okay, then I can make my first point more complete. I agree with the principle of testing out. Fortunately, some individuals are already in court on that principle so that will provide the answer we want. They are already in court and we are not stopping the courts. My view would be that we continue with our process given the arguments that have just gone on, on the Floor.
Mr Speaker, I was summoned by hon. Fox Odoi, chairperson of the committee and I had no option but to go. I think I was well received and we had a good discussion. As a matter of principle, I am concerned that we sit here while our people out there are crying out concerning irresponsibility on our part. They are crying out about misusing tax payers’ money. Then you have one of us who was elected to come and sit in this House, he disappears and we go on paying him endlessly. I made this clear in the committee that I think we need to do something about that. 

Even if it is some kind of interim like they do in the Public Service - if there is a query on you in the Public Service –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, as a Member of this House, I have a duty both legal and moral to insulate this institution from getting into some four corners where we may end up fixing ourselves. It would appear that my honourable friend and muko, the Minister of Defence, has very good points but only during the debate in relation to the report. My procedural concern is whether we are proceeding well in discussing those issues before you make a finding on the question of sub-judice. Guide me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the opinion of the hon. Member for Busiro is correct and I will allow you to speak when the time is right for you to speak.

Hon. Members, the substantive rules we are looking at are two provisions in Rule 64 (2) and (5). (2) says, “A matter shall be considered sub-judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such a matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination.”

That means the Speaker is being called upon to assess what is actually before court and see whether any discussions will prejudice the determination of that case.

(5) says: “The Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub-judice or not before debate or investigations can continue.” This is the point made by hon. Sseggona.

Hon. Members, as I said I am the one who pointed this out. I received a letter this morning raising those matters and the petition is attached. The petition has two aspects: One, it says the Rules of Procedure are unconstitutional and should be amended. Would a discussion on whether the hon. Member has been absent from Parliament for 15 consecutive days prejudice a determination by the courts as to whether Rule 101 of our Rules of Procedure is unconstitutional and the answer is clearly ”No”. So on that first leg, it would not be prejudicing the decision of the court for this House to take a decision as to whether one of its own has violated some provisions of the law as it is prescribed.

The second leg of the petition is that Parliament does not have jurisdiction to handle this matter. On this particular issue, there is a precedent before this House, one which has not been challenged except by the Speaker when she was sitting in this Chair on 20 November 2013: that the question as to determination of electoral matters touching on membership of a Member of the House is taken care of under Article 86 of the Constitution and that is a separate procedure. It presupposes that an election has taken place and there are concerns about those elections.

Article 86 is different from Article 83. Article 83 talks of a different situation not about elections. Article 83 talks about tenure of office of Members of Parliament not determination of qualification of membership, which is under Article 86. The question of determination of questions of membership would be a preserve of the High Court because the Constitution clearly says so under Article 86 (1) and (2). It covers it very well.

But under Article 83, no reference is made to the High Court. The reference that is made is clearly within Article 83 and I can read it: “A Member of Parliament shall vacate his or her seat in Parliament -
d) If that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker during any period when Parliament is continuously meeting and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant parliamentary committee for his or her absence”. 

Now, that is the mandate the Constitution has vested in this Parliament and its committees not any other organ of state; not the High Court; it is this Parliament. The same court has also said that it will not interfere with what is legally the mandate of this House to do. Clearly, this is one of the issues which fall in the mandate of this House to take a decision on. 

So, on the question of sub-judice in a matter that I am required to take a decision on, my answer is very simple. I do not see that a question which is within the mandate of this House to take a decision upon would be sub-judice when court is handling any other separate aspect of the same matter. 

It may be the same parties, but the actual question for determination is different. So I do not see that there is any conflict with our Rule 64 and I deem that this matter is not sub-judice and this House can proceed and have a discussion to determine this matter. 

5.05
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, based on the Article you have just read, you said: “If a Member is unable…” he has not written to the Speaker and he is unable to defend himself. The petition before you, Mr Speaker, is that the committee and this House have not granted the Member fairness to present his defence. The framers of the Constitution were very clear, that a Member should be granted an opportunity to present his case. 

The Constitution and the rules are very clear; they state that the committee of Parliament will examine a witness internally and externally. In this case, an argument was presented that the committee of Parliament should have used that provision of the rules and the Constitution to examine this Member wherever he was to conclude the Constitution provision of fairness, and prove that he has been given opportunity to defend himself – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, hon. Member, before you finish, isn’t that already evidence enough that the Member cannot attend this House? If the Member cannot come before a committee of this House, isn’t that evidence enough? That is the question they are determining. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, a Member may not be in this House, but the Constitution and the rules provide that if the witness is not within the country, that witness can be followed and the facts be obtained –(Interruption) 

MR SEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I normally act with restraint especially when rising up on issues coming from this side. But at times I am privileged to advise them legally. But I also feel an overwhelming duty to myself and my colleagues, members of this committee, taking an insinuation that we never followed the procedures set by the rules – before that matter comes substantively for debate, those assertions kept coming. I feel injured and assailed as a professional to hear that without substantiating it. Is the Member therefore in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is precisely the point that would come from the debate; not from the question as to whether the matter is sub-judice or not. What we are talking about now – I thought you had raised a question where you wanted me to explain further the ruling that I just made that this matter is not sub-judice. 

Instead, you have gone into the debate on the recommendations of the committee, in which case you agree with my ruling. So you rose at a time when you should not have risen. That matter was not yet open for debate because the chairperson has not yet presented the report. So honourable member, you are clearly out of – (Laughter)

So with that ruling on the question whether the matter is sub-judice or not and my ruling is that it is not sub- judice; so, can we now hear from the chairperson of the committee?

5.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am reliably informed that the report should be on the Members’ iPads – (Interjections) – if you switch on your iPads, you will see the report. With you indulgence, Mr Speaker, permit me to lay on Table the minutes of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline in respect to this matter. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and, Mr Chairman, you could at this stage lay a hard copy of that report, if you have an extra copy. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Mr Speaker, permit me to lay on Table a report of the standing Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the conduct of hon. Tonny Nsubuga Kipoi, MP, Bubulo West. I beg to lay. 

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence that we skip the long introduction to the report; the Members can read it. The background to the report and the methodology and we go straight to service of committee summons; that is on page no.8. 

Hon. Members, no.5, Service of committee summons: 5.1 personal service of committee summons. In its first meeting and in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee scheduled a meeting for 27 November 2013 at 11.00 O’clock in Committee Room 018 on the Ground Floor in the precincts of Parliament. The committee tasked the Clerk to Parliament to effect service of summons for hon. Tonny Kipoi Nsubuga to attend before the committee. 

The Clerk to Parliament delivered the summons to hon. Kipoi’s pigeonhole at Parliament and also sent an electronic copy of the summons to hon. Kipoi’s official email address: tkipoi@parliament.go.ug. The electronic copy is annex as marked as annexure no.4 to the report. 

Substituted service; the committee met on the 27 day of November 2013 as had been scheduled. However, hon. Kipoi did not appear before the committee. The committee was satisfied by the Clerk that service of committee summons had been effected by delivery of the same to hon. Kipoi’s pigeonhole at Parliament and emailing the same to his official address. 

For avoidance of doubt, the committee tasked the Clerk to Parliament to effect service of the committee summons by publishing the same in a widely circulating local media and by delivering the summons to hon. Kipoi’s official residential address to ensure that hon. Kipoi appears at the next committee meeting scheduled for 4 December 2013.

The committee was satisfied that the Clerk to Parliament had published the summons in a widely circulating local media and had attempted to serve the summons at hon. Kipoi’s residential address extracted from hon. Kipoi’s personal file. The committee was also satisfied that the service at his residence could not be effected since the address provided by hon. Kipoi was non-existent.

The local media publication and a police statement are annexed as number 5 and 6.

The committee was satisfied that hon. Tonny Kipoi instructed hon. Mukasa Mbidde of Mbidde and Company Advocates to be his these legal representatives and to appear on his behalf before the committee.

Having taken cognisance of hon. Kipoi’s legal representatives as being hon. Mukasa Mbidde of Mbidde and Company advocates, the committee thus invited hon. Mukasa Mbidde to be present at the proceedings of the committee throughout its investigation.

Notice of instructions and the committee invitation jointly marked as annexture 7. To that extent, the committee was satisfied that all reasonable steps had been taken to discharge the requirements to accord hon. Tonny Kipoi the opportunity to appear before the committee to defend himself against the allegations delivered to it for investigation.

Findings of the investigation

Witness testimony

The committee identified the number of witnesses it considered key in its investigation.
The following were identified and sworn evidence touching the matters before the committee was obtained from them;
    a) The Government Chief Whip
    b) The chairperson of the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development
    c) The chairperson of the committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises
    d) Chairperson of the committee on Defence and Internal Affairs
    e) The Inspector General of Police
    f) The Director Interpol and International Relations Uganda
    g) The Director Citizens and Immigration and Control Board
    h) The Minister of Defence
    i) The Minister of Security, Office of the President
    j) The Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs
    k) The Director for International Affairs in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the acting Permanent Secretary to the ministry
    l) Defendant’s witness - the hon. Geoffrey Ekanya

The summary of evidence obtained

The evidence obtained from the witness testimonies is summarised as follows:
    a) The Government Chief Whip
The committee learnt from this witness that: 
    i) Hon. Kipoi Nsubuga was at all material times a member of the National Resistance Movement and was a party candidate in Bubulo West Constituency in the last Parliamentary elections
    ii) He was designated to sit on the Committees on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs by the Government Chief Whip.
    iii) The manner in which hon. Kipoi was conducting his Parliamentary activities was a matter of concern to the party since members are expected to among others, attend both plenary and Parliamentary committees.
    iv) Hon. Kipoi has never reported to the Government Chief Whip about his absence from attending the Plenary of Parliament and the committees.
    v) Since August 2012, when she was appointed, she has never seen hon. Kipoi attending the sittings of Parliament and upon being asked whether she can recognize hon. Kipoi she answered in affirmative.
    vi) She has never seen any letter granting hon. Kipoi leave of absence.
    vii) She has never whipped hon. Kipoi because he has always been absent from Parliament.
    viii) Upon being asked whether she had ever counseled hon. Kipoi on his conduct, she reported that hon. Kipoi’s telephones are always off and he is a stubborn member who does not respond to messages sent to him.

The chairperson of the committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development
This witness chaired a committee where hon. Kipoi had been a member. Appearing before the committee together with the clerk of the committee, the witness adduced evidence showing that:
    i) Hon. Kipoi had been designated as a member of the committee on Gender but has never attended any of the sittings of the committee.
    ii) The committee kept a record of attendance of members in form of an attendance register and submitted monthly reports to the speaker on the attendance of its members. The witness tendered the record of the members attendance.

The chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs

The committee requested the chairperson to appear with the clerk to the committee to produce the record of attendance as required by the Rules of Procedure. From this witness the committee had evidence to the effect that;
    i) Hon. Kipoi had been designated a member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and by the record of attendance, the hon. Member had been present at seven out of 60 sittings of the committee.
    ii) The committee kept a record of attendance in form of an attendance register and submitted monthly reports to the speaker of attendance of its members.

Evidence from the Uganda Police Force

The Uganda police force was represented by the Inspector General of Police who, due to exigencies of duty assigned his duty to appear before the committee with a team of other officials that is to say, the director of Interpol and international relations, the Director Criminal Investigations Department, the Commissioner Special Investigation Unit.

From the witnesses, the committee received evidence to the effect that -
    i) Hon. Kipoi had a multiplicity of cases pending against him at a number of police stations. In some cases, warrants of arrests had been issued and in other cases, he had been granted bail conditioned on him by depositing his travel documents with court.

    ii) Several cases were cited and their respective particulars and details for the committee. Among others, the committee heard that there was a treason and concealment of pending at the CID headquarters under Ref E/436/2012. In this case, the court had granted hon. Kipoi bail and he continued reporting until July 2013 when he was committed to the High Court.

That hon. Kipoi had on medical grounds applied for the passport but he never returned it on 29th June 2013 as per the bail terms. Following this default had received a warrant of arrest which was to be executed including seeking legal assistance from partner states and Interpol. At Jinja Rd police station, there was a pending case against hon. Kipoi, a case of being in possession of suspected stolen motor vehicle under Ref/ CRB/10345/2013. In this case, he had jumped bail in July 2013 and a warrant of arrest had been secured and the police was in the final stages of requesting Interpol to have him apprehended.

Another case of concealment of treason and trafficking persons was pending at Bukedea Police Station under Ref CRB/393/2013. In this case, he was granted police bond and continued to report to CID headquarters until he disappeared in October 2013.

Similarly, at the CID headquarters, under Ref E/420/2013, a case of trafficking in persons was pending against hon. Kipoi and the matter was at the Directorate of Public Prosecution pending legal opinion.

Finally there was also reported to the police a case of obtaining money by false pretense against hon. Kipoi Tony in Gabarole, Botswana.

    iii) As far as his whereabouts were concerned the committee had evidence that hon. Kipoi Tony Nsubuga had been arrested by the Democratic Republic of Congo security Personnel in Mahabye. It was reported that hon. Kipoi in October 2013 while personally supervising the training of recruits to fight the Government of Uganda was arrested. The committee heard that the honourable member was being detained by the DRC military authorities in the capital, Kinshasa.


    (iv) The committee received further evidence to the effect that during the time in question, hon. Tonny Nsubuga Kipoi made the following movements:
    • In September 2011, he was in the Republic of South Africa where he was allegedly transacting in narcotic drugs; 
    • In May 2012, he was in Brasilia, Brazil;
    • In November 2012, he was in Botswana where he allegedly obtained money by false pretense and whilst there, he used to connect to South Africa to illegally practice traditional medicine;
    • In October 2013, he travelled to Botswana where he allegedly stole a motor vehicle;
    • In November 2013, he reportedly travelled again to Brasilia.
    v) The committee was informed that upon receipt of the Warrant of Arrest for hon. Kipoi, the Police was going to communicate to the DRC authorities through Interpol Kinshasa to commence his interrogation and subsequent extradition to Uganda.
    vi) In the same vein, the committee heard that the Uganda Police had notified the relevant authorities in Botswana and Brazil about the various charges that had been preferred against hon. Kipoi here in Uganda.

    e) Presentation by the Director, Citizens and Immigration Control Board
In order to determine the exact pattern of hon. Kipoi’s movements in and out of Uganda during the period in issue, the committee heard evidence from a representative of the Director, Citizens and Immigration Control Board. From this witness the committee heard that:
    i) Possession of multiple passports
Hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga holds three different passports; two of which are Ugandan passport numbers B0600242 which is an ordinary passport and GA0023211 which is an official passport; the third one is for the Republic of South Africa Passport No: A00499137.
    ii) Travel history of Hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga
    • According to Immigration Control electronic data available, between May 2011 and October 2012, while using his Ugandan passports, Hon. Kipoi Tonny travelled to South Africa six times and to Rwanda four times.
    • He last entered Uganda from Kigali on 13th October, 2013 using the Ugandan ordinary passport No. BO600242.
    • There was an ongoing nationwide verification of the immigration records to ascertain whether or not Hon. Kipoi exited the country through any other gazetted border points. However, the witness ruled out the possibility of hon. Kipoi’s last exit from Uganda as having been through Entebbe International Airport.
    • He further noted that if he had used a gazetted border point that captures data electronically, such data would have been captured in the system.
    • Since hon. Kipoi Tonny had not been gazetted as a wanted person the Immigration Control system could not have captured him as such.

    f) Evidence by the Minister for Defence

The committee summoned the Minister for Defence to testify on the matter of hon. Kipoi’s whereabouts and learnt from the Minister that:
                i) His ministry was aware that hon. Kipoi was in the Democratic Republic of Congo;
                ii) Hon. Kipoi had several cases related to matters of Uganda’s national security pending in the courts of law;
                iii) The Ministry of Defence was working closely with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to expeditiously address hon. Kipoi’s predicament;
                iv) That through intelligence, the Government is aware that while hon. Kipoi was arrested in eastern Congo, hon. Kipoi was later transferred to Kinshasa; and
                v) The Government of Uganda has diplomatic relations with Congo and that Congolese renegades in Uganda have in the past been sent back to Congo and he hoped that the Congolese government will reciprocate and have hon. Kipoi’s sent back to Uganda.

    g) Evidence from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Officials

The committee learnt that:
    (i) Uganda has an embassy in the Democratic Republic of Congo;
    (ii) The embassy is among others supposed to render consular services to Uganda in two instances:
    • if the citizen asks for consular services or
    • where the host country brings to the attention of the embassy a situation involving its citizens.
    (iii) Uganda’s embassy has not yet received any information about hon. Kipoi from either himself or the government of Democratic Republic of Congo;
    (iv) The mission was relying on press reports that hon. Kipoi had been arrested. The mission asked the authorities in Congo but had not yet been provided any information as requested.

6.3	Hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga’s defence

The committee was mindful of the legal requirement to accord hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga an opportunity to defend himself against the allegations levelled against him. The committee was aware that in making his defence, hon. Kipoi was free to call witnesses and to have legal representation.

As elaborated in the earlier portions of this report, hon. Kipoi did not appear before the committee to make his defence. However, his legal representative presented hon. Ekanya Geoffrey to the committee as the sole defence witness.

Testifying in defence of hon. Kipoi, hon. Ekanya stated that:
    i) His motivation to appear before the committee as a defence witness was due to his desire to ensure that justice and rule of law prevails in this matter;
    ii) Government had failed in its Constitutional duty of providing security to its citizen, hon. Kipoi;
    iii) He received a call from someone from Kinshasa in DRC whose voice he recognised as hon. Kipoi’s; 
    iv) The caller, hon. Kipoi refuted the allegation made by Government that he was under detention;
    v) He had since had several telephone conversations with hon. Kipoi and that he electronically recorded all the conversations;
    vi) Being a colleague MP, he had interacted with him for a long time enabling hon. Ekanya to know his voice and was able to recognise it when he called;
    vii) The investigation being conducted by the committee in respect to hon. Kipoi amounted to a Government effort to address the Kipoi matter; 
    viii) He undertook to furnish the committee with a record of the telephone calls he had had with hon. Kipoi together with a recording of the conversations he had with him by 6.00p.m. of Wednesday 18 December, 2013. 

6.4	Closing submissions on behalf of hon. Kipoi 
 
The committee took cognisance of hon. Mukasa Mbidde, as the legal representative of hon. Kipoi and granted the former an opportunity to be present at all the hearings of the case and to cross examine all the witnesses testifying in the matter before the committee. 

At the end of the committee’s investigations, hon. Mukasa Mbidde took the opportunity to make closing submissions on behalf of his client in this wise:
    i) Hon. Kipoi is living at 243 Avenue, Nyangwe Kotia and is not under house arrest as alleged;
    ii) Hon. Kipoi went to DRC on the recommendation of the South African doctors to see a Belgian specialist who is attending to him and he is recuperating; 
    iii) That under Rule 101 of the Rules of Procedure read together with Section 86 (1) (a) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, Parliament is not the proper body to declare a seat of a Member of Parliament vacant. It should be the High Court and therefore according to him, Parliament has no powers to declare a seat vacant;
    iv) Every person has a right to a fair hearing under Article 28 of the Constitution. Under Rule 101(9), a member who is being investigated is entitled to be heard in his or her defence and to be represented by counsel of his or her choice. According to hon. Mbidde, since his client is away, there is no way a committee can reach a conclusion without listening to him. His position was that this is against the doctrine of fair hearing. 

v) 	No warning was given to his client since the warning given by the Speaker was given at a sitting which he did not attend.

vi) 	Counsel for hon. Kipoi dismissed the evidence of the Government Chief Whip as no report was presented that he was missing any party activities or parliamentary duties. He stated that his client has been serving his party well. He further dismissed the evidence of the deputy IGP that his client was waging war against the state, which has made it difficult for him to return to the country. 

vii)	The statements being made by the Government authorities in the media have denied his client the presumption of innocence as envisaged in our Constitution.

viii) 	He conceded that he had no letter of reply from the Speaker of Parliament granting leave of absence to hon. Kipoi to travel for medical treatment. What he has on his file is a letter to the Speaker requesting for such permission.

ix) 	He stated that no chairperson had ever made a specific report about the non-attendance of committee activities by hon. Kipoi as required by the Rules of Procedure.
 
x) 	That there was no service on his client since all the proceedings were started when his client was already out of the country. 

Parliamentary procedure of absence without leave

The committee considered all the requirements under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament relating to the leave of absence and a referral made to the committee in that regard by the Speaker of Parliament.

The committee found that all the requirements for a referral being on the absence without leave had be fulfilled and thus the committee found that the matter was properly before it for investigation.

The committee made the following investigation:

Non-appearance of hon. Kipoi Nsubuga. The committee was satisfied that all efforts to ensure that hon. Kipoi appears before the committee were adequate and sufficient. The committee was alive to the fact that Article 28 of the Constitution of Uganda, Rule 101 of the Rules of Procedure and overall the rules of natural justice made provisions for the appearance of the defendant to offer a defence to allegations against him or her before a court or tribunal.

In making such appearance the defendant is entitled to legal representation of their choice at their cost. Whereas hon. Kipoi chose to be represented at the meeting of the committee and whereas he was invited by all reasonable means to appear in person and defend himself, the honourable and or refused to appear to defend himself in person against the allegations made before the committee.

The committee observes that whereas the Rules of Procedure allowed hon. Kipoi to be represented, this did not amount to delegating the giving of evidence to his legal representative. The duty to testify in his defence rests solely with the defendant and his legal representative could never be a witness to his defence. As such, the committee did not see any justifiable reason why hon. Kipoi could not appear and defend himself in person.

Notwithstanding his absence, the committee determined the case on the basis of all the evidence including the defence witness testimony.

Defence witness testimony and closing submission

The committee duly considered the application made by hon. Kipoi’s legal representative to the effect that the committee travels to the DRC to interview hon. Kipoi.

In its consideration, the committee found it untenable to grant such given that no evidence had been provided to the committee as to the whereabouts of the hon. Member by his legal representatives. Thus, the committee dismissed the application on the following grounds:
    1. Failure by counsel despite an earlier undertaking to providing supporting documents of his clients travel history from Kampala to South Africa and from SA to Kinshasa.
    2. Failure by counsel to produce his client’s medical reference forms, the name and the address of his client’s physician.

    3. The committee evaluated the testimony of the sole defence witness and noticed the following:
    i) Whereas the witness had undertaken to produce the evidence of record of his telephone conversation with hon. Kipoi in regard to this testimony before the committee, these were never provided.

    ii) The evidence adduced did not prove justifiable grounds for hon. Kipoi’s continued absence from 15 sittings of Parliament without leave of the Speaker contrary to the constitution and the Rules of Procedure.

    iii) There was no evidential value in the testimony of the defence witness in so far as the investigation before the committee was concerned.

The committee considered the closing submissions of the defence and observed that:

(i)	There was no evidence adduced for any of the statements of fact made by hon. Kipoi’s legal representative. It is obvious that had hon. Kipoi appeared as per the invitation of the committee his legal representative would have been spared the embarrassment of attempting to give evidence on his behalf. Be it as it may, the committee found it incomprehensible that hon. Kipoi did not at the very least produce a sworn statement or a statutory declaration in his defence. I need to add that we offered this option to the defence team.

(ii)	Hon. Kipoi was afforded every opportunity to appear and defend himself. His choice not to take up this opportunity was in the very least ill-advised given that the consequences that would flow from the written warning issued to him by the Speaker of Parliament invoking her powers to refer the matter to the committee for investigation.

(iii)	The statement made by hon. Kipoi’s legal representative challenging the constitutionality of Parliament’s functions in conducting this investigation is misguided and unfortunate. It may be appropriate to remind counsel that as far as the committee was concerned, no constitutional provision had been defiled to that effect.

(iv)	Parliament had pronounced itself and its competence in handling a matter of this nature in the case of hon. Sejusa and as such the precedent was set in that regard. The precedent set was instructive in deposing off this particular case.

(v)	Hon. Kipoi’s status as a Member of Parliament has not been prejudiced in any way including the payment of his emoluments and salary to-date.

(vi)	The Rules of Procedure of Parliament had been complied with to the satisfaction of the committee.

Powers of the Speaker in the absence of a Member

Article 83(1) (d) makes it a ground for a Member of Parliament to vacate his or her sit in Parliament if that person is absent from 15 sittings of Parliament without permission and writing to the Speaker within this period when Parliament is continuously meeting, and is unable to offer satisfactory explanation to the relevant Parliament committee for his or her absence.

Rules 101(1) and (6) of the Rules of Procedure stipulates that:
“(1)Every member shall attend the sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been given to him or her by the Speaker. 

(6) Except with the permission of the Speaker, a member shall not absent himself from 15 or more sittings of the House during any period the House is continuously meeting.”

Whereas hon. Kipoi had sought permission of the Speaker, this had not been granted and as such any absence that followed was without leave of the speaker. 
In that hon. Kipoi’s absence was without permission of the Speaker and contravened Article 83(1)(d) of the Constitution and Rule 101(1) and (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

I can skip 7.4 because it is a statement of responsibility.

Further observations

The chairpersons of the committees make monthly reports to the Speaker on the attendance of all Members of the committee in the committee activities and this is sufficient to satisfy the requirement of the rules. No proceedings had been instituted in the Constitutional Court regarding repetitive - I request I skip that and go to 7.6 which is also basically statement of the law.

Mr Speaker, can I go straight to the conclusions of the committee on page 36 number 8? 

Whereas the committee exercised all means to effect service of the committee summons, hon. Kipoi failed to appear before the committee.

Hon. Kipoi, whose continued absence from the House for 15 or more sittings of the House during a period when the House was continuously meeting, was without permission of the Speaker and as such contravened Articles 83 (1) (d) of the Constitution and Rule 101 (6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

After rigorous investigations, the allegations of infringement of Article 83(1) (d) of the Constitution of Uganda and Rule 101(6) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament referred to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline by the Speaker under Rule 101(8) against hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga were proved.

The committee therefore recommends as follows:

(a) Hon. Kipoi Tony Nsubuga be deemed to have ceased to be a Member of Parliament under Article 83(1) (d) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 101(10) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

(b) The process for his replacement be initiated in accordance with Article 81(2) of the Constitution.

(c) Parliament adopts the committee recommendations in this report. 

I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Hon. Members, I propose the question for your debate. The motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the conduct of hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga, MP Bubulo West. That is the question for your debate. We can have some debate.

5.46
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a wonderful piece of work. No wonder I am not surprised. One time I appeared before the Odoi Committee and it is a very terrible committee. Whether you are a witness or on the defence on the other side, they will grill you. I always thank you for the wonderful job you do.

I am a bit perplexed and here I need some clarification. Hon. Ekanya was a key witness in this case. He was meant to produce conversation recordings on 18 December 2013. There is no evidence in this report that this evidence was tabled, and if it was then maybe the state would be helped to understand the subversive activities between hon. Ekanya and hon. Kipoi.

Two - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from my colleague as to whether he meant subversive in the British English or in his local language. In the Queen’s English it means engaging in actions that are contrary and against the Constitution and against the government that is in power with the aim and objective of overthrowing Government. I am seeking clarification.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I meant the former; Queen’s English - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. Hon. Speaker, is it in order for a colleague who, according to the Constitution, swore to defend and protect the Constitution and who took the cardinal duty to appear before a duly constituted committee to ensure that there is justice and fairness as provided for in the rules and in the Constitution to be declared to have been engaged in subversive activity by another colleague?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report of the committee indicated that you voluntarily went to the committee to give evidence, and that you made an undertaking to provide recordings of your conversation with hon. Kipoi to the committee. The hon. Member is saying there is now no report as to whether that was submitted to the committee and he is saying, maybe it would have helped the government to find out your relationship with hon. Kipoi because the relationship with what has been presented about hon. Kipoi is subversive. So now he is wondering whether there is a link between the activities of hon. Kipoi and yourself. That is what he was saying.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, maybe I can clarify.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you rose on a point of order.

MR EKANYA: Yes, to help you to rule, Mr Speaker, if it is necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I have already ruled on this matter.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, if you could grant me permission -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I have already ruled on the point of order. The Member is not out of order.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. The question of attendance of Members of Parliament is becoming very important in this debate, and I want to say that yesterday it was hon. Sejusa, today it is hon. Kipoi and tomorrow it may be you or me. 

Mr Speaker, I beg for your protection. Why am I saying this? Last week, in Kenya, they introduced some electronic way of registering the attendance of Members. It is not only Kipoi that has not sat in this House for 15 consecutive sittings. It is actually very many others but it is not until some person, for either vindictive reasons or for some other reasons, mentions someone’s name that it becomes a subject of debate. This is why hon. Speaker, as we take a record of this, we also need to take cognisance of the fact that it should be applied uniformly. If the constitutional command is that if one misses 15 consecutive sittings without the Speaker’s authority, the Speaker’s Office should have some method of tracking attendance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker’s Office does have that method.

MR MUJUNI: And if it does then other than the two and the others that will come, we should be able to see some of them because we know them. They come and register but they do not attend and this has happened. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to support the motion that there is already overwhelming evidence that hon. Kipoi did not attend the 15 sittings and therefore we should adopt the report. However, this report should be a lesson to all of us and it should not be applied selectively but uniformly. Thank you very much.

5.52
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want to raise two issues: One, that the hon. Kipoi is a Ugandan citizen and also subscribes to the NRM political party. It is also clear that the Chairman of the NRM, His Excellency, President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is also the Command-in-Chief.

I have heard in the report which hon. Odoi has read that the whereabouts of hon. Kipoi are well known. Secondly, we have an embassy in Congo and DRC also has an embassy in Uganda. There is also a treaty which has been signed to make sure that security prevails within the region. However, I have not heard in that report how the embassies of Uganda and that of Congo have been utilised to make sure that hon. Kipoi is followed and we get information from him. 

So my point is to the effect that when we are voted in our respective constituencies, we are not only voted to come to Parliament and subject the members to only the rules in Parliament forgetting that constituents too have power over us as representatives of the people. 

Uganda is well known in the region as perfect in matters of security and intelligence systems; we are perfect in spying. I would therefore have expected that among the procedures to undertake hon. Kiyonga, the Minister for Defence, who also doubles as MP for Bukonjo West and the Minister for Internal Affairs would be helpful in this matter; so that when this House adopts and report its decisions are premised on issues that no one can challenge. Uganda has not run short of intelligence systems that can track down Kipoi; we should avoid having this House blamed by anyone for taking this decision – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, of what effect would that help determining that the Member has been absent from Parliament for 15 days? 

MR NZOGHU: The issue that I am bringing to the attention of the House is to the effect that we must exhaust all the means, so that we know that the decision we are making as Parliament is not contestable at any level. 

Finally, in the interest of our country and in the interest of the Members of Parliament, and that of the constituencies whom hon. Kipoi represents, I seek you indulgence, Mr Speaker that the Chairperson of the Committee on Rules and Privileges could give us some explanation to the issues which I have raised before we take a decision as Parliament. 

5.58
DR MICHAEL BAYIGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to debate this report without prejudice well knowing that the person in focus is a Member of the NRM party, which I would have loved to continue losing Members of Parliament. But on the contrary, I will not use that prejudice to debate this report. 

Article 80 of the Constitution spells out the qualifications and disqualifications of Members of Parliament and it is the supreme law. I do not see how Kipoi leaves Parliament on that basis. 

Secondly, when we go to tenure of office of Members of Parliament in Article 83, it is only section one, part (b) that would incriminate him, which says that if such circumstances arise – if that person was not a Members of Parliament, we would cause that person to be disqualified for election as a Member of Parliament under Article 80 of this Constitution; that would be enough to disqualify him. 

I am very grateful that this committee has dug out the history of this Member and we find that indeed in this Parliament, we are sitting with many people of that nature if at all we were to investigate all of them. So the immediate question we should ask ourselves is: what circumstances would necessitate investigation into the Members of Parliament? 

In your seat, Mr Speaker, you may not know the history of all these Members of Parliament. One leader said that one Member of Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the reference to the committee was made under 83(1)d not (b) so please address that one. 

DR BAYIGA: Mr Speaker, (d) says: “If that person is absent from fifteen sittings of Parliament without permission in writing of the Speaker...”. If this were to be the case, then the conversation would have been short because it would not have necessitated the committee to dig out the history of the gentleman in question. It would be short because the Speaker would know from the record that this Member has been absent for 15 sittings, in which case the Speaker would have said, even hon. Kataha Janet Museveni should be out – (Interjections) – yes, let us listen to each other; I said I am debating without prejudice. This one is not my member; in fact, I would have wanted him out yesterday. 

I am saying, we are finding Parliament in catch 22, because you are going to open a Pandora’s Box when certain persons, whom we know have not attended Parliament for over 15 consecutive sittings and they have not been touched – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, this is the problem you face when you read a provision and you stop halfway. It says that absence should be without the authority of the Speaker. How sure are you that the Members who are absent do not have the authority of the Speaker? Are you sure they do not have written notice to be away for whatever reason? 

DR BAYIGA: Mr Speaker, I am debating while trying to ring fence the Office of the Speaker to have the insulation from these kinds of provisions – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not think you are doing that honourable member because it is the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga who sat in this Chair and gave that notice to hon. Kipoi. It is the same Rt Hon. Speaker who cited these rules after the period she had granted hon. Kipoi lapsed, who made the reference to the committee. So, how are you insulating the Office of the Speaker by making statements that seem to show that the Speaker’s Office is being selective in some of these things? What kind of referencing are you doing to the Office of the Speaker?  

DR BAYIGA: I beg your indulgence, Mr Speaker, and if at all that line was offensive – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course it is. It offends the Office of the Speaker when you make statements that there is selective treatment by the Office of the Speaker who knows that some members are absent but chooses other members. That is offensive to the office.

DR BAYIGA: That is why I regret it on that basis. However, what I am saying, Mr Speaker, is that in case then we are talking about Article 83(1)(b), the conversation should have been short in respect of the report. The report was so elaborate that even if you didn’t have something against Kipoi you would say, no, this man should be withdrawn from Parliament on the basis of the history. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The hon. Member for Buikwe is saying that if we just focused on only 15 sittings or more than that that possibly we wouldn’t have gone into a long debate. The honourable member has been on several occasions warned not to go far deep into other people’s problems because we have hon. Kipoi and we know that whether the debate becomes short or longer, it does not change the fact that hon. Kipoi has been absent from this House and I am very sure that the honourable member for Buikwe has been here attending regularly unless he doesn’t have eyes. Is he in order to continuously keep dragging himself into problems of others in abandoning the issue of hon. Kipoi? Is he in order to keep repeating himself and dig into other things that do not concern him? Is he in order to waste our time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member for Buikwe, please make your submissions relevant to the subject we are discussing. Make your contribution; that is the opportunity I gave you. 

DR BAYIGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would request that this House considers also for futuristic projections and consideration that investigations per se and digging out history would not be relevant to the current conclusion of the committee. Therefore, I would support the committee’s decision on 83(1)(d).

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I think there is an apparent confusion on the burden of proof because the burden of proving, providing reasons, indicating inability to attend lies on the person who is implicated not to have been attending. The burden is not on those who are hearing that complaint. The circumstances you keep on invoking being so much in the report is simply an effort by the committee to indicate how much involved they were to ensure that this person is accorded fair hearing. That is all. Actually, it is not that they were digging out these investigations doing a,b,c,d in order to implicate the person or in any way doing that but to show that they went to this extent to give this person a fair hearing. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, I want to give information to my colleague, hon. Lulume Bayigga. Mr Speaker, as I said earlier, I am a member of this committee. We took all steps to even discharge the so called burden, to even discharge the burden that would otherwise be shouldered by hon. Kipoi. 

Secondly, you do not even leave it hanging, talk about the standard because we were not dealing with a criminal trial. The issues to be determined were actually two: one, did the member absent himself from 15 consecutive appearances or sittings? Secondly, did he have any justification? As to whether he missed them out, the report is exhaustive. We simply went out of our way just to clear out and two, where would we receive the justification for absence - from the member himself after making all those efforts. And with the evidence of people like hon. Geofrey Ekanya because we examined it - that he talked to him about the proceedings and that he even instructed counsel to appear for him in form of hon. Mukasa Mbidde was sufficient that he was aware of the proceedings and, therefore, that he was required to provide an explanation. Technically, hon. Mbidde as lawyer could not provide evidence on behalf of his client and therefore, it remained hanging but we were blessed to receive evidence from hon. Geofrey Ekanya and we examined that evidence exhaustively. So, that is the information that I wanted to provide to the honourable member for Buikwe.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, let us debate; you had concluded already. 

6.11
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will restrict mine to the absence of the Member of Parliament. When we are in Parliament, we do not represent ourselves as individuals but we represent a constituency. So, whereas we are here debating about hon. Kipoi as an individual, I think his constituency is missing him too. I represent eastern Uganda, I have been in that constituency and the members were asking me, “Where is our Member of Parliament?” I told them that the issue was being handled by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline which today has been presented here. I want to say that the woman MP is being bothered in Bubulo because the MP has to cover that kind of area.

Mr Speaker, as Members of Parliament, we are responsible. You can imagine missing sittings - you are earning money for doing almost nothing and I can imagine if one day we all stayed home and decided to leave this Parliament empty and of course get the money, would it be fair? So, I think we need to talk and look at the taxpayers’ money and let us not make this a fund and people have to make statements that they think are good. 

According to the report, hon. Kipoi has not even attended any committee meeting; where has he been for two and half years and not just 15 sittings and at the end of the day, he sends people to represent him.

One time I was listening to something about Egypt when the former President Mubarak was brought on his sick bed to appear as a witness even if he did not talk. But what is wrong with this man? Is he too disabled to come and appear before the committee or what? Because even us the disabled we move. (Laughter) So I am just wondering why does he talk to hon. Ekanya as if he is talking to a lover? And hon. Ekanya cannot tell his friend to come appear before the committee.

Rt Hon. Speaker, for me, I want to support the move made by the committee – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR EKANYA: The rules and the Constitution are categorical. While contributing, a member is encouraged to use decent language. Is the member in order to insinuate that the said hon. Kipoi was so close to me and the manner in which maybe he was speaking to me was like that of a lover. What type of a lover is the member referring to - (Laughter) – aware that this Parliament even passed the anti-homosexual law and the President is going to assent to it? Is the member in order to insinuate and make statements that are on the boundary of violating the law that the President is about to assent to? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you substantiate what you are saying? What did you mean?

MS ASAMO: I am aware that hon. Ekanya is a properly married man and he is even my in-law. So I did not mean that I wanted to talk about homosexuality but he is a very good friend and because of all the MPs here, it was only him who was called – maybe they are neighbours and are very good friends and people who are friends of course love each other. (Laughter)    

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So in the circumstances, I do not find the statement out of order. Please proceed.

MRS ASAMO: I just wanted to say that since there is evidence that even at the Speaker’s Office, this person did not get any permission to be out. And also being invited by the committee to appear and he has not appeared despite all the attempts they have made.

I would like to stand here and support the motion that this person be handled by what the committee has agreed because even the individuals in Bubulo West are missing – we need to give these people services of the country by giving them a good representation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.16
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the resolution of the committee and I think that this time we should be speaking as people who have been elected to come and represent our constituencies and communities.

Two weeks ago, I was in Bubulo for a burial and the question that arose when we were introduced as Members of Parliament was, “Where is the Member of Parliament representing this constituency?” We had no answers. 

I am aware that the people of Bubulo have also made an attempt to petition and they generated signatures to recall Kipoi but the legalities sometimes would not really warrant them to make the process so fast. This automatically shows the dilemma that the constituency is in and it wants a leader, a Member of Parliament to represent them. 

We should also base on this to know that while we come here in Parliament, we have the Rules of Procedure and we swear before the whole Parliament that we are going have allegiance to observing the constitutional provision whereby this is a member who is very much aware that 15 consecutive meetings would been enough to warrant a disqualification. 

So whatever the committee has come up with, I believe that they really exhausted – which makes really makes me comfortable that we deserve to support them in helping the people of Bubulo to come up with a new leader who will come represent their issues.

One of the things that we really need to put into our minds is that the image that has been painted on Bubulo and Bugisu by our colleague, hon. Kipoi, is not really good and further paints the images of the Members of Parliament to be imagined that we are people who come here with different characters and sometimes we do not deserve being Members of Parliament. This automatically would, when we check the background which the committee has brought up – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, Bugisu is a big region with a large population and with a number of Members of Parliament in this House. Is the member in order to cast doubt on Bugisu because of one person and more over the NRM that voted for this man did not do due diligence on Kipoi? Is he in order therefore to say that the whole of Bugisu and doubt the members from Bugisu and the whole Bugisu region. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member was just ‘crying’. He says this does not augur well with those of us who are not like him. And he actually said a lot of them are not like him but now they begin looking as if they were him. I think he was just ‘crying’ out. Please, he was lamenting to be put in this kind of predicament and he was supporting you in what you have just said. So how can I rule him out of order? (Laughter)

MR MAGANDA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. But my submission is just to support the committee and also to ask the members of this House to come up with a resolution that would really compel a better writing of the document which will advise the Electoral Commission to have a new representative from that constituency who would represent the people. I am very much interested in seeing that we have a new representative in that place because I believe that our brother Kipoi has now lost that integrity of leading the people of Bubulo. I thank you very much.

6.20
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I happen to come from that part of the world and it is very unfortunate that the issues come up now because in the first instance, Kipoi would never come to Parliament at all but because of the bad system and how Kipoi was nominated, the people of Bubulo know and they raised petitions. One of the petitions was that Kipoi did not have the qualified papers to come to Parliament.

Secondly, the elections in this country have now been monetised. Kipoi ‘splashed’ a lot of money during the elections. He should have been disqualified but you closed your eyes because he was wearing a yellow t-shirt and he was allowed to the House.

I want to thank the committee for unearthing a lot of information which has embarrassed this country because how do you issue two passports to one person; the ordinary passport and then the official passport? The ordinary passport in the first instance would have been withdrawn before he could get the official passport.

We share a lot of information concerning the movement of Kipoi. There had been a lot of allegations and Entebbe Airport is one of those airports that have been blacklisted in the whole world because of drug trafficking. We read in the report that hon. Kipoi was involved in drug trafficking going through Entebbe Airport and I keep wondering – the Police are always harassing people and tear gassing but they are not even able to detect people trafficking drugs in Entebbe Airport! What are they doing apart from running and teargasing people?

Uganda is a member of the international community and if Kipoi had been found training people in the forests of Congo then Government through the official channels and with extradition treaties signed, he would have been extradited from DRC to Uganda.

I keep wondering about the minister of foreign affairs, have they passed through the normal channels, contacted the Congolese Government about the criminal and that he should extradited to Uganda. This leaves questions, now if Kipoi is a criminal Congolese Government would have handed him over, there must be a reason why the Congolese have not handed him over and possibly Kipoi could be lying on a sick bay in Congo.

But then we have got official channels that should have been taken to extradite Kipoi from DRC. Kipoi has been an embarrassment to the Parliament of Uganda. The man carries an official passport goes to South Africa and carries himself as a Member of Parliament. Goes to Botswana and steals a vehicle while you people are looking on? 

The ministry of internal affairs is there and person is not apprehended? He is not apprehended because you think he is a member of your party? He brings embarrassment to the Parliament where he sits.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you hon. Member for giving way. On that very point, for me I have been wondering and asking myself who Kipoi is. First of all, I do not know him; I only saw him in the papers, a very humble man and I could not believe the stories that were following him.

But on this issue and why we ask who Kipoi is, why Kipoi can run to DRC and hide and cannot be brought to Uganda, where we have seen people like Bad Black who just de-toothed a Muzungu was brought all the way from Rwanda and brought here in the courts of Uganda and charged. Why can’t we bring Kipoi? Who is Kipoi? Is he so amorphous that we cannot bring him the way we brought Bad Black?

The information I want to give is they have arrested and brought so many criminals who have committed crimes outside Uganda and we thought that even Kipoi would be brought so that we can get a chance to know him.

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much Mr Speaker, you remember before Kipoi left Uganda, he was complaining that all his accounts had been frozen and blocked.

I think we need to understand the circumstances that made Kipoi to leave the country. It looks as if Government was aware of what was going on. Government should come up and explain why they blocked Kipoi’s account when he was in the country.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much right hon. Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. It is very clear that if your account is frozen or it has been blocked completely you have a right to go to court does it mean to go to exile? Is the hon. Member in order to put a blame on government about an explanation? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: hon. Member if an account is blocked, the normal channel would be you take on the bank that has blocked your account. Nobody else can block an account except the bank because the contract is between you and the bank. Nobody else can come in that contract. Be mindful of these things.

MR OLANYA: I wanted to know the circumstances under which his account was frozen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then you might have to go to the bank. You go to the bank.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you very much Mr Speaker, we are getting all this embarrassment because of the inefficiency of Government. Many people are carrying red passports wrongly and they are dealing in drugs we have been told.

What has the ministry of Internal Affairs done so that we do not embarrass this nation? Mr Speaker, I want to support the motion that the people of Bubulo West deserve a good representative in the House. A person who is going to talk for the people of Bubulo, a person who is going to present the issues and not a person like Kipoi who does come to the House while people are suffering, roads are bad, schools are bad, results are bad. We want to have someone who will come and support the people of Bubulo.

6.30
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative Central): Thank you very much Right Hon. Speaker. I wish to add my voice to my colleagues. I want to say that on multiple accounts a number of absentee people always caused people’s suffering. Suffering is not only with voters in this case not only with the people of Bubulo but also the entire Ugandan. 

As an active Member of Parliament the hon. Kipoi would be here at least enhancing the legislative work of Parliament and again overseeing Government programmes but more specifically the Bubulo West constituency. But now here hon. Kipoi is nowhere to be seen it is an indication that hon. Kipoi gave up his role as a member of Parliament representing the people of Bubulo having missed 15 consecutive sittings of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please hon. Members let us finish this debate.

MR AYOO: Thank you hon. Colleague for giving way. I read in the papers when Kipoi declared war on Museveni’s Government. He stated in his own words that Museveni is a liar and should not be trusted, he is no longer interested in a parliamentary seat and he is therefore advising his voters not to vote for any NRM candidate backed by Museveni. Those were his words and that is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NAKABALE: Hon. Member, what I would say, is that people who have such characters of going to unknown places where they cannot be traced are not only a security threat to the country but also for our people in Bubulo. I wish to add that by the hon. Member being away from Uganda is an exposure to the people of Bubulo to suffer. Those suffering include the relatives and us colleagues of hon. Kipoi.
 
So I would wish to support the committee report and say that in order to have effective representation and in order to see our government have effective service delivery, we would wish to have effective representative in the names of a new Member of Parliament. But of course as hon. Kipoi was coming from our side as an NRM Member of Parliament, I would also wish to interest the leadership of the NRM party that we should not only cry about missing hon. Kipoi but also understand that NRM has a role to play in seeing that we get right candidates for the right cause of party building and more so for our country Uganda. Thank you.

6.34
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is indeed painful that as Members of Parliament, we are debating over an issue that will result into us losing a colleague. However given the circumstances, I think we are obliged to say something about it.

I believe we do not have to get diverted. If we do not get diverted so much into other issues concerning the personality of hon. Kipoi, we would move much faster to deal with this issue of knowing whether hon. Kipoi missed 15 consecutive sittings of Parliament and knowing whether he went without the permission from the Office of the Speaker. I think those are the main issues that we should concentrate on.

However, the committee in its wisdom thought of going beyond to provide more evidence to know whether hon. Kipoi, being outside Parliament and being outside the country, was on his own business or he was on business that would help in making the committee take better decisions on whether to go by the constitutional Article 83 (1) (d) or by Rule 101.

In this case I would think that other issues concerning the personality of hon. Kipoi would require somebody raising issues outside the confines of the report of this committee and that could also be -

I believe that after voting a Member of Parliament in the House, the people of Bubulo would expect to interact with him and expect that one of the duties would be representation, which they are missing. As we sit here, many people down there are already moving and canvassing for votes believing that Parliament and Government was doing them a disservice to keep the man in Parliament when he has not been there.

Like my colleagues have said, he declared war on NRM and said, let any other person be elected and of course not a member of NRM. NRM would have feared to say, let us keep him with all the things surrounding him. Instead, to save the interests of the people and our nation, we think it is time to go by the rule and send people to the ground. NRM will field a candidate and others will also do the same. They will then vote and we move on.

In that vein, I would like to painfully support the motion and the position of the committee. We are going to lose a colleague but as the law requires, the committee has dug all the information and brought all the facts that hon. Kipoi missed the 15 sittings of Parliament and went without the permission of the Speaker, in addition to all these other things. I believe we should confine ourselves to that and not drag ourselves into discussing other issues that we can handle later. Rt hon. Speaker, I thank you.

6.37
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I had the privilege of attending the committee when one of the prominent witnesses was appearing in the name of hon. Ekanya Geoffrey. I think on that day hon. Ekanya had nothing useful to do so he passed by that committee. We should not take him seriously – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, this matter has put me in a very difficult situation. Hon. Oboth is my brother, he is my age mate we were born on the same day-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That makes him not in order?

MR EKANYA: And I worked with him to become a Member of Parliament. Now I find it very difficult to put him on a point of order but nonetheless to comply with the Rules of Procedure, is it in order for hon. Oboth Oboth to insinuate that when I appeared before the committee to perform my constitutional duty of ensuring fairness and justice to a colleague, I was idle and disorderly and had nothing- And yet hon. Speaker, I am a very busy and committed Member of Parliament and that is why I have been able to win four elections. I am very coordinated, very organised, a senior Member and a shadow Minister of Finance. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, we heard a statement from a member of the committee who said your testimony before the committee had no evidential value. It is on the record of this House. It is possible that, that is what the honourable Member who now says he actually attended the meeting said. There was no value of evidence that you presented to the committee.

So the reasonable conclusion would have been- Because you were not really supposed to be there and what you went to do there did not produce anything. The reasonable conclusion is that it is possible therefore that the reason that you went there was because you did not have something else to do at that moment. It is a reasonable construction. All of us have been listening to the – But be that as it may, it is not honourable to make statements that would challenge the reputation of a Member of Parliament who is honestly conducting himself in the works of this House.

MR OBOTH: Most obliged and hon. Ekanya knows I said that in good faith and I know he rose up in good faith.

Mr Speaker, it is challenging to us that we are here debating to decide on our own but that is what the Rules say and that is what the Constitution says. I would have expected that the debate would have been as to whether the committee exhausted the requirements as per the rules and according to the Constitution and not whether the other person was treated fairly or not. That could also have been part of the questioning of the procedural requirements.

I want to just pause a little bit and question ourselves. When you go to be elected as a Member of Parliament and then later on you are a drug dealer, a witch doctor and everything, it is a shame. It is with pain that I know that the people of Bubulo need a representative in this House. They are missing a lot so the earlier we decide on this fate- I would not mind tomorrow if it were upon me but the rules are very elaborate. It is not something that will happen overnight. There is due process and I do not think that we should be afraid of the rules in this case. 

I think the committee did a commendable job and there would be no reason to find that somebody who is planning to wage war against any established government would continue to be part of that government, bearing in mind that government has three arms. A House that fights against itself can collapse. Since he has decided – and I thought the English he wrote here to the Speaker instructing Mbidde, even telling the Speaker that “I went to South African for medical treatment, but due to the nature of my illness, I have gone to DRC Congo to see a specialist” – how can you go from Mbale regional hospital and go to Health Centre IV in Buburo and claim you are seeing a specialist. How can you leave South Africa, nearly a fight world country and go to the jungle – (Laughter) – I think he meant a doctor; I do not know whether a medical doctor or a witch doctor. But it is part of the evidence here. 

Mr Speaker, this is a matter which should serve to warn all of us. We need to take the call to serve this nation seriously and we do not just play around; you are Members of Parliament today, then a witchdoctor and a drug dealer. 

I urge hon. Ekanya, who is my good friend and other who feel pain that it had to be this way. When it happens to me tomorrow, it will be the same rules because we play by our own rules. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to hear from somebody who is opposed to the motion now because there seems to be concurrence from all the submissions that have been made. So if you have a contrary opinion as to whether hon. Kipoi has not missed this House for 15 sittings – I someone can come up and say this committee report should not be adopted, that is the person I want to hear from because everybody who has spoken has said it should be adopted. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided by you. From all this evidence that has been given in the report, there are criminal acts which were done by this NRM Members of Parliament –(Laughter)– so has Government taken any interest to ensure that this person in the names of Kipoi, is arrested and brought to answer for the crimes he did?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you even heard that the Members of Parliament jumped bail. He was granted bail in court – that means he was already being prosecuted. When he was given bail, he disappeared; that is the circumstance contained in the report. That should explain to you whether people are interested or not. 

MS NAMAYANJA: With due respect, the address of this individual in Congo is given in the report. Jumping bail alone – this Government has gone to other countries to interfere in the affairs of other Governments – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the point is that the Government is interest; they were already prosecuting this person. Can we leave it at that? The details of the extent of their interest are entirely their business, but they are entirely interested in prosecuting this case. 

6.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are issues that I am not convinced with up to now which I would need Government to explain if I am to support this motion. You just stated that hon. Kipoi was charged for treason. We have had cases, one of which is that of our former party President, Dr Kiiza Besigye, when he got bail, we had to stand surety for him. And in case he had jumped bail, we would have to answer. 

I would like the Government side to answer; when hon. Kipoi jumped bail, what was done to the surities. We have not heard anything on whether they were asked to account for where their person has gone or to pay the equivalent. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable member, the issue for our decision is clear. Has the member missed sitting for 15 consecutive times? Secondly, does he have justification for this; those are the issues before the House. 

MR OKUPA: Yes, but I would like to hear that to enable me support this motion. I do not want to say what we have heard – I do not want to mention it here. We have here the Minister in charge of Regional Cooperation. Can he tell the House how far he has gone in finding out whether hon. Kipoi is in prison or hiding? There are channels; that is why he is the minister for regional cooperation. Can he tell us; did they attempt to extradite him and the Government of DRC refused? I need that to help me understand. 

But also, out of this, I want to caution members. One member of this house, a lady, the day before hon. Kipoi took off, he had invited her for a dinner; that he had something special to discuss with her. Be careful with the friends near you. I do not want to go beyond what the hon. Member told me. But that is a word of caution. That is how conmen defraud us; get into drug business and all sorts of things. 

And like the hon. Member for the Youth Central stated, I think it goes back to our parties; we must vet people when they come to stand on our party ticket. Do not have any Tom, Dick and Harry coming up and you just support them. hon. Kipoi would have been questioned on where he got all that money that he was flashing left right and centre. He would have been questioned if the Minister of Internal Affairs was very alert. But we just left it at that. We would not have reached this level where Members of Parliament’s credibility is put under question. We are getting embarrassed due to such issues that we heard about our honourable colleague. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

6.51
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for what I consider a thorough job and I support the motion one hundred percent. But let me first clear the points which have been made; that what effort has Government made in regard to the conduct of our colleague, hon. Kipoi. 

In this report, although hon. Fox Odoi was summarising, I think he did me a favour in regard to my submission. “We, in Defence with Foreign Affairs are in touch with the Government of the DRC and are asking the Government of the DRC to return Kipoi to Uganda.” That is our request that has been standing. It is one thing to make a request and it is another point for the one you are asking to respond one way or the other and I wouldn’t like us to use this limited motion to discuss openly here the issue of our diplomatic relations with the DRC. We could say more if, hon. Speaker, you think we should go into this outside this motion because the fact that we requested - this person has charges on him, charges of treason, you are our friend, return this brother - and the government decides to act other ways. So the Government definitely took action.

Just to conclude, Mr Speaker, you have elaborated that this brother was with the court. He was in prison and through the court system, he got bail and he jumped that bail. So, I think let us not give the impression that the government took no action. In my view, the government has been trying what it can in regards to this issue. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, the Uganda Police is a member of Interpol and if one is a criminal, he would be arrested and handed over, leave alone the political part of its extradition treaty but as a criminal. Trafficking in drugs, Interpol Uganda should have requested Interpol DRC to hand over this man - leave alone the treason case because there DRC would say what did you do with M23? But use Interpol; this is a criminal, he has been caught with drugs. Hand him over.  

DR KIYONGA: Hon. Wamai, that is a good point and you had another point earlier. You did fault, and correctly, the government system. Why should one individual hold two passports from the same country? So, what I would like to request through the Speaker and members is that once we support this recommendation and we carry it forward, let us go back and pick lessons learnt because it is not possible for me, coming here and or the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister coming and having all those memories. Did we do that? Were there sureties? These are things we can go back and examine and get lessons learnt. This is our country and we need to protect it. So, I take those challenges but I think we need opportunity to examine them in more depth. 

Lastly, let me first make two last points on this point, Mr Speaker. First in my view and hon. Fox Odoi will bear me out, I made a presentation to the committee that we needed to do something about our rules because here what the people that hon. Kipoi represents are saying, they have missed representation and they are right. When you go there they ask, where is Kipoi? What is happening to our representation? The power is with us to discipline one another. It is us that have taken this long to take this action. Is there something we can do about our rules so that when something like this happen - yes, we pay due respect to justice but also act with speed so that people do not unnecessarily suffer? I do hope that we can really do something.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, there is something that I wanted to say and that is why I went to the committee. Under the Constitution, there are government officials who are in constitutional bodies and the Constitution is categorical, that you lose your job or assignment once you have been convicted of a given period of time. In this case, I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, that we are disciplining and cleaning our House. But there are many people outside there, who are in office holding it with question marks.

In this case, if the Executive was very serious and I am asking for you clarification, that there are many other ways; why couldn’t Government having convinced hon. Kipoi - because the Constitution is clear, once you are convicted, you can also do the other –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Ekanya, are you now asking the government to direct the court to convict?

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, because the matter is in court, Government is already –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But Court is independent. You cannot ask the government to ensure conviction because that is a discretionary power of the court.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to – I have been listening carefully and many members are blaming the Executive for not doing this, not doing that, but we are all aware that there is a limitation. Everybody has a limit, a Member of Parliament has a limit, members of the Opposition have a limit. Those outside the House have a limit.

That is why there is a law which is created, penal code, and others. Not specific for particular persons, until you commit a crime, whether, you are a Member of Parliament whether you are a member of the Opposition, NRM, it does not matter. You are a criminal. You have just committed a crime.

So, the issue here today is has our colleague missed continuous meetings for 15 times? That is what we are to decide but that is not the business of a government. There is a limit – even for you, honourable member, government is not going to know what you do at night. (Laughter) We cannot know and we are not responsible, if you want to sleep on the road side, that is your business. I do not think Government is going to be responsible. So, Government is not going to be responsible for everything.

That is why the law is there, without naming specific law for so and so; law is for somebody who commits a crime. This man having been appointed or being elected, he decided to commit all these crimes, that is him to stand for it. What we wonder is whether people who come to the committee to give contradictory witness, whether they should not also be held responsible because if somebody can come –(Mr Ekanya rose on order­_) – no, there is no order here - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, hon. Member, please, conclude -

MR EKANYA: Order -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I am asking for the hon. Minister of Defence to conclude his submission.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this case of hon. Kipoi, we have delayed just as we did in the case of Gen. Sejusa. Honourable colleagues have talked about us being embarrassed, being misunderstood in the country and outside country and those are serious statements.

As a young country, we are in transition; we are learning - (Interjections) – yes, 50 years, there are countries which are hundreds of years. But the point I am making, hon. Members, is that we are being watched; we are watching ourselves, the people who elected us are also watching us and other people.

All the time, we bear that responsibility to convey to our fellow Ugandans that Parliament is a serious institution, that Parliament can help them in their problems. If the population should get a different thinking, then those will be very many steps backwards. So, we owe it to our country to act as judges in our own court, to be firm with each other and the population will see that we can move with them and help them out of difficulties. I support the motion.

7.03
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (POLITICAL MOBILISATION) (Mr Richard Todwong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to add something little on what the Minister for Defence said that our colleagues seem to be mixing three things; the laws on deportation, the laws on extradition and the laws on asylum. When the minister is talking of the systematic approach that Government of Uganda is taking, it borders on our regional and national relations and definitely hon. Wamanga-Wamai being a person who has ever served in the foreign affairs must have known this. Because if we are asking the Democratic Republic of Congo to hand over Kipoi to Uganda and when we know that the last port of exit for Kipoi was from South Africa to DR Congo, then that will not work because DR Congo –(Interjections)- hold on. If we are talking of deportation, DR Congo through their immigration could deport Kipoi to South Africa. But if you are talking of extradition, that would mean –(Interjections)- hold on; that would mean that Kipoi is arrested or Kipoi has entered the territory of DR Congo with the full knowledge – [MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: “Clarification?”] I will give you. I am a bit schooled in this area and if you could give me time to explain – DR Congo would know the address of hon. Kipoi as Kipoi would have reported to the government of DR Congo and then we could ask the Government of DR Congo officially to extradite. 

Now according to the defence lawyers, they have stated in their document here that Kipoi is a free man in Dr Congo and according to the Clerk’s report – when the Clerk went to look for Kipoi, they failed to get Kipoi’s address and as of now, there is no concrete evidence from the committees report, the investigation, his lawyers and from everybody that the true address of Kipoi I known apart from the evidence that we have gathered that possibly he is within the wider terrain of DR Congo. 

So, for you to expect too much from the Government of the Republic of Uganda as to why it has not got Kipoi up to now and when the minister is explaining to say that all diplomatic efforts are being pursued to have Kipoi wherever he is come back to the country, definitely, I believe and pray that members should really take this.

Lastly, the NRM Party to which Kipoi is a member and a member of this Parliament, definitely is a party that is overwhelmingly loved by Ugandans and is a party that the people of Bubulo West love so much – [HON. MEMBERS: “Order.”] And I know that - [MR NZOGHU: “Order.”]- should this august House take -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.  

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, hon. Todwong is a senior government minister and every after five years, this country holds elections and you know what happened in 2006 when Dr Besigye brought his case to court and court ruled that actually the elections which the NRM candidate had won were fraudulent and that they would not repeat the election just for the sake of peace of this country –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member.

MR NZOGHU: Yes.
    
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Hon. Member.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please –

MR NZOGHU: This is what the judges said –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, this is the Speaker and he happens to be a lawyer and has read some of those judgements that you are quoting. Please do not mislead this House. If you do not know the facts of the case and the rulings in the case, do not invent them on the Floor. Please, this is a House of dignity.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, thank you for your ruling and you know, the point of order which I am raising is that if NRM is overwhelmingly supported by Ugandans, how come that NRM in every election, it has been picked among the political parties which overwhelmingly rigged the elections in this country? (Laughter)  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not sure how the member for Busongora expects the Speaker to rule on that subject. All I can say is that as of now, there are about 275 Members of Parliament from the NRM side and there are a total of 385 elected Members of Parliament. That at least in the House, gives it an overwhelming majority of about 70 percent and that I can say because I have the facts. Please can we conclude this matter?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I want to put the record right. I want to disagree with -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, how are you accessing it? How are you there? Please! You are holding the Floor, hon. Member.

MR TODWONG: In a nutshell, as the National Resistance Movement Party to which Kipoi is a member, I am sure that the people of Bubulo West, having gone through what they are going through will definitely give another person to represent them on the NRM side and we are ready for that. We shall definitely deliver another person to represent. I thank you.   

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is a clarification; I want to put the record right that if you hold a passport of one country and you travelled to South Africa and you go to DRC, you are holding a passport of Uganda and therefore you cannot be extradited to South Africa – [MR TODWONG: “Order.”] 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, the information we have in the House is that the person has a South African passport as well and we do not know which one he used to go to the DRC. Can we know? That is the evidence that we received; that he has a South African and Ugandan passport. Hon. Members, can we finish with this matter?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline on the conduct of hon. Kipoi Tonny Nsubuga, MP Bubulo West be adopted with its recommendations. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson of the committee. Hon. Members, it is now 10 minutes past 7.00 O’clock and this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7. 11 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 19 February 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

