

Tuesday, 21 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You are already aware of the loss of our own, hon. Annie Logiel, which happened last week. For the whole of this week, we have been waiting for the arrival of the body. The people handling the transportation of the body have now confirmed that it will arrive aboard Turkish Airlines on Thursday, 23 February 2017 at about 4.15 p.m. When that happens, Parliament will be sitting on Friday. 

The body will be brought to Parliament on Friday morning at about 10.30 a.m. In the afternoon, a tribute motion will be moved and this House will have that debate from 2.00 p.m. until the end of those proceedings. This will be a special sitting. Because of that Friday sitting, we will be taking decisions on what happens on Thursday and I will communicate that tomorrow. Otherwise, that is what we expect to happen on Friday. Thank you.

2.09
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of extreme public importance, which transpired over the weekend when we read in the press that the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) has deployed in Equatorial Guinea. 

Mr Speaker, the deployment of the UPDF is regulated by this Parliament. Article 210 of the Constitution provides for Parliament to regulate the deployment of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Force. It provides thus: “Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and, in particular, providing for -
the organs and structures of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces;
recruitment, appointment, promotion, disciplines and removal of members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and ensuring that members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces are recruited from every district of Uganda;
terms and conditions of service of members of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces; and …”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, why don’t you deal with the specific issue?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the main point is on Article 210(d) and it is about the deployment of troops outside Uganda. It came to the public domain that indeed the UPDF contingent, under the command of Lt Col. Wycliffe Keita left for Equatorial Guinea to support President Obiang, who has ruled that country since 1979 and who came to power through a military coup.

The point here, Mr Speaker is: deploying all the way to West Africa yet there is the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) - if indeed there was a humanitarian problem, there is ECOWAS. Members of the UPDF are the sons and daughters of this country. The Constitution is very clear that outside deployment must be regulated and ordered or allowed by this House. 

I am a Member of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs but nothing like that has come to our committee. I have been in this Parliament and no such motion has come to this House. Can Government stand up and answer to these questions? 

Under what circumstances has the UPDF been deployed to that West African country?
Why is there increasing disregard of the constitutional order in this country? Moreover, last week we celebrated the Luwum Day knowing it was the climax of dictatorship in this country. Why is dictatorship creeping back into this country? Why must Government disregard the authority and powers of Parliament to deploy outside the country?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any response from the Government?

2.13
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, I know that the UPDF is obliged to come and inform Parliament in case of deployment outside Uganda. If it is in hot pursuit, they are obliged to come and inform this House. Therefore, I am expecting the Minister of Defence to come and inform us about the circumstances under which the deployment was made. That is if it is true because the honourable member is only citing the press. I don’t know whether it is true, but if it is true, definitely the minister will come and inform us.

In regards to the total disregard of constitutional order, I refute that statement. Uganda is obliged to respect constitutional order and we are trying to do so as Members of Parliament who are doing oversight work to see how the Executive is doing its work. So, it is not true that Uganda is under anarchy where the Constitution is defiled on a daily basis.

2.14
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. In Kasese, after the killings, which happened from 26 to 27 November 2016, the people of Kasese have never settled. As I speak, the Uganda Police Force and the army have launched a search in homes and so people are not sleeping in their homes, particularly in the sub counties of Bugoye, Maliba, Kyabarungira and Bwesumbu in Busongora North. The army is raiding people’s homes with people being arrested in a manner that is unprecedented. They are being intimated on their way to church, in their homes and everywhere.

Mr Speaker, as leaders from Kasese, we are committed to ensuring that peace prevails in the area. It was on this ground that on the 28 December 2016, we met His Excellency, the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and agreed on the following four tenets: that the arrests of people must stop because the people arrested are actually innocent; that the intimidation of people must stop; the framing of innocent people must stop because people are trying to use that confusion to achieve and revenge on issues that Government cannot understand; and they are extorting money from the people yet the President directed that to stop. 

Mr Speaker, we have committed to that to ensure peace prevails in the area. The reason I am raising this matter is to seek an explanation from Government why the army and the police are not respecting the directives previously given by the President of the Republic of Uganda? 

The people of Kasese are still nursing a lot of frustration, humiliation and discomfort. The continued arrests and intimidation of the people is likely to trigger and cause commotion amongst the people of Kasese. 

Therefore, can the Government explain to the people of Kasese and the people of Rwenzori region generally, why the police and the army are not adhering to the directives of the President, who is also the Commander-in-Chief because he pronounced himself on those four clear actions? 

2.19
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by requesting that after I have given an explanation, the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, gives an explanation to what hon. Ssekikubo raised so that we deal with the matter.

First of all, I feel sympathetic to the people of Kasese. We all know what happened there and we are all yearning for peace and stability. But if in search for peace and stability people are inconvenienced, that is regrettable. 

Otherwise, I would like to say that when an area is under such circumstances of instability, where bad people use innocent people, somehow people are bound to suffer because the police and UPDF have to come in to search for such people who could be leaving amongst such communities.

Anyway, we will find out whether the army and the police have gone beyond their mandate because the Commander-in-Chief is aware. 
However, as to why they are not respecting the directives of the Commander-in-Chief, I would like to say that if they were not respecting the orders of the Commander-in-Chief, he would have reacted because his ears are on the ground too. 

I do not want to stand here and believe that the police and the UPDF are doing their own thing without the knowledge of their Commander in Chief. He is aware that there is an operation that aims to bring peace and stability to the people of Kasese. Please, just be tolerant. If you want to produce a child without pain, then you can as well forget about having a child.

Mr Speaker, it is very painful. We went through it in Northern Uganda until we established peace. We are ready to go through it in any part of this country to ensure we liberate our people. I thank you.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col. Charles Engola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I came in when the question was organised and sent to you. However, I have heard the issue of the Equatorial Guinea and that we have deployed there.
I would like to say that what Uganda has done, under the request of the President of Equatorial Guinea –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. When the honourable colleague raised this issue of deployment of our soldiers across our borders without the approval of this House, the Government Chief Whip informed the House that we shall have a report. So, wouldn’t it be procedurally right, basing on the magnitude of the problem, that the honourable minister brings a comprehensive report for us to debate it rather than having an off-cuff reporting?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The request from the Government Chief Whip has been overtaken by events by the presence of the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs. Please, proceed to respond.

COL. ENGOLA: I hope I am protected. Colleagues, I think this is an urgent matter that you would like to know about. We have not deployed. They are two different things. 

First of all, there is deployment to fight like we are doing in Somalia and there is interchanging our troops to train. Our soldiers have gone to train –(Interjections) – we have many troops that come here to train in Uganda. I do not think the UPDF have never requested to go and train - we have trainees here. They are there to particularly train –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I have endeavoured to come up with specifics that a batch of over 250 UPDF soldiers, which is the first and expected to be followed by another batch of 250 UPDF officers and men, under the command of Lt. Col. Wycliff Keita - he is the one leading that mission and certainly, by any imagination, with the equipment and arms – it is reported. Those cannot be there on an exchange programme.

Mr Speaker, can the minister be honest to this House and say the exact mission why the UPDF have gone to support, moreover, the person who shot his way into power in 1979?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but that is not the point you are raising. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: That aside, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, stick to the issue.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Can the minister, therefore, be kind to this country because there are reports that the UPDF is there for anybody with money to hire for missions. We are turning our UPDF officers into war merchants. Are our soldiers mercenaries, war merchants or dogs of wars?  What is the proper description?

COL. ENGOLA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be clear here that our troops have gone to train. This was after a request was made by the President of Equatorial Guinea. But we also have foreign troops training our soldiers here. We have not gone for any other missions apart from that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you finished?

COL. ENGOLA: Therefore, the issue of any mission being performed by our troops in Equatorial Guinea is not true. Our troops are only training the Equatorial Guinea’s troops. That is all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow is Prime Minister’s Question Time. Can the Government Chief Whip inform the Prime Minister so that he makes a short statement on this issue before his question time starts? Thank you.

2.27
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance over the closure of the only public road we have in Kalangala from Luku in Bugoma, to Bukakata in Masaka District. 

To give you a background, on 6 January 2017, Kalangala Infrastructural Services (KIS) wrote a letter notifying us that in a period of one week, they would scale down the operations of the ferries. After that period, they indeed scaled down their ferry operations from 20 to nine trips per day. 

On Monday, 20 February 2017, they wrote to us another letter saying they were further going to scale down their ferry operations to only three days - Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Mr Speaker, that is the only public road we have in Kalangala. What does this mean? It means we have to make appointments to fall sick. The expectant mothers are suffering. As I speak, the ferries are down and nothing is taking place. The business community is suffering. You all know that we do not have even a hospital and most patients are referred to Masaka. However, when they are referred, they do not have any other transport because the ferries are down. The tourists too, have been scared away. 

Mr Speaker, it is my humble prayer to the Minister of Works and Transport and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Members of Parliament do prevail over the matter to ensure Kalangala Infrastructural Services is instructed to make the ferries operational instead of making the common man suffer for nothing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Nabayiga, for raising this important issue. All of us know what Kalangala contributes to the country’s economy. I am going to find out the circumstances under which the decision to scale down the ferry routes from Bukakata to Kalangala was made. Right now, I do not have the information, but there must be reasons why they are scaling down. At an appropriate time, even tomorrow, we shall inform this House on the circumstances under which this decision was taken.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.31
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 16 January 2017 at 6 p.m., I received an email on my iPad from the Inspector General of Government inviting me to declare my income, assets and liabilities. The email stated: “This is an invitation to you, as a leader, to declare your income, assets and liabilities to the Inspector General of Government through the online declaration system.”

After getting this invitation, I started straightaway to open the declaration, but the system refused. I took time to go to our Information Technology Department to find out whether my iPad had a problem. I considered this important because I know what happened to one Member of Parliament who failed to declare. My iPad still failed to open the document. I went an extra mile to ring the IGG’s office to find out why their email was not opening and why it demanded for passwords and many other commands. They said they would get back to me. 

The last information I got was that they required Members of Parliament to move to the IGG’s office to declare their income, assets and liabilities. Now, in terms of protocol, I believe we are a bit above the IGG. 
So, I would like to know why the online registration is not taking place. Did they work with our IT Department to see that - of course what they are doing is good, but it has failed? 

Declaration has time limit and anything can occur to a Member of Parliament. This can also affect any one and the Speaker of Parliament. So, may I know what is exactly happening at IGG? They refused to respond to my call. They promised to call back, they didn’t yet members are going an extra mile to go and declare their incomes, assets and liabilities from the IGG’s office, which is irregular. That is the matter of national importance which concerns all of us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, they used to bring those forms and we would fill. What has happened? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Ssewungu, you are not the only one suffering with the online declaration of income, assets and liabilities. We have tried to login using the login token given to us but have failed. I have been trying myself. 

Mr Speaker, I am going to request the Prime Minister to tell the IGG to accept, for now, the usual declaration where we used to fill in forms as we improve on our IT system because of the timeframe and we do not want to become victims of those circumstances. The IGG should accept that we use hard copies to declare our incomes, assets and liabilities. 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I am receiving notes from some Members that they would like to raise urgent matters. So, it is time I drew your attention to Rule 39 of our Rules of Procedure so that we also protect the Office of the Speaker. 

Rule 39: Notice on Urgent Questions reads as follows: “(1)A question shall not be asked without notice unless it is of an urgent nature relating either to a matter of public importance or the arrangement of business. (2), questions without notice shall only be asked with the prior leave of the Speaker.” 

Prior leave of the Speaker means you came and briefed the Speaker of what you would like to talk about. The Speaker knows and then will allow it to be handled. You cannot send me a note saying that you would like to raise some urgent matter. How do I give you prior leave? Please, let us respect these rules and the office of the Speaker. We do not want to go into issues that we do not understand. It is in my interest because I know what is on the Order Paper because I must also know what members are going to raise in the course of raising matters of urgent public importance. I would not be standing in an ambush in this House. I will stick by the rules and let us play by them as the only way to fairly play the game. Therefore, no more urgent matters for now; let us go to the Order Paper.

JOINT MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON AN ACTION PLAN TO MITIGATE THE FOOD SECURITY AND DISASTER SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

2.37
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent SSempijja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I hope the statement was uploaded on the iPads -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, there are numerous factors responsible for the ongoing food insecurity in the country and they include: the prolonged dry spell, pests and vectors, diseases, declining soil fertility, soil degradation and land fragmentation. 

The others are: low fertilizer use, over selling of food, high food prices limiting access to food by households, rural urban migration where the most productive age bracket of the youth is getting less involved in agriculture and getting more involved in sports betting and gambling; limited mechanization, inadequate homestead and community storage facilities, inadequate capacity and knowledge on water harvesting and use of irrigation and horticulture, livestock and others.

Mr Speaker, Government has taken steps in the immediate period, short term, medium and long term to handle this very rather serious situation. 
We have agreed – and Mr Speaker, we request for your indulgence and permission - to allow me request the honourable minister in charge of disaster preparedness to handle the first part of our presentation. I will handle the rest if you allow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it is a joint statement. How you handle it is up to you. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Musa Ecweru, come and handle the first part.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Hillary Onek): I delegate my minister of state to read our statement. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I told you they knew how they were going to do it. Please, proceed.

2.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Thank you my senior minister. Mr Speaker, arising from the preamble that my senior colleague from agriculture has given, the country is indeed facing a severe shortage of food. There is scarcity of water and lack of pasture, all as a result of the prolonged dry spell.

Mr Speaker, in the second paragraph of my presentation, the first sentence needs a correction. It reads, “Cabinet in late October 2016 directed a team of Government ministers and technical officers to go for countrywide community food security Baraza meetings. They had radio and television talk shows. This was intended to inform and sensitize the people on the deteriorating food security situation and the wise use of the available stocks.”

Mr Speaker, the ministers met communities from the 3 November to the 22 of December 2016 and thereafter presented a report to Cabinet. In addition, Government ran radio and television food security awareness messages in English, Ateso, Luo, Luganda, and Runyakitara where we deliberately advised individuals and families to sparingly use the limited stocks of food that were available over the same period of time.

Mr Speaker, this was followed by an inter-agency technical field assessment and data analysis by a joint team of experts from the Office of the Prime Minister; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; Ministry of Water and Environment; Uganda National Meteorological Authority -(Interruption) 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very important statement because Ugandans are starving due to shortage of food. I acknowledge there are different statements in this joint statement, each titled differently. I am wondering what the honourable minister is right now presenting. 

Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally okay for the minister to tell us the title of the statement he is presenting right now? That is important because we are interested in all, this being a statement from the two ministries.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, is that statement circulated?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, this is just a segment of the same paper titled, “Joint food security situation in the country.” It was supposed to have been presented jointly by the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but he has requested me to just capture the elements of the disaster relief response and then –(Interjections)– It is on the iPad if you check very well. I am sure the technical people should be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, would you assist me with this? Was this statement uploaded on the iPad?

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, the technical people are still sorting themselves out and I will proceed immediately after that.

HON. MEMBERS: Read for us the heading. 

MR ECWERU: The presentation is titled: “The food security situation in the country: Response actions and a five-year strategic food insecurity eradication plan.”

HON.MEMBERS: It is not there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I suggest that we harmonise this and come back to it when the minister is ready? Consult with your technical people and make sure we have the document ready before we can proceed. This matter is really important. So, let us have the next item before coming back to this.

MR KIBALYA: The Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said there were two parts in the report; the first being for disaster and the second for his docket. Could we be listening to his portion of the report as the disaster section sorts out itself?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I had guided on this issue that we defer this matter until they are ready and that meanwhile we could go to the next item. 

If you are very dissatisfied with that guidance, there are other procedures you can follow. You should not rise on another procedural point. The next item, please.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE ANNUAL REPORT ON THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE YEAR ENDING 30 JUNE 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we are on laying of papers. Okay, let us move on to the next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2017”

2.48
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Mr Speaker, I think there is a problem with the network. We sent the motion for uploading some time back but there has been no success in uploading it. I do not know whether you will allow me to proceed when Members do not have copies of the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we receive the motion’s text and then we access the detailed proposals that he has made later? Will that be okay? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and honourable members for granting me that opportunity. 

This motion is seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017.” It is moved under Article 79 and 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (1995) and Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to propose the motion? It should be something like, “Mr Speaker, I beg to move the motion that…” After you can state the details.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the guidance.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017.”  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. We will listen to the motion and then we shall seek secondment.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Parliament enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 94 (1) of the Constitution and Clause 4 (b) of Article 94 and Rule 110 to empower a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AWARE THAT the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objective X of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the state’s duty to take all necessary steps to involve people in the formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes which affect them; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT whereas the Government of Uganda formulated the “Buy Uganda Build Uganda policy” with the aim of increasing consumption of local products and increasing participation of the locally established firms in domestic trade, this policy has not been fully implemented; 

CONCERNED THAT Uganda currently does not have legislation aimed at promoting Ugandan manufacturers, service providers and suppliers to compete favourably with international goods and service providers;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT whereas the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 requires the implementation of preference and reservation schemes, there are no penalties for non-compliance making its implementation less effective; 

ALARMED THAT whereas Government has encouraged and provided various incentives for foreign investors to establish businesses and operate in Uganda, there is no obligation imposed on the foreign investors to employ Ugandan labour or to use Ugandan goods or services in their operations;

FURTHER ALARMED THAT the lack of protection for Ugandan manufactures, the non-imposition of obligations on foreign investors to use Ugandan labour, goods or services as well as the non-implementation of the “Buy Uganda Build Uganda policy” has had adverse effects on the economy and has generally exposed Ugandan manufacturers and service providers to unfair competition, resulting in factory closures, increased levels of unemployment, widening of the trade deficit with other countries, shortage of foreign currency in the economy and depreciation of the Ugandan shilling against major world currencies;  

NOTING THAT unless stringent measures are introduced to ensure the use of Ugandan labour, goods and services in all undertakings or projects where Government is party or where public funds are used, the earlier identified adverse effects on the Ugandan economy will continue, that may result in social and political unrest in the country; 

COGNIZANT OF THE FACT THAT the use of Ugandan labour, goods and services has been implemented in the oil and gas sector as required under the Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda, 2008, the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act, 2013 as well as The Petroleum (Refining, Conversion, Transmission And Midstream Storage) Act, 2013 and have resulted in the increased employment of Ugandans, protection of Ugandan manufacturers as well as the utilisation and consumption of locally manufactured goods and locally available services in the petroleum sector;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill, for an Act entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017,” a draft of which is hereto attached and to order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.” I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, the motion is seconded by the honourable member for Bukoto South and the honourable member for Soroti District. 

The motion is properly before the House and the Member for Buliisa County – honourable member, that was just secondment. 

However, as we agreed, you will justify your motion when Members have the text of this motion. So, I will propose the question for debate when Members have the full motion and that is what we agreed. Thank you. The motion is received and we will proceed accordingly at the right time. Let us move on to the next item. 

BILLS

SECOND READING
THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does anybody have a brief to speak on the motion for second reading of this Bill? Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – it cannot be the chairperson. The motion has to be moved by the person who is proposing the Bill. The chairperson makes a report on the motion, but it has to be proposed for second reading.  

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, can you move the motion for second reading of this Bill? If you are not ready, let us proceed with other business. Are you prepared to justify the motion –(Laughter)– because when you move a motion for second reading of the Bill, you speak to the principles of that Bill before the committee can report? (Laughter) Let us move on to next item. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDATION AND APPROVAL OF THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$14,300,000 FROM OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT TO SUPPORT THE VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROJECT PHASE II

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the minister to move the motion properly? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I wouldn’t have stood at this point in time, but you may realise that the finance ministry has the key to almost all these items. This Order Paper was approved by the Leader of Government Business, in consultation with the responsible ministers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Order Paper was approved by the Speaker. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, you are right, Mr Speaker. However, the line ministers must be aware that these matters are coming up. Now, when we start to skip one matter after another, yet we have in our midst, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Presidency and the entire Frontbench. This is the crux of Government; this is their docket. 

When the front bench sits without the vital ministers coming up to lead the House, you could see the embarrassment when the deputy minister attempted –(Laughter)– really he attempted but that was the best he could offer –(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you adding information on a point of procedure, honourable member?

MR KAKOOZA: No, I am supplementing on what he is talking about. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you rose on a point of information, honourable member. 

MR KAKOOZA: I was giving information to enrich his point of procedure. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: So, Mr Speaker, I beg that you crack the whip. This is a serious Parliament. Government is fully represented and we cannot be seen running around in circles. 

Mr Speaker, crack the whip and call Government – put them to task to explain why they are treating Parliament in such a shabby manner. We came here to do business and that is what we are voted to do but now we reach here and nobody is emerging from the Front bench. 

So, Mr Speaker, without you listening to their whispers, can they commit to this House – can you reject their whispers and tell them off that they have to present business for us to proceed as Parliament? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Lwemiyaga, I have just been informed that a particular minister had been designated to move these motions and speak to them. So, we will proceed with the moving of the motion, its justification and the chairperson of the committee will report. Please move the motion, we speak to it and proceed.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY EDUCATION (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to move a motion that Parliament authorises Government to borrow –(Interjections)– I beg to move a motion to seek the authority of Parliament, under Article 159 of the Constitution to borrow up to US$14,300,000 to support the vocation education project phase II. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member for Samia-Bugwe South, Member for Bunghoko and Member for Sembabule District. Okay, would you like to speak to your motion?

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I want to thank the honourable members and remind the House that Government constructed nine vocational institutions at Corner Kilak in Pader District; Nawanyago in Kamuli District; Ogolai in Amuria; Namataba in Mukono; Nakasongola, Lokopio Hills in Yumbe, Lwengo and Basoga Nsadhu in Namutumba District. 

Mr Speaker, these were constructed in the first phase of the project; they were already commissioned and are now operational. 

At the design of the project, the scope was supposed to include a sick bay, the multipurpose hall, girls’ dormitories and staff houses. However, at the time of implementation, the funds could not accommodate the original plan and so the scope was reduced.

Mr Speaker, the loan we are requesting for is intended to cover the gaps in those institutions. And of course what we intend to do is to construct the girls’ dormitories because, dear colleagues, you will agree with me that most of these institutions have been constructed in rural areas and definitely we require girls’ dormitories. 

There are no staff houses which also have to be constructed; we need the multipurpose to provide for the dining halls and also other activities and we need the sickbays too. Most of them, like I have said, are in rural areas and if there are no staff houses, then training cannot take place.

So, Mr Speaker, this is the reason we are requesting this House to approve this loan so that we can have these institutions fully operational with all the required facilities. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, the motion is that this Parliament approves the request by Government to borrow up to US$14.3 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development to support Vocational Education Project Phase II. That is the motion before us and this particular request was submitted to the Committee on National Economy and at this time the committee will report then we have a discussion.

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the Minister of Education and Sports for ably presenting the request. 

That aside, Mr Speaker, I would like to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow up to $14.3 million from the Opec Fund for International Development to support Vocational Education Project Phase II.

Mr Speaker, I have a file containing the following documents, which I would like to lay on the Table:

The signed report; 
The signed minutes;
Minister’s brief on the proposal;
The loan approval guide;
Project incompletion report for Phase I;
Project proposal document;
Certificate of environmental impact assessment and;
The consolidated procurement plan.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BBUMBA: By way of introduction, Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy, considered the request by Government to borrow $14.3 million from the Opec Fund for International Development to support Vocational Education Project Phase II, which is spearheaded by the Ministry of Education and Sports in accordance with Rule 166(2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure. 

The request was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 9 August 2016 and was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.

Mr Speaker, we have taken time to come up with a report for presentation to this House because we wanted to be thorough in scrutinising this loan. We wanted all the questions we had to be answered to our satisfaction and this was done.

Mr Speaker, the methodology followed is under paragraph two and the background to the request is covered under paragraph three. This can be found on the iPad, if you can make reference. 

The project objective, which is under paragraph four, states: 

“The overall development objective of the project is to contribute to the expansion of equitable access to quality post-primary education and training as part of Uganda’s Universal Post-Primary Education and Training programme.”

The project description and location are given under paragraph five but for the sake of the members, I will mention the areas and they are Amuria, Hoima, Kamuli, Masaka and Lwengo, Mukono, Nakasongola, Namutumba, Pader and Yumbe.

Under paragraph six, the project is well linked to the country’s strategy, Vision 2040; UNDP II and other planning programmes of Government.

The project components are in paragraph seven; the project is going to cover civil works, supply of equipment and tools, training and technical assistance, designs and work supervision, project coordination and management.

The project costs and financing is provided in Table 1 under paragraph eight (i). Members can have a look at it.

Table 2, under the same paragraph covers the proposed financing plan. The bulk of the money is going to the civil works. And the other big component is for supplies and training.

Mr Speaker, this project is going to be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Sports, which implemented the first phase because this is just the second phase.

And the benefits of the projects include:

The project will provide skills, training, and opportunities to those children who will not be or have not been able to proceed with secondary school education; and
Vocational education will equip them with skills so that they become productive citizens. This type of training process will enhance equity among those who proceed to secondary school and those who join technical vocational education and training institutions.

Considering the high unemployment in the country and the scarcity of skills, I think this loan is a move by Government in the right direction.

The current debt situation is manageable; we are still under the convergence criteria. So there is no need for worry.

Under paragraph 12, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

The committee noted that due to budget deficits, some of the components like works and supply were reduced in the scope of planned works and training due to the scarcity of funds.

Under the works contract, four priority buildings were omitted and this had an adverse impact on the operations of the institute. Additionally, a significant portion of the required external work was also omitted and these include roads, walkways, landscaping and lighting.

Our recommendation is that Government should expedite timely utilisation of the loan to support the implementation of the planned second phase and should also provide counterpart funding in a timely manner.

Mr Speaker, these days we insist that unless counterpart funds are clearly indicated and ring-fenced in the budget, we do not proceed with the loan appraisal. So in this case, the money is available so there will be no excuse for the ministry to delay the implementation of this project.

The committee further observed that many students drop out of school at lower levels, especially girls. By Government investing in vocational education, these school drop-outs will be absorbed and armed with hands-on practical skills.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Education and Sports should come up with a strategy to have more female students enrolled in vocational institutions since there are more girls who drop out of school at an earlier age than boys.

Furthermore, the Minister of Education and Sports should tailor the curriculum to suit the current requirements of the job market. It will be sad if these people are trained in skills that are not required by the market. So the curriculum should be appropriate to the job market.

The committee noted that the vocational education project phase II, would involve the construction and equipping of the nine newly constructed schools to provide conducive learning and teaching environment for both pupils and teachers. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that in future, the selection criteria of the location of these institutes should ensure equitable distribution all over the country. There was some equity in these, but it needs more emphasis. 

Concerning sustainability of project infrastructure investment; the committee noted that adequate and regular maintenance of the infrastructure of the project will be important for their sustainability. Investments in beneficiary districts will depend on regular maintenance by local governments.

The committee recommends that Government should ensure that the current cost associated with implementation of the project infrastructure investments are absorbed in the subsequent national and local budgets for the implementing agencies of the projects in order to guarantee proper and continuous maintenance.

It would be sad if money is provided at the centre and the districts, which are implementing are not provided with money for maintenance. We are all aware that in Africa, we are good in acquiring new things, but extremely poor in maintaining what we acquire.

The committee noted that there were substandard works in most institutes and there were no proper handover of the projects in some of the institutes we visited. 

The committee recommends that Government, through its inspectorate, should ensure quality work in these projects. It further observed white elephants which were constructed and six months thereafter had not been utilized; we saw very nice structures without any activity taking place.

The committee recommends that Government should cure the mismatch between the completion and equipping of the projects to avoid wastage during that time of redundancies. 

The committee observed that these institutions admit Senior Four leavers with bias in science subjects, which leaves out many students who drop out of school due to various reasons. It further does not recognise that many schools do not have science laboratories; this implies that should they continue with the above criteria, it will only be those few from the privileged schools with such facilities.

The committee recommends that Government should consider lowering the minimum entry requirements to these institutions and further arrange for informal training to school dropouts. Furthermore, when designing new secondary schools, Government should consider making them technical secondary schools in order to shape the young peoples’ skills at an early age and thus shoot two birds with one stone. 

The committee further recommends that the different collection periods for building should be extended from the current six months, which is normally provided in the agreements to a year so as to be sure that what is delivered is durable.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that subject to the above recommendations, the request by Government to borrow $14.3 million from the OPEC Fund for International Development to support the vocational education project phase II, be approved. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion for debate of the report of the committee in response to the motion that has been presented to you. We will have a debate on this motion and see how to proceed from there.

3.20
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. However, I would like to seek more clarification from her; she mentioned vocational schools and at the same time technical schools. I would like to know whether the loan government is seeking to approve is for vocational education because that is different from technical institutions.

Secondly, my concern is about the Government policy to establish a vocational or technical school per constituency. I would like to know whether this is one of the strategies seeking implementation of this Government policy or this is different. If this is the case, may we know from Government the status; where does this take us after approving these funds? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.21
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for the report and highlight some of the issues. My concern is what you stated about the white elephants. Two months ago, as a committee of gender, we went to the field and one of the places that we visited was the Commonwealth centre Labora, which is in Amuru District. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware of this; this is a very big youth centre and it was built with the intention of helping the whole Greater North right from West Nile up to Karamoja, but this place is underutilized because there is no money allocated to this centre so as to run smoothly. 

Therefore, as long as we do not address the issue of money for maintenance, we shall have as many white elephants as possible in Uganda without realising the intention for which they were built. Mr Speaker, this is what I thought I needed to bring to the attention of the committee as we consider this. Thank you.

3.23
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I support the borrowing of this money because of the importance attributed to it; skills acquisition is still on high demand from our people. 

However, I would like to note the following: the chairperson raised the issue concerning quality construction. To me, this goes hand in hand with timely construction. As I support this loan, the user departments should take keen interest to see that the construction bureaus are respected.  

For example, in Adjumani District, we have Amelo Technical Institute, which was supposed to be completed in March 2015, but to date, it has not been completed. The leadership of Adjumani District has tried to follow this up and failed. I pray that the scenario in Adjumani will not be repeated as we borrow money to construct these institutions in other parts of the country.

Secondly, the committee talked about unutilised structures, but there is also the challenge of underutilisation of the structures where you find that the manpower deployed in these institutions is too low. For example, many people are coming in Adjumani to acquire skills yet the main structure is not yet completed. You find that a structure that would be accommodating over 1,000 students accommodates less than 20. Therefore, as we plan to construct, we must plan to deploy enough manpower to ensure that these centres become attractive.

I also wish to say that we need to construct these centres across the country. As we talk about the high level of school dropouts, I think the user department should look into it because in Adjumani District alone, the level of girls dropping out of school is too high. Therefore, it is also important to expand our curriculum in order to change people’s mind sets as well as ensure that citizens are educated on the importance of staying in school. Otherwise, the high level of drop –(Member timed out.) 

3.26
MR SILAS AOGAN (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work so far well done. My major concern is the debt sustainability analysis. 

In your report, your analysis ends with November last year, and yet you know very well that the rate at which we borrow is so high because you bring a loan request on the Floor of this House nearly every week. If you talk about the November figures, there is a likelihood that we shall borrow beyond our limits. I, therefore, think it is very paramount for us to always include the most up to date figures of our analysis due to the values that we now use in the borrowing. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, loan request is a means for us to catch up with our intended scope of work. Where is the figure that was initially stated? Where is that figure that we downsized so that we can balance the equation? For instance, we could probably say that we had $10,000, which was reduced by $3,000, and now we are borrowing the $3,000 to fill the gap. Where is that figure? I think those are pertinent questions that we need to ask ourselves so that we catch up with what we need to do. 

When you look at the issue of the terms and conditions of the loan, we are going to pay certain interests. I do not know the committee’s views on those who will fail to implement work within our specified period because this is the Kisanja Hakuna Mchwezo period; we want to see people do their work in a timely manner. We have suffered in Kumi with the water project due to that kind of thing, so we are waiting because we do not want to see anybody suffer in the same manner. I think you have done a good job so far. Just fill in the gaps and we shall be okay. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. 

3.28
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. However, I have two issues that I need to raise on that matter: One of them is the issue of equity. It is good that the committee itself raised that matter, but they fell short of making any recommendation regarding that issue. 

Mr Speaker, in my constituency, I have a school that started during the Obote II era; it is called Barinyanga Technical School. Right now, the school is in a very poor shape. The buildings are collapsing and it does not even have a single staff house. It surprises me that a school in such a condition cannot meet the criteria of being considered in the funding modality.

That aside, Mr Speaker, the issue I am raising here is that if you look at this loan, it is going to finance nine centres in nine districts and it is okay. The problem here is that when it comes to borrowing, the loan benefits a few areas. However, when it comes to paying it back, its cost is borne by everybody. 

I would like to illustrate this with figures; in our budget in the next financial year, the cost of debt servicing interest payment is 12.2 per cent. To understand this figure much better, it is important to know that the 12.2 per cent is bigger than the combined allocation of seven sectors, and yet these are very key sectors. For instance, when you combine ICT, tourism, trade, social development, lands, housing, legislature, public administration, water and environment, you will realise that these are the seven key sectors. However, the money allocated to these sectors is still less than what we are going to spend on debt servicing. Therefore, that shows the cost of debt repayment, which is going to be borne by everybody –(Interjection)- just a moment, let me first expand on this and I will give you time. 

We are complaining about money for the old people, and yet these are the costs that everybody will bear. If we did not have this loan repayment, our old citizens would enjoy the money. Unfortunately, everybody will suffer because when it comes to getting the loan, very few people benefit from it.

Mr Speaker, I think as a Parliament and a country, we need to rectify –(Member timed out.) 

3.32
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to, first of all, thank the committee for presenting such a good report to this august House. 

However, I have about two issues: One, when we get such a loan, at the end of the day, it is paid by all of us. We all bear the burden because it comes from the taxpayer’s pocket. My challenge here is the utilisation of this money. 

Mr Speaker, we have a vocational school in Bugiri District called Nongo Technical School, whose construction has taken about seven years. When you get there today, you will find it very bushy because its construction has not been completed. The school now looks like a place that once had construction going on but now it is totally deserted. I wonder why we keep getting this money, and yet we do not utilise it effectively. 

The other issue is regionalising. To the contrary, I do not believe that we should consider regions, when it comes to distribution of vocational institutions. This is because you can find a man from Kigezi going to study in Bugiri District and no one will deny him access. Some of us come from Bugiri District but have studied in Kampala, western and northern Uganda and no one has denied us access to education. 

I, therefore, do not believe in considering a particular region for the construction of a vocational school. As long as the institution is going to serve Ugandans, I will support it wherever it will be. However, my issue is utilisation of these funds. Let us effectively utilise the resources that will be paid by the taxpayers. That is the take that I had on this issue. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.34
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the loan. I was going to raise an issue on the white elephants but it has already been mentioned. I was also going to make a quotation on Omoro Vocational School that has a very good environment but there are no instructors and students. 

Mr Speaker, as we talk about this institution, I think the Ministry of Education and Sports has got a lot of work to do in terms of changing the mind-set of the students. This is because people look at vocational education as an education for those that are stupid and not able to do anything. Everybody is now looking at the university and you know the universities we have.  There is need to change the mind-set of our children to understand that when they go to vocational institutions, they become even more important than people who have got degrees. This is because they already have the jobs as a result of their training.

The other thing I would like to bring out is a caution; the buildings that they are going to put in place should be disability sensitive. If we are talking of vocational training, you should know that my disability facility is on the right and the machine should be measured in that room to fit accessibility of the persons with disability. This is to enable the persons with disability to also benefit from such programmes that the Government initiates.

I, therefore, would like to call upon the accessibility standards that were passed by this Parliament to be considered. I would also like to appreciate that the issue of education in vocational schools – I support it 100 percent, because we really lack the people who have the skill. Let the right curriculum be delivered. Thank you.

3.36
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I must confess that as a teacher and parent, I have very high respect and support for technical vocational education in Uganda. I was mostly touched by the justification given by the minister when she was making the statement on why this particular borrowing is necessary - the initial borrowing was eventually not enough to put in place the facilities required, including dormitories for the girls and the multi-purpose halls.

I have a problem with our structural valuers - when I say “our”, I mean Government structural or quantity valuers. What happened in the first place? The budget was done and in just a space of two years, it was realised that it was not enough. Bank of Uganda has always projected the economy five years ahead. How can a quantity valuer come up with the budget of a very important project like this one and in a space less than five years claim the money is not enough? I think this is very unserious and I have actually not heard ample justification from the report presented by the chairperson of the committee.

As a Member sitting on the Committee on Education, I have visited some of these institutions. A number of sites we visited are as we have heard financed under a common fund but they have different designs and different structural plans. Those of you who know schools like Lubiri SSS, Gombe SSS, and Kyambogo College have a uniform plan. It could have been very easy for the people who implemented that to know how much money would go to each of them.

However, now when you go to each of these institutions, you find that the structure under one funding have different designs. One has a multi-purpose hall and the other does not have; one is storied and the other is not. These hospitals like Gombe, Kiryandongo, among others, they were easy to construct  because they had  one plan and a common design and that meant  uniformity, even in terms of money. Why isn’t that happening today?

Lastly, this goes to the Minister of Education and Sports. Somebody has actually hinted on it that we lack career guidance. Just two weeks back, I was looking at parents shedding tears because their children were not placed in secondary schools. Some of us know that vocational training/education is better. You do not see anybody crying because his or her son or daughter has not been placed in these vocational institutions. However, you will see people shading tears – mature people at 60 or 70 years of age shedding tears that their children have not got a particular school of their preference. A secondary school has almost nothing compared to what happens in the   vocational institutions. So, I take this opportunity to urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to emphasise career guidance in secondary schools. Thank you, very much.  

3.41
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. I have been emphasising that I will be very happy when we are borrowing for the sake of education, health and agriculture.  The ministry should look into the areas that can drive the economy. I would like to address that to the Prime Minister as well.

The other problem in the country is the cost of the technical education. Most of these people, who drop out of school, leave schooling because of the cost of education in this country. However, those who are out of school and are supposed to go for technical education find the cost still very high.

Fortunately, today I sent a child to Nile Vocational School in Jinja and I paid Shs 1,050,000. That is the first payment for the child going for that education. That means if we are going to build this technical school and the cost is very high, we would have not solved the problem in the country still.

Secondly, when you look at the dropout rate from schools - I happened to get the figures from the planning department of Parliament; they show that there are many people dropping out at the primary level. It would, therefore, be important to ensure that we build these technical institutions or vocational schools targeting areas where there are many school dropouts from the primary and secondary levels.

Finally, I happened to be one of the people who were promoting skills training and vocational education before I joined this Parliament. I realised that sometimes you do not need to build those expensive schools. We were placing those people who had never gone to school in places where they were already practicing. Within six months or one year, the person would be more skilled than a person who has spent two years in a vocational school. I think we need some research to be done in this area as it is very important. That could be one of the areas that Government could venture into and to improve the economy. Otherwise, you have my support because I believe that through technical education, we can improve development in this country. Thank you, very much.

3.44
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion because of the importance we attach to vocational education. The NRM, which is the party of the Government in power – during the campaigns, we promised that every constituency will have a vocational school.

We have over 200 constituencies. Here is a loan; they are going to do construction in nine centres and in nine districts only. I have looked at the Budget Frame Work Paper; it contains nothing to this effect, yet we are also finishing the first year of this term. Can the Prime Minister tell us and  assure the country that by the time we come to 2021, when we go back to the field, every constituency will have a vocational school?

Secondly, we want these vocational schools to help children who have completed primary seven and senior four. When you look at the PLE and UCE results, there are very many children who did not get even a single credit. When you have very many people graded at primary school level, who will go to these vocation schools?

Lastly, our children are dropping out of school as my colleague said because of the cost. Government introduced free Universal Secondary Education (USE) but what is on the ground is that even those who have passed Primary Leaving Examination (PLE) cannot go to the so-called USE because these schools charge fees. Therefore, can the 	Prime Minister assist us on this? Thank you.

3.46
MR EMMANUEL ONGIETHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two things but before I say them, I am wondering whether I should support this or not.

First, I ask myself and Members should also do, how many vocational schools and institutions did we have before we started the Ninth Parliament and how are they functioning? We have gone into these new ones and we are constructing more. This loan is still about construction. We did construct some things and now we are going to construct more. However, we do not hear who the teachers are, their recruitment, equipment; vocational schools are mainly about equipment.

We do not hear about equipment but only construction. Couldn’t we have made sure that the old vocational schools and institutions are functioning well? As my colleague stated, our children can move from one district to another and still study well as long as those centres are well equipped and they are teaching them very well –(Interjection)– I have little time, I really want to exhaust it. I am sorry.

Therefore, my other point relating to the issue of construction is that what I am beginning to see is that there are some people who are comfortable with issues of construction not because they believe in the construction but because they have a share from it. Therefore, let us construct, whether they are going to be useful or not, it is not our problem. For instance, we have known of health facilities and a number of other construction activities; the ones we are referring to as “white elephants” that have been constructed, but they are not performing. 

When are we going to start thinking seriously and making sure that when we go into this, we make sure that it is well functioning? How do we make sure that those facilities that we already have are working well before we think about adding others?

3.49
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most of the points that I had have been mentioned. However, I would like to emphasize the issue of putting up dormitories for the girls, which was mentioned by the minister in the justification.

If we only looked at the dormitories for the girls, these technical institutes are going to remain “white elephants” in the villages. I would like to suggest, much as I support the loan, is that they should put up some provisions for the boys as well.

In my area, for example, I put up a vocational institute but Government gave us money for non-formal education. The boys and girls were asked to go without looking at the blackboard and simply get the skills. Those who were persuaded to come were from a distance but they had nowhere to stay.

They started renting rooms around which I feel put them at a disadvantage. Therefore, I think they should think about dormitories for the boys as well.

The mind-set of our people is not good. The Ministry of Education and Sports should try as much as possible to change mind-sets, through the education officers, who only sit in their offices. They sit there waiting for head teachers to bring them something, or if they have to go out, they go to secondary schools where they expect handouts. They do not go to the technical institute. 

Why don’t they go out and sensitize our people or even on radios and tell our people the importance of skills because from the skills, you get employment somewhere or you create your own job.

Therefore, I would urge the Ministry of Education and Sports to go out intentionally to urge their education officers to do something in the rural areas and not just sitting in the offices and think about putting up dormitories instead of these multipurpose halls. These might not have students and yet we are putting in too much money. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have to end this because there are other loans coming up. I need to hear the opinion of the Leader of the Opposition or whoever is in her place. Hon. Ssemujju has informed me that he is standing in for the Leader of the Opposition - then we see if we can still have contributions on this.

3.52
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with submissions of many colleagues in support of this motion. Hon. Asamo made a very good point on who goes into these vocational institutions because those who are selling vocational education are selling it as if it is for those who have failed to go to secondary schools.

Therefore, many of those who go there look at themselves as failures. Vocational education should not be a substitute but an option. Instead of stigmatising those who go to vocational schools, Government needs to do a lot of work to popularize and not make it look like a substitute but an option.

Mr Speaker, the money we are borrowing, $14.3 million. I want Government to start treating this Parliament in a serious way. How do we begin processing a loan of 14 million then 7 million and then 8 million? In other countries, they consolidate borrowing for a full year. Last time we were in Nigeria with a committee of Parliament, the President presented a request to borrow $10 billion for infrastructure development for the next five years.

The people who will be reading the Hansard in future will wonder how we sat here, representatives of Ugandans, to process $14 million. They will then look at the items that we are allocating money, I will use one like State House where you have Shs 90 billion for donation and you are in Parliament borrowing $14million to construct dormitories, supply furniture and buy textbooks.

I understand the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is supposed to do planning as well. You are working in a very unstable way; it is as if you first hear that a loan has been announced then you come dangling a request. You have turned our Committee on National Economy, which is supposed to be a serious one, into a loan-processing bureau. Hon. Bahati has now become a mere prefect for loans that is why you saw that we were in trouble because he had not arrived. I would like Government to plan; you can consolidate all the loan requests, for example, in the education sector.

The other day, we were here for centres of excellence - you cannot be bringing a loan of US$14 million for this and that, consolidate them. I thought “Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo” was supposed to be something serious, and not merely a slogan. 

Mr Speaker, I urge Government that next time, consolidate your needs for a year the same way we appropriate the budget; but you cannot be coming to every single sitting of Parliament to process a small loan as if we are a local council Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, the items for which we borrow - I had been made to understand that we were borrowing for bigger infrastructure projects like roads, highways and hydro power projects. 

Honourable Prime Minister, you mean we have started borrowing for text books? Because that is the justification; that we cannot supply textbooks to vocational institutions now the committee must process a request to come and say, “MPs kindly pass this so that we can supply textbooks”. 

It is like a husband going to a bank to borrow money for buying saucepans. Imagine a whole Ssemujju in the bank borrowing money to buy saucepans at home. We should make this Government look serious. You borrow for serious stuff-maybe you just borrow because you have had someone dangling a loan and then you go there-

Just imagine the Vice President was here, the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister who was also a minister of Finance under the Amin Government. (Laughter)All these serious people are here to process a loan of US$14.4 million. 

Mr Speaker, as I said at the beginning, I would like to associate with submissions that support vocational education. If you look at the results from our exams - which is another area that you need to address; nearly 100 pupils failed PLE, they got zero.

There are districts like Luuka, Buyende, Mayuge that do not even know how a first grade looks like. The solution cannot be throwing a vocational training centre there. 

You also need to deal with secondary schools because at secondary level nearly 75 per cent of those who sat O’ level failed; because you had 40,000 who got Division 9, you had 140,000 in Division III - they cannot be easily admitted into secondary schools.

In a nutshell, I would like to ask Government-

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, so much, Leader of the Opposition. I would like to thank you for being so observant there. Mr Speaker, it is so embarrassing to know that Government is also going to borrow money to pay salaries under this component. 
If you check in the figures there, you will realise that contingency is taking a half of what is supposed to be purchased to help our children. And they have also budgeted for unallocated. 

It is not allocated, but we are borrowing to the tune of about US$0.77 million and yet Government is also adding that one which is taking US$1.1 million, what is it for? We should be considerate; yesterday, I announced scholarships and bursaries for some students in my district - they are desperate. If we can budget this money-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating? 

MS JOY ATIM: And it is wasted because it is not allocated to them - some people take it all and yet our people are suffering, I think it is not acceptable. Thank you so much, Leader of the Opposition. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker,  she illustrated the point further, that you even have US$ 1.1 million unallocated but you are asking Parliament that even this one for which you do not know what it will do should just be approved; this is what it is in the request.

As I said, I associate myself with all the submissions in support of vocational training but this is a loan that we can defer so that it can be processed better. 

I guess even the committee had the same problems because when they came here to present it they were not around. Then the Minister of Education and Sports had to volunteer-you saw the trouble that she went through.

Maybe even when they went to appear before the committee, they were as scattered as we saw it today. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. 

4.01
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. This has been a good debate. This little money we are asking for is to make final touches on the projects. We should not look at it in terms of an isolated loan. 
Secondly, some good points came up; hon. Kasibante raised a good point when he talked of standardised structures. Since we are going to have many vocational centres, it is right that Government and the country should have optimal structures that will meet the needs of the country at the minimum cost possible. 

The Leader of the Opposition, definitely this is “Kisanja Hakuna Mchezo” and that is why we are pushing this loan quickly even if it is small to ensure that the uncompleted work is completed as quickly as possible. 

That is one way of removing stigmatisation against vocational and technical work. Let us have appropriate equipment, good staff and facilities so that people know that the country means business when it talks of giving skills and training youngsters so that they can come and play their rightful role in the transformation of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I am happy that colleagues have given general support to this very important motion and on the contrary, I will just talk about the Shs 90 billion donations that you have talked about. The question of presidential donations is often not understood well and it is sometimes misinterpreted. 

Most of the donations go to specific areas of urgent need that may sometimes not have been budgeted for, but which are crucial for the well-being of the country and development. I call on colleagues to overwhelmingly support the motion. Thank you, Sir. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the request for Government to borrow-

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, there are some issues of serious concern that were raised by the honourable members here regarding the component and others that ensued during the debate which needed clarification by the chairperson of the committee and the minister.

We would request that you guide such that they are responded to before we can put the question. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there gaps in the issues that have been raised? Would you like to respond to them quickly? Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, would you like to talk from the dispatch box in order that you speak authoritatively?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are three issues which were raised and I would wish to respond to them. The first one was the issue regarding unallocated funds in the breakdown of this project. The unallocated funds are the same as contingency funds. It is just for contingency purposes and is a general provision in any project. It is meant for things that are not seen at the time of planning, but you make a provision just in case they come. It is a standard procedure in project planning.

The second issue is that of interest rate which was raised by one of our colleague here that we are now reaching almost more than Shs 4 trillion in interest expense. Yes, it is true that our interest payment is high. However, I would like to assure Members of Parliament here that our debt portfolio compared to Growth Domestic Product (GDP) is at 38.6 per cent. We set ourselves a threshold of 50 per cent debt to GDP. The 38.6 per cent includes all the loans in the pipeline, for example, the one for the Standard Gauge Railway and all these loans we are approving. This is actually far below all the governments in the region. We are, therefore, within the debt sustainable indicators that we set ourselves. We are very cautious and we are not going to put this country in debt stress.

The last question which was –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the report we have from the Committee on National Economy is that our debt now stands at $8.5 billion, which is actually 36 per cent of our GDP. The money we are borrowing for the Standard Gauge Railway is not included in the 36 per cent, yet it is nearly $5 billion. Is hon. Bahati in order to mislead this Parliament that all the borrowings, including what they have not brought before Parliament, has now become part of the loan report that is before Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to clarify that? 

MR BAHATI: Our status of the debt to GDP, including the Standard Gauge Railway borrowing which is already in the pipeline, is 38.6 per cent. We captured it in the report which we brought to this House.

The last question was on the issue of consolidating all these borrowings into one project and borrowing huge sums. That would be a preferred approach, but in the real market it is not possible. This is because you have lenders who have a certain ceiling on how much you borrow at a certain time. Therefore, it is not possible. Even at individual level, you may not be able to borrow Shs 1 billion from one bank, but you can borrow from different banks to meet the same target. Therefore, it is the market that sometimes dictates how much you can borrow from a specific bank. That is why we are borrowing from different sources_

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister,  the main point is, can this House be made to know what we are likely to borrow in a year so that we are guided? The point was not in the details of the borrowing, but rather the projections of what we are going to borrow in the next financial year.

MR BAHATI: I may need to remind the Leader of the Opposition that every financial year when we come here, in the budgets that we pass, we pass the total amount of the money that is going to be borrowed. We should remember that we pass a budget that has both the source of financing and what we are spending on. 

In the source of financing, we have how much money we are getting from Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and how much money we are going to borrow externally to finance our budget. Therefore, during the financial year, we break it down one by one and bring it to the House. I am just reminding the Leader of the Opposition. However, I know that the Shadow Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development knows this very well and has a responsibility to inform the Leader of the Opposition. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Further clarification? Honourable minister, are you taking clarification?  He says he has finished.

MS AKELLO: No, there are some issue that we raised, but he didn’t respond to them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you already raised it before?

MS AKELLO: No. These ones were before. Mr Speaker, the matter raised by hon. Musasizi is very important. It is about the pledge by Government to construct vocational schools in all constituencies, contrary to what is now being proposed. What we are passing now is just for nine districts. Isn’t that a contradiction?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are not discussing the budget now. We don’t know what the budget has said about that policy. This is a specific request for a project that was already on-going. Can we separate the two? If we start discussing the whole budget at this stage, we will miss the point of this particular request. 

Honourable members, can we wind up this? We have other matters coming up. Can I put the question to this request? I now put the question for the approval of the request by Government to borrow up to $14.3 million for the OPEC Fund for International Development to support vocational development phase II.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you are already aware, we skipped four items before we came to Item No.7. To go backwards, I will have to exercise my discretion to choose which one of the four. This will be difficult for me to do in terms of showing fairness. Therefore, the easier way for me is to go in front so that I can deal with the rest of the things that have remained tomorrow in that sequence. Which one do I choose?   It doesn’t matter. We have passed. How do you choose food or any other?

If the consensus is that we deal with the issue of food scarcity then we do that. That means the other items – motion for a private Member’s Bill, the insurance Bill and the laying of papers will be stayed for tomorrow. Is that okay? Can we receive that report and hopefully we will be prepared to proceed properly this time.

JOINT MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON AN ACTION PLAN TO MITIGATE THE FOOD SECURITY AND DISASTER SITUATION IN THE COUNTRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson of the committee, for the report we have just concluded. We will deal with these other ones tomorrow. Honourable members, on a sad note, I have a very important announcement to make. It is from the UPC Whip in Parliament, hon. Santa Alum Ogwang, and addressed to the Deputy Speaker. It reads: “Death of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) Secretary General. This is to bring to your attention the death of the UPC Secretary-General, Mr Segganyi Edward. Burial takes place Saturday 25 February 2017, in Mityana”. Honourable members, please take note. This is the first time it is coming to our attention and I will request us to rise and observe a moment of silence.   

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now go back to item No. 3?  Honourable minister.

4.16 
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement to Parliament on the joint statement on the action plan to mitigate the food security and disaster situation in the country.

Mr Speaker, allow me to request hon. Ecweru to lead this first part and I will handle the last but the biggest part of the statement.

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, thank you for your patience.

Mr Speaker, by the time Members requested that we stop to cause this report to be uploaded on the iPad and copies distributed –(Interjections)- I was indicating to this House that there was an interagency, technical field assessment and data analysis by a joint team of experts from the Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Water and Environment, Uganda National Metrological Authority, Uganda Bureau of Statistics, Food Agricultural Organisation(FAO), World Food Programme (WFP), UNICEF and production officers from 85 District Local Governments, representing all the sub regions of the country and this took place from the 8 to the 24 January 2017.

Mr Speaker, it was noted with a lot of concern that the most food insecure populations in the sub regions particularly are in Teso, Karamoja, Bukedi – the cattle corridor running from Isingiro across Nakasongola, parts of Busoga, Lango, Acholi, West Nile and central. I have started receiving relief food from the Office of the Prime Minister for these areas. 

Mr Speaker, the current relief stock stands at 30,000 bags of 100 kilogrammes of maize flour (3,000 metric tons), 7,000 bags of 100 kilogrammes of beans (700 metric tons) and 119,660 bags of 50 kilogrammes of rice (5,983 metric tons of rice) worth Shs 22.2 billion - that is just rice alone. I am happy to report to you that this is a donation by the Government of China.

In addition to the Government’s own relief efforts, development partners including the World Bank, DFID, USAID, the People’s Republic of China, like I have mentioned, the Government of Japan, World food Programme (WFP) and Food Agricultural Organisation have been approached by Government to give additional support.  

I am happy to report to you, Mr Speaker, that the Japanese Government has pledged to support, particularly the Karamoja sub region through the WFP, feeding in school. The World Bank is processing Shs 9.9 billion through NUSAF 3, under the cash-for-work, commonly referred to as “Disaster Risk Financing” (DRF). I am also happy to note that the training of the district community leaders assigned to implement the DRF started on Wednesday, 13 February 2016, in Moroto.

Mr Speaker, it is sad to note that the food crisis situation has additionally impacted severely on the attendance of schools especially in rural government primary schools. Children now find it hard to go to school on empty stomach because they do not know whether on return they may even have supper. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has allocated some food to each district education committee in all the 116 districts for vulnerable Government aided primary and secondary schools across the country, like I have indicated. I would like to inform you that the Office of the Prime Minister is going to work with the district education committees to determine the beneficiary schools because we have sensed that much as the famine was worst in some areas, education cuts across all the 116 districts.

Mr Speaker, we were also informed particularly of our citizens who are on ARV - the Office of the Prime Minister, will this month also provide 5,000 bags of 50 kilogrammes of rice to The Aids Support Organisation (TASO), to use its network to reach the people who are on ARVS who were finding a problem to swallow the medicine on an empty stomach.

Mr Speaker, arising from the reports that we got from the different Members of Parliament and the technical assessment, the prolonged drought has also caused chronic child malnutrition especially in Karamoja. The number of malnourished children admitted in Tokora Hospital in Nakapiripirit District, Matany Hospital in Matany District and Moroto Regional Referral Hospital, which I personally visited and others have reached alarming levels. The overall rate for severe acute malnutrition is now at 3.1 per cent, well above the two per cent emergency threshold as spelt out by UNICEF. The Office of the Prime Minister, has allocated 3,000 bags of 50 kilogrammes of rice to be distributed through these hospitals that are particularly reporting high malnutrition to be given to mothers who are giving care to these children in the respective hospitals that we have already assessed.

Mr Speaker, in the Financial Year 2016/2017, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, allocated and released Shs 3 billion for purchase of relief food for the whole country over the period of 12 months. However, on realising that it was grossly inadequate, additional Shs 3.06 billion was released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in October 2016, for the same purpose. 

Again, towards the end of the month of January 2017, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the directive of this august House, released Shs 10 billion for the support of the districts in distress.

Mr Speaker, in order to appropriately address the current relief food needs up to when the needy population harvests - with the hope that the rains come early March - the Office of the Prime Minister would require relief food worth Shs 141.750 billion. The formula used to arrive at the above figure is from WFP and it is a multiplication of the needy population, which we are now looking at as the critical one which is 3.500,000 times the minimum one-day-dietary intake of a quarter kilogramme, times the period up to harvest (90 days), times the average cost of one kilogramme of food.

Mr Speaker, given that the development partners, particularly the Government of China, Japan, World Food Programme and World Bank under the NUSAF III, are coming to support the Government’s relief efforts, Office of the Prime Minister will not need all the Shs 141.7 billion. The Office of the Prime Minister requires only an additional Shs 42.65 billion to cater for the population of 1.3 million in critical need as the contribution from development partners meets the needs of a population of about 2.2 million people.

Before I sit down, Mr Speaker, I would like to add that we have realised some problems that we are prepared to own. When this emergency relief is distributed and sent to the districts, our technical people attempt to copy these distribution programmes and send them to the pigeon holes of Members. We have directed, henceforth, that an officer must contact the Members of Parliament, in addition to contacting the RDC, Chairperson LC V and the CAO. 

The Members of Parliament must know what has gone to their stations. Even if they do not get directly involved in overseeing how it is distributed, it is critical that they are in the know of what is happening. This directive, Mr Speaker, takes immediate effect. There is a desk officer who has captured all the contacts of the Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, arising from the memorandum that the head teachers gave us, they indicated that the release was only going to take care of a few weeks. In other words, they are likely to close Government schools because of the spiralling food prices. We are attempting to close this gap. We are also consulting our partners. 

Mr Speaker, that is the position as far as emergency relief intervention is concerned. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, the Office of the Prime Minister and Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Let us have the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

4.28
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to inform Parliament that we have three phases of food security: 

Phase 1 is the National Integrated Food Security. The Phase Classification Report identified that the proportion of the food secure population, which is phase 1, declined from 83 per cent in July 2016 to 69 per cent by 27 January 2017. The figures have ably been presented by hon. Ecweru.

Table 2 shows the population and the food insecurity analysis between January 2017 and what is expected in May 2017. However, the population, under phase 3, which is in crisis, is 1,586,184 people.

The Interventions done to Mitigate the Situation
Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Water and Environment have done the following: 

Under construction and de-silting of valley tanks and dams, those two ministries have responded to the drought-hit areas by assisting in the transportation and provision of water through the following:

The Ministry of Water and Environment provided three water bowsers to the districts of Lyantonde, Sembabule, Mbarara and Kiruhura for both human and cattle consumption. Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries provided three water bowsers to the districts of Isingiro, Kiruhura, Kiboga, Luweero, Nakaseke, Gomba, Mukono and Wakiso. This equipment is mobile and deployment in the new districts is in accordance with the demand and level of stress.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has also constructed and de-silted dams and valley tanks in the districts of Rakai, Kamuli, Isingiro, Kiruhura, Gomba, Kayunga, Nakaseke, Luweero, Kyegegwa, Mubende and Nakasongola to increase and improve the availability and accessibility of water for livestock, agriculture and irrigation. This water is also used by human beings where there is no better alternative for clean water.

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, as a sector, using the heavy earth moving equipment, have also opened farmland equal to 2,100 acres in the districts of Wakiso, Adjumani, Gomba, Kayunga, Mubende, Isingiro, Mbarara, Nakaseke, Luweero and Kiruhura. In addition, we have established farm roads equal to 80 kilometres in the districts of Kumi, Jinja, Nakasongola, Luwero, Gomba and Wakiso.

Under the Ministry of Water and Environment, we have also designed and constructed water facilities in the districts of Lyantonde, Kiruhura, Karamoja sub-region, Luweero, Kiboga, Bukedea, Sironko, Kween, Adjumani, Moyo, Gulu, Nakaseke, Soroti, Kiruhura and Mpigi.

Mr Speaker, we have also established solar powered on-farm water pumps for irrigation in the districts of Kabale, Nakasongola, Kalungu, Kaberamaido and Luweero.

In order to ensure that we save the national herd of cattle and other ruminants, we have distributed pasture seeds in the districts of Lyantonde, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Kiruhura, Ibanda, Sheema, Ntungamo, Isingiro, Rukungiri, Kanungu, Kabale, Mukono, Wakiso, Masaka, Kaberamaido, Soroti, Moyo with Mitooma and Sembabule on board this coming season.

To ensure that we save our national herd, we have also distributed standby FMD vaccines in the districts of Rakai, Isingiro and Ntungamo to avoid any outbreaks in the border areas. Indeed, the outbreaks have been there. We have also vaccinated in some areas within these districts. 

In addition, we have vaccinated against Foot and Mouth Disease with 280,000 dosages, Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) with 350,000, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) with one million dosages and Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP) with 5,000 dosages in all the seven districts of Karamoja.

We have vaccinated against Trypanosomiasis in the districts of Kaabong and Kotido. 

Mr Speaker, in support to the agricultural mechanisation for farm operations, including pasture production, we are going to distribute 208 tractors in all the districts of the country. We are ready to distribute, between now and June, the following materials to ensure food security and good nutrition for our people.

Mr Speaker, the first box shows the totals. We are ready to distribute 3.565 million kilogrammes of maize worth Shs 17.825 billion. For beans, because of the drought and bad seasons that we have gone through, the bean seeds are scarce and we can only provide 600,000 kilogrammes worth Shs 2.4 billion. Regarding cassava, we are going to distribute 80,000 bags. Mr Speaker, I am sorry these are bags and not kilogrammes of cassava stems worth Shs 4 billion – (Interjection) - Yes, cassava cuttings. 

For bananas, these are suckers; 896,500 suckers worth Shs 2,330,900,000, Sorghum 28,000 kilogrammes worth Shs 98 million and cowpeas 66,000 kilogrammes worth Shs 264 million. The total amount of money that is going to be used in this emergency period is Shs 26,917,900,000.

Mr Speaker, the breakdown is as below to all the districts. As usual, we have always worked with the Members of Parliament. You have always participated in the food security campaign and the allocations, through the Members of Parliament, will start early next week. That will be under the Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) programme. In the next one or two weeks, all the allocations for all districts will be undertaken.

Mr Speaker, when I go to page 20, between now and June, we shall be opening up to 580 acres of land for pasture multiplication in the nine districts of Lyantonde, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Kiruhura, Ibanda, Sheema, Ntungamo, Isingiro and Sembabule. We shall continue with seed multiplication for pastures in the Financial Year 2017/2018 and beyond to serve the entire country. I have already mentioned the number of tractors that we have to allocate for this and other purposes in the short and medium term.

Provision of fast maturing disease and drought resistant seed and planting materials, which include maize, beans, cassava, banana planting materials and cowpeas, during the first season is March, which is coming in, has been illustrated in those tables. Continuous food and nutrition surveillance and awareness campaigns on food security will also continue to be done by the ministry.

Mr Speaker, we have the matrix that was for the immediate and the short term. It shows how we are going to continue with this programme as an elaborate plan for Government so that we mitigate these problems and we do not go back to the same situations that we have faced in the recent past.

Therefore, this one is under the Strategic Action Plan Matrix for sustainable food security in Uganda. I have also provided that on this table. 

I have also combined all the actions under the Strategic Action Plan Matrix to make it easy for Members to follow. For example, food relief will only be between now and June but provision of water will continue up to next year. Construction and de-silting of valley dams will continue throughout. Provision of seed and planting materials will follow the seasons and that is why we have spaces there and so forth.  

Mr Speaker, that is the submission showing the immediate, short term and long term plan for sustainable food security in Uganda. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a series of engagements on this particular topic. There have been gaps and each time there were gaps, the minister was asked to come back. We have had preliminary discussions on the effect of the drought, generally in the country; we have had discussions about Karamonja and other regions that have been grossly affected by this.

Therefore, this joint statement now comes to bring us together on the focus on the short term, medium term and long term. That is where we are today. Therefore, the kind of debate we are going to have is not to go back to the previous debates that we have had. We are going to ask where there are gaps in this particular statement. We are going to ask for clarifications so that we are guided better and if there are proposals we need to make, we can do so. That is how we are going to proceed with this debate and each contribution will be two minutes.

Therefore, now going by the number of those who would like to speak, this debate will take no more than 45 minutes. If you are caught up by the 45 minutes, the Speaker will have done his best to exercise fairness.

However, if you have already spoken earlier in the day, you might not catch the Speaker’s eye immediately. (Laughter)

4.43
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Mr Speaker, I rise to seek two pieces of clarification from the statement from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. On page 2, under sub-regions that have started receiving relief food, Lango sub-region that has a total of eight districts has been highlighted. May I seek clarification, out of the eight, which one has received any relief food from Government?

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on annexure one, we are seeing allocations to almost all the affected districts, sub-region by sub-region. However, when it comes to Lango sub-region, on page 7, I only see allocation to the eight districts on rice. There is no allocation for beans or maize flour. May I also seek clarification from the ministry? 

I represent a community that has been invaded by the Karimojong herdsmen. We need to have a contingency plan, something over and above, because we are taking care of them. They have already eaten into our share for Hepatitis B. Over 400 herdsmen have been vaccinated in Alebtong. When it comes to food ratio, Alebtong and Otuke districts must get over and above but we get nothing here. Aren’t we also people? I thought we are. I rest my case.

4.45
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministers for their statements and in particular, disaster management in the Office of the Prime Minister for trying its best to address one of the resolutions that Members agreed upon.

My clarification is to do with districts in Teso and Karamoja that are in dire need of affirmative action. When we generalise, for example, the cattle corridors where people are dying, it means that we are at the same pace yet in the Committee on Presidential Affairs, we found out that there are some districts that are doing fairly well. I would like to ask for clarification on what plans there are for such districts.  

Secondly, in regard to the statement made by the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, we said that we need a sustainable plan, which keeps informing farmers on the main seasons in the country so that we do not live in anticipation. However, I have not seen this well highlighted in his presentation to the House. I thank you.

4.47
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the two ministers for their presentations. However, I must record my disappointment with these reports.

Mr Speaker, when you look at page 7, Jinja is nowhere to be seen when it comes to the Busoga region. We had hailstorms and I reported the matter to the ministers in charge of disaster preparedness. However, when issues concerning Jinja come to the Floor, they are not addressed.

When one looks at the detailed report given by the agriculture minister, Jinja only gets maize. When it comes to beans, banana plantations and other items, Jinja is left out.

Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the ministers what criteria they use and also find out if Jinja is still part of this country. Thank you. 

4.48
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to what the minister has stated and in particular, the first page of the submission.

When we look at the food security situation, there is the five-year strategic food insecurity eradication. I think it is very important to be positively oriented. Instead of having the five-year strategic food insecurity eradication, I think you should revise this to reflect what would read, “Five-year strategic food sovereignty plan”. That gives a positive aspect in terms of looking forward. We do not have to be very negative at all times.

4.49
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Mr Speaker, I have two clarifications that I would like to seek from the minister. However, I would like to begin by thanking the minister and the Office of the Prime Minister for supporting my district and our people with relief items.

I would like to address myself to page 4 of his statement. The minister specifically talked about malnutrition in the districts of Nakapiripirit, Napak and Moroto. My question is, you are aware that you and I border our uncles. Have you made an assessment in the hospitals of Katakwi and Amuria, where you come from, to ascertain the level of malnutrition in those areas? There is no way that our communities can avoid malnutrition when they lack food.

My second observation is for us, honourable members. If you look at the quantitative analysis that the minister was trying to put here in terms of asking for more money, it is important that we support the Office of the Prime Minister by requesting Government to prepare a supplementary request to help our people. 

The rains are coming but what will the people eat in the next three months? As we talk, we are doing badly and yet we are going to begin planting. What shall we eat in the next three months as the rains fall? This is for us, as the august House.

My last point goes to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. All the interventions you talk about are for Karamoja and there is nothing for my district and yet it directly borders Karamoja. Regarding dams, could you tell me why you are constantly de-silting dams in Karamoja and none in my district?

You also talked about trying to find big cars to bring water for our animals and people in those other districts. I could take you to one of the dams in my area, which is dry. Our animals are also dying in the same way that they are dying in those other districts because there is no water – (Member timed out.)

4.52
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I wish to thank the ministry for trying to give some Ugandans relief because we know that many Ugandans are desperate because they did not harvest enough yields from their efforts.

The support from the ministry is timely. Under the national relief food distribution, the ministry highlighted all the districts in West Nile as desperate but when it came to the actual distribution of the relief food, two districts of Yumbe and Maracha were left out. 

In the first report to Parliament, Mr Speaker, the districts of Yumbe and Maracha were reported to be more desperate than the rest. I do not know what criterion was used in the distribution. Yumbe is hosting 230 refugees but it was left out. Since we are sharing our food with the refugees, I thought the ministry would understand and consider Yumbe as a priority. What criterion was used to give out the food? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think my list will help me better. Let us have the Member from Dodoth East County.

4.54
MR SAMSON LOKERIS (NRM, Dodoth East County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform this House that I have seen allocation of figures of food to Karamoja and they are quite low. I think we sounded the alarm early last year that there was going to be hunger in Karamoja. We brought it to the attention of this House but the ministry never took action.

What we have seen here, it seems Government is broke and is trying to hide. If you know that the entire country is affected by drought and there is hunger, why don’t you declare a state of emergency? South Sudan, which is fighting, has declared a state of emergency. In Kenya, President Uhuru Kenyatta called for a Cabinet meeting and also declared a state of emergency. What is the problem with us? 

There is a project under resilience in Karamoja for which this Parliament passed a loan. The loan was specific that when there is disaster or hunger, five per cent of the $ 40 million must be used to feed the people who are supposed to benefit from that project.

We, in Karamoja, believe that there is money but I think the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Government do not want to feed our people. You have not seen what is happening now. When you see teams going for barazas, who will come to listen to these barazas when people are dying? 

We need this Parliament to push Government to declare a state of emergency so that we save our country rather than spending money on other programmes and paying allowances for the technical people and ministers. Honourable members, my plea is that we should push a motion to declare a state of emergency. Thank you very much. 

4.56
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I looked at the statement, Rubanda District is missing yet when UNICEF came to greater Kabale during their research, Rubanda District had the biggest number of children affected by malnutrition, which was leading to the poor performance of children in our district. Therefore, it is absurd that we are missing in the report. I am not happy about it and I ask the minister to consider us too. 

4.57
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues to thank the ministers for the statement. 

I have gone through the matrix and seen the distribution in our region. First of all, there is no maize or beans; instead, they have given us rice. Mbale District has a population of one million people and we have been given 300 50-kilogramme bags of rice. How are they going to share that? 

Looking at schools, in my place we have 55 Government-aided primary schools and you are giving us 300 50-kilogramme bags of rice. That means each school will get around 273 kilogrammes. This is a big problem. I wonder what we will do as Members of Parliament because if you deny some schools, people will protest. 

Apart from maize for planting, there are no beans. Do you think the Bagisu do not eat beans or was it an omission, which needs to be clarified?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am gauging the way we are proceeding; we are saying that some areas do not have beans, some districts are excluded and that the quantities are not sufficient. It does not matter if we speak until tomorrow or next week unless we go to the critical question, “Is the money enough? Can we get more money?” 

I think the issue is about money and if there is a possibility of increasing the money, let the Prime Minister speak on this. If there is no possibility of increasing the money, we could speak here forever. 

4.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, the concern of colleagues is very well taken by Government. It is true that the country is food stressed, as we have heard from our colleagues. 

On the question of money specifically, there is no money. However, Government is set and we are ready to make the necessary budgetary adjustments and come to the House in order to ensure that Ugandans are prevented from dying because of hunger and starvation. This is the position of Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is about money. The shortages that we are seeing in terms of how we intervene to try and help– Honourable members, the Speaker is speaking at this moment and usually, Members sit when the Speaker is speaking. The issue is money. If there was infinite money, we would not be having this discussion because the Minister for Disaster Preparedness would be in the field with whatever possible to give to the people. 

There is a statement here and you have not been clear on it. Members are saying that some neighbouring countries have made calls to be assisted because the situation is getting out of control. Have you had such a discussion, as Government, to see how we can handle this situation, considering what is going on in the whole region? Have you considered taking some measures? 

Support from the international community is coming in, according to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees; DFID, USAID and all those people are coming in. What are we going to do, Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Give guidance to the House so that we can be confident that people are going to be looked after. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that the Government of Uganda has been collaborating with development partners on this question. There has been a joint technical assessment of the food needs in the country and a number of countries have responded and are responding. As you have heard, China, a friendly country, has come in quite strongly and we expect that as we continue this collaboration, more support will come in. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification and I will begin with the issue of money. I still believe that this Parliament and Government can agree that Government comes with a supplementary proposal to procure foodstuffs because this is urgent. The minister has indicated here that they require only Shs 42 billion in excess to cover the food need in the country. 

Secondly, as you mentioned, Mr Speaker, some districts are not receiving any relief at all. In my district of Agago, for example, we have been reporting in this House about the influx of the Karimojong and their animals. As I speak, gardens have been destroyed and food items stolen from people’s houses. My people are starving. We border Karamoja and we do not have water or food. Food distribution has been taking place since November last year and my district has never got anything. Where is the fairness in this, Mr Speaker? It is not fair. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us seek clarification or give information in two minutes. I will have Kazo first. 

5.05
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been here and I have spoken only four times. Whenever I speak, I speak about fake acaricides that have caused tick-borne diseases that have finished the cattle population. 

The Prime Minister must recall that some people do not feed on beans and maize only. Some people feed on milk. These are Ugandans and they stay in Uganda but they are not catered for in this programme and it is very serious. When is the Government regulating the use of acaricides that have finished the cattle population?

Secondly, the Cabinet is here, why don’t you consider exempting foodstuffs from tax for a period of six months so that food can come into Uganda tax-free and we save our population? These beans and maize that you have put here are not enough to feed the population. Put some tax on export of food and exempt tax from import of food for six months. What will we lose as a country? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.06
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for this statement. In your first introduction, you properly outlined the factors responsible for the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I wish you could seek clarification only.

MR BASEKE: Yes. I would like to seek clarification because you have been selective in providing solutions to the causes of food insecurity. You focused mainly on some items and left out some, based on what you presented.

Another thing is related to what hon. Bafaki mentioned. On Saturday, I saw the Minister of Disaster Preparedness on TV lamenting that the donations we got from China have not been released because of the tax that is owed to URA. I would like to know from the minister, since he is here, if he has resolved that issue because our people need the food. 

5.07
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for his paper. According to this paper, this food that has been distributed is going to schools. Remember that the communities down there are also hungry; how are we going to control communities from crossing to the schools to grab this food? 

Secondly, supposing the rains do not come now, what plans does the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have in terms of irrigation because that was an issue we raised last time? Thank you.

5.08
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two quick clarifications to seek from the minister or the Prime Minister. Of recent, we have been hearing about plastic rice. I hope the rice that is going to be distributed is not plastic rice.

Secondly, I would like to request the Office of the Prime Minister - When you go to Government radio stations upcountry, you will find that the LCV chairpersons and RDCs are allotted free time to speak each week. Can we, at this time of stress, allow Members of Parliament time on radio stations to speak to the population?

I thank the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for coming up with a plan to buy equipment and put up dams as a long term plan. May I request you to also avail some of these machines to private persons who would also want to set up these dams in their small and medium-sized farms? That would help the neighbouring communities since not everybody can access these big dams wherever they are put.

Lastly, it is a pity that at this time when we are water-stressed, Government cannot stop charcoal burning. One finds several lorries ferrying charcoal. Government should wake up. Can’t you stop charcoal burning? Trees are still being cut and yet we are crying for rain. It hurts to see people sleeping and yet trees are still being cut and ferried to factories to be used in the steel rolling mills. 

5.10
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the ministers for their reports. I have looked at the strategic plan for five years and the matrix, which will take this country for five years. Since the Prime Minister is here, I have a different version to supplement the five-year matrix, which I have seen. 

Mr Speaker, I believe that this drought is a blessing in disguise to enable Uganda sit and plan. Under the UN Charter, Africa has been identified as the food basket for the rest of the world. The water bodies that we have in Uganda occupy 24 per cent of the entire land mass, which is about 198 square kilometres. Uganda can use its fresh water bodies to irrigate at least 50 kilometres from any given water body so that we can go into commercial farming. The commercial banks will then come in to fund the farmers through irrigation and equipment. This will help us fix this economy through agriculture.

I am also of the opinion that if a proper plan for the future is put on the drawing board, we can make agriculture very fruitful for this country and supply all our neighbours with food. Mr Speaker, I would like this to be one of the ways we can reduce the imbalance of trade –(Member timed out.) 

5.12
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the two ministers for this information. I have some clarification to seek.

The first minister who spoke gave us a statistic and in it, Lango sub-region has a population of 2,174,600 affected, which is 80 per cent. To my dismay, however, when you look at the distribution table, Lango sub-region is only getting rice and yet we have the districts of Otuke and Alebtong, which are food-stressed and are looking after the Karimojong. Where is the fairness in this country if even the districts that are hosting people from outside Lango sub-region cannot be taken care of?

Secondly, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said that there are 208 tractors to be distributed all over the country and yet we have 116 districts. This means that –(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I went to the same school with hon. Santa Alum. The information I would like to give her is to the effect that I have also been seated here wondering whether this plan is realistic. If I heard properly, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said he is going to distribute 80,000 bags of cassava stems. 

The issue is that in Amolatar District alone, we have a population of about 150,000 people, giving us about 21,428 households. If each household is to have only one acre of cassava and also aware that cassava is the main staple food crop of our area, you need not less than five bags to plant at least one acre of cassava. This would translate to 107,142 bags. However, the honourable minister is saying that he is going to distribute 80,000 bags. What will happen to the rest of the districts in Lango that also cultivate cassava? What will happen to the rest of the districts in Teso and Acholi? The issue is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you still giving information? 

MR OKELLO: That is the information I would like to give my colleague.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for that information – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report and the Office of the Prime Minister for the deliveries I received in Butaleja District, although they are not enough. 

My concern is about the plan because it is not a long-term plan but a short-term one, and it may not be sustainable. I did not hear the minister speak about the storage of food to keep us for the next three months as we wait for the rains.

You also talked about the challenge concerning schools and said that we are waiting for the education committee in each district to identify schools that are doing badly. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all schools are doing badly when it comes to food and as I speak, some pupils have not reported to school due to lack of food.

Thirdly, when it comes to hunger, it is a multi-sectoral problem. I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister what will be done about the shortage of water. This is because you may provide us with food and yet we lack water and this affects both the children and mothers who go out looking for water.

We were given some planting materials, which dried up and some were eaten up. As such, the communities did not benefit. When you talk about delivering planting materials at the end of February, how soon is this because I would propose that we have the planting materials before the rains resume, easing distribution.

Lastly, what will you do for the districts that have special issues? We have districts that have settlement problems, those involved in land wrangles and have not been cultivating – (Member timed out.)

5.18
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. I also wish to thank Government for the strategies so far put in place. However, I would like to seek clarification. 

At the moment, we are dealing with a disaster but the country continues to export food. I would like to know if you have thought about putting in place a ban or some strategies to limit the amount of food that is exported from this country. This is because much as you may distribute food, people continue to buy food. Therefore, if we have no food in the country, the prices will go up. 

We have experienced school fees hikes and part of the reason is the cost of food that students in boarding schools consume. Therefore, honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification about the above. Thank you so much.

5.19
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have a problem right now at the border of Busia, which I represent. Kenya, as a Government, has designed a very good strategy to ensure that it protects its people against hunger. I believe almost all the cereal business traders have been sent to Uganda to buy cereals at any cost. 

I would like to know from the honourable minister what measures Government of Uganda has put in place to protect the little food that we have. Moreover, as Government of Kenya does so, it does not allow its traders to export food to Uganda. Ugandans were surviving by buying Irish potatoes from Kericho but the Kenyan Government does not allow that yet as Ugandans, we have opened our borders to them, to the Government of Tanzania, Rwanda and Southern Sudan. We have left Uganda to be a supermarket for everyone who is hungry in the region. I think it is high time, as Government, that we put up measures to protect our people from the outside traders. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we have a problem of lack of enough food and water. Our neighbouring governments have removed all the water tanks and are distributing water to the animals. In Uganda, we have not implemented this. I will give an example of Kenya. All the fire brigade trucks are ferrying water to the farms and to farmers who have animals, which we are not –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just look at the Members who would like to speak about this matter, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. You need to bring closure to this issue. Be definite about what you will do about this issue.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we appreciate the information, ideas, suggestions and gaps identified by colleagues. My two colleagues have given information about what is being done but it is obvious to Government, Parliament and the country that more must be done. 

Therefore, our view is that tomorrow, Cabinet will be meeting and the ministers who have reported and spoken to this House and presented papers will report to Cabinet on the content of this discussion, issues raised and the glaring gaps in some of the areas in the country and indeed in our schools. Government, as earlier said, has no choice concerning this matter but to ensure that additional funds are mobilised so as to support the country to bridge it until we are able to feed ourselves sufficiently - (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the statement being made by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the points given by people. However, as a matter of procedure, there are some pitfalls and problems that we have encountered in this document. Some of us have not had an opportunity to speak but I needed to just give you one or two points, which would add to your discussion in the Cabinet.

If you look at page 6 of the report read by hon. Ecweru and page 3 of the report read by the senior minister, you will definitely see that there are discrepancies. I am doing this from a nationalistic point of view. I would not like to mention Lango because somebody may misunderstand that, but I look at the central region, Acholi and of course Lango as areas that have been identified in the present situation that was analysed here. It is well done and I appreciate that.

However, when you read the other document, which was read by hon. Ecweru, under sub-region one I would have expected the bags of maize and beans in hundreds, say 800 bags of maize and 400 bags of beans, which have been taken for distribution in Katakwi; Amuria 800 bags of maize and 400 bags of beans; then you come to Soroti, 900 bags of beans and 200 bags of maize. 

I would have expected that to have targeted Karamoja because it is among the worst hit areas. Instead, they have been delivered to the Teso areas of Katakwi, Amuria and Soroti. You are my neighbours and I am not saying it in bad faith, but I am just looking at the analysis you have done. That is why I said I do not want to look – (Interjections) - I am standing on procedure. 

When you look at page 4- (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order directed towards my senior colleague and mentor, hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I am hurt because I spent one week in Ngora and I arrived in Kampala today. Yesterday evening, I was in Katakwi, Amuria and Ngora, in my own village, and people do not have anything to eat. Using my own money, I bought posho and I had to give a cup of porridge to an old woman and children who did not have anything- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order? 

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, is hon. Cecilia Ogwal in order to stand on this podium and say that the Teso areas like Amuria and Katakwi are doing fairly well because they received 800 bags of food and yet those are peanuts? Is the honourable senior member of this House in order to raise such a statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the concern is noted and there is no violation of any order. However, sensitivity is important when we discuss these things.  

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am trying to add value to the analysis that has been done. I am giving my humble, nationalistic and painful feedback. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of procedure.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Yes, I rose on a point of procedure and that is why I am saying that I just want to help the Prime Minister. When he is discussing this with the Cabinet, they should look at this analysis and make sure that distribution is fairly done based on the gravity as identified in this document. These are your own Government documents and I have not looked at them. I have just seen it here. Therefore, I am saying, address your mind and distribution to what has been analysed. 

Mr Speaker, on page 4 they mention the construction and de-silting of dams. I would imagine that those that are perennially affected by drought should be given priority. That is what I am trying to say. 

I know that the issue of Lango has been raised and as you can see, despite the fact that Lango is 80 per cent distressed, there has been no delivery of maize and we are not complaining. I am not raising it here and yet that should have been my first priority. I would have said Lango is 80 per cent distressed as identified by you and yet they have not got maize and beans. However, I have not raised it because I am concerned about the worst hit areas. In other words, the actual distribution of maize and beans is not properly done. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister please carry our sentiments to Cabinet when he discusses this issue tomorrow? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please -

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the procedural point, information and advice given by hon. Cecilia Ogwal has been taken into account and it will be useful. 

I think to conclude this matter, we are already confronting a challenging situation and Government is already taking some measures. Some areas have not been covered and indeed, they must be covered. These discussions that we are going to have in Cabinet will take into account these areas. 

Let us also mobilise our population because the rains are more or less beginning. Let us optimally utilise these rains so that we can plant quick maturing crops so that they can fill the gap as the country stabilises. 

Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable members -(Interruption) 

MR OCHEN: Mr Speaker, I would like to applaud the Prime Minister for the response he is giving the House. However, I would like to make my point clear. As a nation, let us not fight ourselves. We are hit by a crisis, so let us ask the Speaker to take this opportunity to raise the agricultural budget. Let this year be the year Uganda raises the vote on agriculture and water to address water for irrigation. (Applause)

I would like to appeal to this Parliament and the nation. I appeal that tomorrow’s Cabinet meeting gives consideration to all the affected regions so that Government provides food to all the schools, until food is secured -(Interjections)- Yes, those corridors, which are affected. Instead of us complaining, let that money be appropriated and primary schools are fed so that our children’s education is not affected; while the elderly can struggle to get food, let that be captured. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the clarification I am seeking is: could you help this Parliament and inform us on what the current position of the agriculture and water votes are? Other than declaring a state of emergency, can the Government raise the vote on agriculture and water so that we use the money to procure equipment and seeds? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I will only chip in and say that there was a vaccination in Kaabong and Kotido - Why don’t you consider the host communities? Apart from their disastrous situation, they have continued to receive their brothers from the other side and they are hosting them. What is done the other side should also be done on this side as well.

The honourable Member of Parliament for Kaabong raised the question of the European Union (EU) grant. In this disaster situation, let Government get five per cent of the EU grant to buy food. Can Government act on that? It is my concern. 

I would like to appeal to honourable Members of Parliament. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal and other Members of Parliament raised an important point. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, hon. Musa Ecweru, who comes from Teso, should not be misunderstood on the grounds that he comes from Teso. The situation of food is dire across the country. This is the time for us to put the Government to test. This is the time for the regime in power to resonate with the problems affecting the community.

On those grounds, Mr Speaker, we are not attacking anybody but we are simply asking Government to act –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order, something I rarely do, directed towards hon. Ochen, who is my good friend. Is he in order to insinuate that the only hard hit region in the food crisis that is currently hitting the country is Teso? Can he explain to us that our people from Acholi and Lango sub-regions are not dying and yet we have already registered cases of death? Is he in order? Actually, out of the allocation of Shs 10 billion, Acholi sub-region has never got anything. Is he in order? (Interjections) He insinuated.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these matters are urgent and they are serious. We should listen to each other. We all come from areas that have been grossly affected. Imagine if I were now supposed to speak on this subject; I represent people as well! 

Let us accord this House the respect it deserves. Let us discuss with courtesy. The hallmark of parliamentary procedure is courtesy to other Members when they give their opinion. Honourable member, you had finished. So, please withdraw.

I am going to ask the Prime Minister to conclude this matter. There is nothing you are going to say that will help us in the way forward. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please make your concluding submission.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we conclude this important debate, the views brought in by colleagues, the gaps mentioned are going to be considered by the Cabinet. 

On the issue concerning schools, every district of Uganda is going to receive some food for schools but of course it cannot be enough. However, the districts will know where it is biting most and be able to assist accordingly. 

This has been an important debate. Government takes the matter seriously and some additional resources are going to be mobilised. Parliament and the country will be informed accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do we take it that after the Cabinet meeting of tomorrow, you will come and tell us what you have been able to achieve there? Do we take it that way?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, yes. After the Cabinet discussion, both Parliament and the country will be informed about the resources that have been mobilised to strengthen our national capacity to fight food shortage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we wait for the information that will come tomorrow and if it is insufficient, we can then move a motion? Tomorrow is just the next day. 

I think, honourable members, let Cabinet meet. Concerns have been raised. When we come tomorrow, we also have Prime Minister’s Question Time. Before we reach that, we will have examined these matters and found a way forward. All we want is for people to be helped in the situation they are in.

MR OGUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before this report came, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries indicated to us that he needed to consult and discuss this particular issue in Cabinet first. It is on that day that we allowed him to defer the report and bring it today. 

I do not know if it will be procedurally right to again say that Cabinet must go and discuss it and then we get another report. I do not know how many times this must happen and yet people are dying.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, from the time we have had this discussion, you have been standing and you are on my list about what you would like to say. I am sure you are going to say that the report that has been presented by the minister is not sufficient and does not give us proper guidance.

The Prime Minister has requested that he goes to Cabinet tomorrow; what is procedurally wrong with that? This is the Leader of Government Business and we are saying that we need money to intervene appropriately and you are saying that it should not go back to Cabinet, that it is procedurally wrong for Cabinet to look at it again. Are we now going to witchdoctors to look for money? (Laughter) 

The matter is going to Cabinet and it will come back tomorrow afternoon. We will be here and then we will be able to know what they have been able to discuss.

MR OSEKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to rise on a procedural issue in respect to starvation itself. This is a crisis we all understand. However, there are areas that have not been reached up to now and the report does not indicate how soon they will be able to reach those areas. I, therefore, would like to raise this so that it is also part of the Prime Minister’s agenda to indicate when they are going to reach these areas. 

We have almost a similar situation; people are going emotional and some of us are just quiet and yet back home things are very bad. I, therefore, would have liked that to be one of the factors and then the other one is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR OSEKU: Yes, on procedure again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you have not even raised any procedural point. Now rise on a procedural point.

MR OSEKU: As we attend to this problem, I think it would be procedurally right for the Prime Minister and his ministers to ensure that they disclose to us the procedure of the intervention, especially in terms of deliveries and also in terms of allocation. You need to revisit this.

There has been a priority allocation of the planting materials but some places are very big; you need to revisit that as well because it is part of the procedure of intervention. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The procedural point I was attentively listening for was the one where I would guide. However, now you are raising procedural matters with the Prime Minister and it will be difficult for me. 

Honourable members, these matters are really serious. Let us give the Prime Minister the opportunity to consult and come back tomorrow and then we see how far we have gone with this matter. However, in my own understanding, it revolves around money to beef up the intervention and support the disaster areas and also support – The other day we talked about when we should start distributing seeds to the population, because they said that the rains are expected at the beginning of March. Have we started the process of giving out seeds? All those issues should be comprehensively dealt with so that we will have a solution.

Honourable members, can we pause here on this subject and we come back tomorrow and we see how the Prime Minister will be briefing the House on the way forward. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the annual report on the Petroleum Fund for the year ended 30 June 2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is one of those requirements of our laws to have that covered. 

Honourable members, can we receive the motion under item No.8. Let us just receive it and see how we can handle it.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 8 October 2016, His Excellency the President, the Fountain of Honour, declared this year a year of family. Today, at the oldest and most prestigious university in this country, thousands of our children graduated. Would it not be procedurally correct that some of us, parents and family members, be released to go and join our children in celebrating their achievements?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, are you proposing a motion for adjournment?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally correct to adjourn the House until tomorrow?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, many of the celebrations will be during the weekend. However, we normally stop at 6.00 p.m. There are still pending items that we could deal with probably up to 6 o’clock.

Honourable member for Mitooma, times are not very good. Therefore, is it possible for us to consider item No. 8, receive a motion and the report and then see how we proceed?

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $8.44 MILLION TOP UP TO THE SDR 64.092 MILLION ($91.56 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE GRID EXPANSION AND REINFORCEMENT PROJECT (GERP)

5.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for the approval of the supplementary request by Government to borrow $8.44 million to top up the SDR 64.092 million ($91.56 million) from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP). 
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Members for Kiboga District, Bungokho, Kumi Municipality. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, this House considered a loan of $100 million to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project. It reduced the amount by $8.44 million. The ministry and Government came back to this House and submitted a request to reconsider our previous decision and the House granted us permission to do that.

It was on that basis that when we took the resolution of Parliament to the World Bank, they found it very difficult to approve the entire amount. In other words, a reduction of $8.44 million collapsed the entire request on account that this particular component of the loan was to support capacity building in terms of training of our engineers to offer operational capacity to the energy sector.

The request was made and the House allowed. The committee has been working on this additional request and they have made a good report to this effect. New facts were given to the committee and they are ready to report on this issue. I beg to move that this request be reconsidered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy and the chairperson is ready to report.

5.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for moving the motion. He has even given the background. I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:
The file containing the signed report
The minutes 
Minister’s brief
Project appraisal documents
Loan appraisal guide
Loan Financing Agreement

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, as the minister has explained, when they presented the loan, we rejected the portion which provided for “capacity building” because they had not given sufficient explanation. We are fatigued in the committee with capacity building because every loan that comes has “capacity building”. We feel that it is high time we reduced this component. It is on that basis that we rejected that portion. 

However, after the explanation, I will go straight to paragraph No.6 - project and supplementary loan objectives. The objectives are: to support Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) project implementation and operational capacity; and to build technical capacity for the power sector.

We were informed that these new power projects are different from what they have been constructing. Therefore, they need additional capacity to be able to handle them. They said, for instance, that for the first time, they are going to handle wires of 400 kVA different from the ones they have been handling of 200 kVA or 110 kVA. We accepted the request because we did not want to have a mismatch, where the power stations are completed without the evacuation system in place. 

Under paragraph No. 8, we have the components that the supplementary loan is going to finance; they are clearly earmarked from (i) to (iii). 

Mr Speaker, this project is going to be implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Minerals and the UETCL. This loan is very important because for the first time, we are going to have grid extension in the greater north - West Nile. It is the only part of this country, which does not have grid extension. They have been using small hydros, which are now non-functional because the rivers have dried up, like Paidha. They have also been operating on thermos, which are extremely expensive.

After the re-submission, the committee studied the project and came up with the following observations and recommendations:

1. 	The committee noted the letter from the World Bank Country Manager to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where he wrote saying that they cannot approve part of the loan because they know that it will not be implemented without that portion. It was observed that Government has very little choice in determining loans’ borrowing terms. 

The committee recommends that Government should develop and enhance capacity to negotiate for loans with the financiers so that we do not fait accompli. This is because when these loans come, we cannot make any adjustments. We realised that it was due to limited capacity within Government.

2. 	The committee noted the ad hoc provision in loans for capacity building and the lack of sustainability of those trained by Government.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should come up with holistic central training and consider bonding the people trained for a period of time. Uganda trains people and they go and serve other countries; of course, they bring in some money and it is due to other reasons, but I think we need to address all these reasons so that we retain the capacity we train.

3. 	The committee noted that ministries, departments and agencies spend a lot of time on procurement, which affects project implementation. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should carry out advance procurement and the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) law should be amended to minimise unending procurement arbitrations, which affect project implementation.

4. 	The committee further noted that there is need for Parliament to follow up closely, under the oversight role, the implementation of projects financed from loans. The report from the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), which we adopted here, recommended that we should get quarterly reports on these loans for infrastructure projects.

The committee, therefore, recommends that as part of the monitoring, quarterly performance reports of the loans approved should be submitted to the committee approving loans by the implementing agencies. We hope that this will help us to monitor and whip the Government in time.

5. 	The committee noted that there is a lot of money spent on training engineers and other staff in other countries including in the Republic of South Africa, China, Germany, Botswana and Ghana. Right now, most of our engineers are trained in Botswana. 

The committee also noted the need for the attachment of young engineers from finishing schools to job attachments. The committee welcomed the idea of setting up a training institute at Karuma to mitigate the dollar outflows for training staff abroad. 


In conclusion, after reviewing the submissions and clarifications, the committee was convinced that the $8.44 million that had been rejected from the main loan of $100 million was desirable as an integral part of the main loan of $100 million for smooth and speedy implementation of this project. 

Mr Speaker, subject to the committee’s observations and recommendations, I request that this House approves this supplementary loan request. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that is before us is for the approval of the supplementary request by Government to borrow $8.44 million to top up the $91.56 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project. I propose the motion for debate. 

In other words, the big bulk of the loan was already approved by the House. We approved one part but rejected one part. It now becomes necessary that the whole thing should be looked at again. Can we have a debate on this matter.

5.58
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason that the chairperson has given to convince the House to approve this loan is the need to train our engineers. I know that this is not the first time we are going to extend electricity to any part of Uganda and I would like to assume that the work we have done so far was done by Ugandan engineers. 

Like has rightly been said, all the loan requests that we have approved, even the loans that have done everything that we have already done, had a training component. May we know whether the engineers that we keep training go out of this country? What kind of engineers are we going to train? What kind of trainings are we going to offer? How can we ensure that Ugandans get value for money? 

We are going to procure this loan to train somebody; we are not going to take away that training from that person. How will the minister assure this House that these engineers will not continue to be trained over and over again?

The amount said to be for training is $8 million. Are they going to earn another degree or are they going for masters? We want to know the particular engineers they are going to train so that we have them in our records, so that we know that Mr Bahati was trained. 

There should also be conditions attached to this. Ugandans cannot continue training people and they go out of this country. We are paying money to make people better in earning their bread.

Mr Speaker, it is with such a heavy heart that I rise on this situation. I have witnessed that throughout this week we are approving loan requests almost every day; it is unbecoming. 

6.00
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion by the minister for a supplementary loan request for capacity building for power extension. 

I think the reasons given were very clear. For the first time, power extension in this country is going to move upward. We have been at 132 kVA lines, 33 kVA lines; now for this particular one, it will go to a 400 kVA line, which is much bigger.

Secondly, as it was stated, the West Nile region is the only region so far that is not connected to the national grid. We are relying on Nyagak power, which is only 3.5 megawatts. It is like boiling water in a kettle over a charcoal stove; it cannot help the whole family. That power is terribly inadequate for the West Nile region. 

Right now, Nyagak is dry and power is hardly being produced for people doing welding and carpentry. They cannot use that power. At the moment, we cannot even attract any industries despite our proximity to a large market in the neighbourhood of South Sudan, Eastern Congo and Central African Republic. This is the time we need this power extension to that area. If it is to assist to extend this power to West Nile region and develop capacity of our engineers to be able to extend this power line, I would like to fully support this programme.

Mr Speaker, we should have initially passed this proposal and not have it thrown back by World Bank. I am glad that they rejected it and threw it back to us. Now, we have seen sense. We really need this loan. I thank you.  

6.03
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kabelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, I rise on this very important matter in which our country is going to obtain a loan to support capacity building for engineers. 

Before a country like Uganda moves to borrow money, there should be pertinent questions to be asked. What has fallen short in our institutions so that they cannot raise the required engineers? What has fallen short internally? If those questions are answered, then the country gets to understand the importance of the loan. 

In this country today, there are many things that are taking place behind the backs of some people, where some people are left to pay for others. That is why these questions are asked. However, on the other hand, it is very critical for the country to raise the capacity of its technical people to drive the development of the nation.

I would have loved to ask the Government what they are doing to address the issue of engineers that are meant to drive the Standard Gauge Railway, for example. I am bringing this as an example because recently, when we visited Ethiopia, we found that the Government there had taken this initiative; they mobilised their engineers and dispatched them for further training in China. 

However, we are signing a contract here without putting into consideration that particular need of addressing the issue of engineers. If that was the issue, I would have loved that we probably borrow this money to strengthen our institutions in the country. What does Makerere University lack? What type of capacity building are we yearning for as a country? Couldn’t Kyambogo University, Makerere University and those other institutions handle it, other than taking it abroad and putting it at a very high cost, which will deprive many Ugandans of that opportunity? 

Mr Speaker, this is the area we are concerned about. We need technocrats to run this country but we need to be very transparent. Recently, we queried, on the Floor of this Parliament, the criteria used by the Executive, particularly the Office of the President, in identifying over 7,000 students studying in universities abroad. How is that money raised? We are demanding to know who these children are and the criteria for their selection. They said they are bringing students from constituencies that were affected by wars but is there a register showing that? We are very worried. 

Even for this money that we are borrowing, we are going to end up sponsoring the children of the rich. The privileged people are the ones who will send their children to study in those universities and my people in Kapelebyong County will be the ones to pay the loan. That is the concern we raised. 

My colleague from Koboko raised the issue of taking electricity to West Nile. Nobody objects to that. It is the desire of every citizen across the country to have power. However, we must be very concerned about the money we are dragging our country to borrow from international institutions, which will become a burden to the children who are not yet born. That is our concern. Otherwise, it would be ideal that we borrow this money but it must be borrowed on the right grounds so that it benefits the right people. 

I am told some people sit in this House but their children study in the US and UK – Harvard University – at the expense of the taxpayers. Why can’t we be transparent to this country? That is the concern we raised about this loan. This country is going in the wrong direction. We borrow money left, right and centre but the services in the country are totally unacceptable. Go anywhere in the country and you will find that the services are wanting. Why would we borrow the money?

6.08
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Mr Speaker, I stand here to support this loan request for the following reasons: One, for the first time we are going to have reasonably enough power to cover most parts of Northern Uganda. That is for sure. I appreciate the two flagship projects, but mainly those areas that were underserved –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, we are not talking about not taking power anywhere in this country. We need to be objective as we debate this loan request. Our question is: are the kinds of engineers we are going to train necessary? I think we must be focussed. 

Is the honourable member in order, therefore, to deviate from the direction of debate and imply that we are actually just here opposing this loan request because we do not want power to go to northern Uganda? Is he in order to insinuate that our direction of debate, which is questioning the purpose of this loan, is not legitimate?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the $8.44 million is top-up money for the one which we have already approved for those purposes. If we do not approve the $8.44 million, whatever we approved earlier will not be dispatched; it will collapse. 

Therefore, the original loan is hanging. That original loan is the one, which was for grid extension, and that is why the Member is saying let us do this so that it can activate even the bigger loan and the supply of all these things can be done properly. Therefore, the debate is two-fold: it is reviewing what we have already approved, and also trying to say let us approve this one so that the whole process can be activated. 

The committee recommended that we should not approve this particular component and we did not approve it. They went to the World Bank to disburse whatever we had approved and they said, “We cannot do that unless the other component is done. We are not going to do this thing in segments”. Therefore, the whole thing has been stayed and that is where we are. That is why they have come back calling it a supplementary.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise counsel. They say the eyes are a mirror to the soul; I knew -(Interruption) 

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, in this House we are honourable members. I am not blind and I am not even wearing glasses for that matter. If I understand where that language comes from, which is the Bible - if my colleague knows the Bible at all - I think he is misquoting it. Is the honourable member who belongs to my committee, the Committee on Public Accounts, in order to belittle his chairperson on the Floor of this House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have heard on several occasions the honourable member for Koboko District saying “I have seen what you people are doing”. Therefore, the fact that you have eyes does not mean that other people who do not have eyes cannot see. The honourable member for Koboko cannot visibly see, but she always says “I have seen”. (Laughter) So, let us leave it like that.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That aside, I wanted to say that whereas generation as a component is doing very well, transmission is not doing well at all. In fact, towards the end of 2018, we will be having these generation power stations well on board but the transmission bit will be some years behind schedule. We should be alarmed and scared if we have such a huge white elephant not evacuating power to our people. 

Honourable chairperson of my committee, I am very sorry in case I offended you. I wanted to say that capacity building in this context is mainly for on-job training. It is just like we have the civil service training centre. The training centre is not because we do not have trained civil servants but once in a while, they go to the civil service training centre and undergo renewed training. 

Technology is changing almost every other time. Many more other flagship projects are actually going to come on board in less than three years. We need many more engineers, not necessarily these ones from Makerere or Kyambogo universities. There are those whom we used to train in Masaka Technical Institute, which unfortunately was turned into a university. These are some of the people that will be mainly targeted to ensure that they are trained to run these very many ongoing and upcoming projects in power generation. 

It is, therefore, important that this loan request passes without any further delay and we only make sure it is done, as my colleague was saying, very transparently. You remember when we delayed the entire project of the civil service college because they were looking at it from a very huge angle. 

Mr Speaker, we even used to have that kind of school in Jinja at the Owen Falls Dam on a small scale. This time round, we are saying it should be massive so that the power generation projects in Kikagate, Agago and in many other areas can be covered not by the expatriates or Chinese but by our brothers and sisters. We are only trying to build capacity of our own. The local content bit will be assured if this college is put in place. I thank you very much.

6.16
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion. Aware that the $ 8.4 million loan for capacity building is part of the other loan that we had already approved; and aware that the other loan cannot be disbursed if we do not approve the $8.44 million meant for capacity building - Mr Speaker, we always raise issues to do with local content and I think capacity building – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you need to state the motion. 

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I therefore, move a motion that the question be put for the approval of the supplementary request by Government to borrow $ 8.44 million top-up from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP). I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that motion has been moved and seconded. The initial request for borrowing was $100 million. We approved $91.56 and rejected $8.44 million. The $100 million request therefore cannot be implemented and that is why this motion has come back for the approval of the $8.44 million, to make the $100 million initial borrowing. 

A motion has been moved that the question be put. I now put the question to that motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for the approval of the supplementary request by Government to borrow $8.44 million top-up to the $91.56 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the annual report on the Petroleum Fund for the year ended 30 June 2016 was laid on the Table, I did not refer it to the appropriate committee to handle. The appropriate committee for the sector would be the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It stands accordingly referred to that committee.

Honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 22 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
