

PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 10 February 2022

Parliament met at 2.11 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we wish to welcome you to this special session today. The sitting is entirely dedicated to paying tribute to an eminent son of Teso and indeed, the great nation, Uganda. The deceased was a paramount chief of Iteso Cultural Union, His Highness Emorimor, Papa Iteso, Augustine Kadugala Osuban.

Without preempting the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament, I take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God for blessing this country, with Papa Emorimor Augustine Osuban. The Iteso are an ethnic group from Itunga, a group that originated from among the Nilo-Hamites that cover a big stretch all the way from Ethiopia, South Sudan, Uganda and Kenya; a group of people who are known to be hardworking, loyal, disciplined, trustworthy and open-minded.

The Emorimor was a great advocate of people of unity for people of Teso and Uganda at large. That is why you find the fights that used to be in Teso ceased because of Emorimor. His devotion to preaching about morals and cultural values was immense, and he must be appreciated for that. He served his people and the nation with distinction and indeed, the people of Teso will dearly miss Papa Augustine Osuban.

I urge you, my fellow countrymen, to learn from the distinguished service and exemplary leadership of this fallen son of Teso and Uganda at large. As we send off Papa Emorimor to his final resting place, may we, as leaders, continue to strive for peace, unity, growth and prosperity for this country - something that Papa Emorimor has lived for.

If anybody asked Papa Emorimor, he would always tell you, “I am fighting for my people,” especially on issues of compensation. He was very passionate about it. He has fought for his people to be united; there are no divisions in Teso.

The call for leadership, especially of the cultural institutions is a call for unity, growth and to inspire the people under your charge. Let us honour the memory and legacy of His Highness Augustine Osuban Emorimor by leaving Uganda a better Uganda than we found. We should not leave Uganda that people will always regret. Why were these people born Ugandans? Therefore, let us try our best to make sure that we will leave Uganda a better Uganda and we are all one Uganda, irrespective of political parties.

Honourable members, I join all of you to celebrate a unifying leader born, grown and died a Catholic; a very devoted Catholic, an accomplished civil servant and a leader of the Iteso cultural community worldwide. May the Lord grant the bereaved family of the Teso people and the family of the Emorimor ever merciful love and may Papa Emorimor, rest in peace as we pay tribute to him tonight.

Those still alive should still follow what the Emorimor fought for, especially on the issue of unity, prosperity and the rest of the things for the good of Teso. “For God and My Country”.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE EMORIMOR AUGUSTINE OSUBAN, THE PARAMOUNT CHIEF OF THE ITESO CULTURAL INSTITUTION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you come in, can I kindly just recognise the people in the gallery, the gallant sons and daughters of Teso? 

We have:

Mr Augustine Omare-Okurut - the Prime Minister of Iteso Cultural Union

Ms Beatrice Malinga - the Deputy Prime Minister.

Mr Tom Okurut - the Minister of Lands in the Iteso Cultural Union. 

Mr Ivan Engoru - the Attorney-General in the Iteso Cultural Union.

Toto Ariko Rosemary - the Minister of Education in the Iteso Cultural Union.

Papa Sande Emolot - the chairperson of Iteso Cultural Union Council. 

Amb. George Kyaligonza - the Secretary-General, Uganda Kings and Cultural Leaders’ Forum.

Eng. Eyatu – Director, Ministry of Water and Environment.

Mr Ocailap Patrick - the owner of money.

Mr Ettedu J.J – Manager, Ministry of Local Government.

Prof. Francis Omaswa.

Dr Patricia Acan Okiria – Deputy IGG.

Lady Justice Margaret Oguli.

Lady Justice Susan Asinyo.

Hon. Charles Oleny - former Member of Parliament.

Hon. Alice Alaso - former Member of Parliament.

Hon. John Otekat - former Member of Parliament.

Hon. Mariam Amoit - former Member of Parliament.

Hon. Onapito Ekomoloit.

Mr Martin Osengor – Iteso Cultural Union (ICU), UK Chapter

Eng. Epiyat Julius – Commissioner in the Ministry of Water and Environment.

Dr Atingi Michael Ego - Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda. 

Prof. Pius Okong – the Chairperson of the Health Service Commission.

Mr Charles Opolot – Medical Consultant.

Dr Esther Obaikol – Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), Ethiopia. 

Mr Richard Omongole – Counsel. 

Mr Ebitu James – the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Mr Peter Emorut – Commissioner, Electoral Commission.

Col Freddy Onata – Chief Executive Officer of Wazalendo SACCO.

Ms Jane Ekapu – the Secretary of the Equal Opportunities Commission.

The family of the late Papa Emorimor is here. Just stand up. Thank you for coming.

Hon. Capt. Mike Mukula – Vice Chairperson of NRM, Eastern Region. (Applause)

Members in the gallery, this is your Parliament; the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. Feel free; this is your House. We are your representatives and we are here to serve you and we condole with you, as Parliament of Uganda. We promise to take Parliament to the people and bring people to the Parliament. We are here together with our people. We thank you very much.

Honourable members, you have heard all those names; the professors, doctors – I told you that the wise people come from the East. (Applause)

In the public gallery, we have Hon. Paul Musamali, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), who is our candidate. We have Hon. Denis Namara, Hon. George Odongo, Hon. Rose Akol, Hon. Mary Mugyenyi and Hon. James Kakooza. These are the NRM EALA legislators. You are most welcome.

Most importantly, for the Teso community, you have your own, the Second ranked person in this country, none other than the Vice-President of Uganda, H.E. Jessica Rose Epel Alupo. (Applause) Your Excellence, you are most welcome.

From the family, we have:

Mrs Osuban Akaliat Agnes - the wife of the late.

Mr Francis Osuban – son.

Ms Christine Apio – daughter.

Ms Josephine Apio – daughter.

Ms Agnes Ikiriat – daughter.

Mr John Osuban – son.

Ms Genevieve Osuban – daughter.

Ms Patra Osuban – daughter-in-law.

Ms Martha Osuban - daughter-in-law.

Mr Vian Niyonzima - son-in-law.

Mr Simon Eyoku – personal doctor.

Ms Martha Alupo – Nurse.

Some two months ago, we observed a moment of silence in respect of the late Martin Osuban. Papa Osuban lost a son called Martin, who was a Commissioner in the Ministry of Education and Sports. It was really a sad moment. Members, before we receive the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can we rise for a moment of silence for the late Papa.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

2.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I move under Rule 26 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Emorimor Augustine Osuban, the Paramount Chief of Teso Cultural Institution.

“WHEREAS Parliament has, with deep sorrow learnt of the death of Emorimor Osuban, the Paramount Chief of Teso Cultural Institution, which occurred on 5 February 2022 at Mulago National Referral Hospital;

AWARE that the Emorimor Augustine Osuban was born on 12 August 1934, in Kumi District and attained various academic qualifications including a National Certificate in Agriculture from the School of Agriculture, Houghall Durham UK, a Scottish Higher Certificate in Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry from the Dundee Technical College, Scotland, UK, and a Bachelor of Science in Agriculture from Edinburgh University, Scotland, UK;

FURTHER AWARE that Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol has had a celebrated career serving with honesty and integrity, holding key responsibilities including; 

Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries until his retirement; 

Service on several boards, including Kinyara Sugar Works, Uganda Tea Growers Corporation, Produce Marketing Board and Uganda Medical Stores; 

Deployment in I954 in the Ministry of Agriculture as a Laboratory Assistant in Serere District and, subsequently, in Arapai Agricultural College; 

RECALLING that Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol was elected on 2l November l998 and enthroned in April 2000 as the Emorimor, the Paramount Chief of Iteso Cultural Institution, a position he held with immense humility and dedication until his death; 

FURTHER RECALLING that Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol used his position as Iteso Cultural Leader to advocate for and promote moral and cultural values, unity and embracing Government programmes among the Iteso community; 

NOTING that as an advocate for peace and stability, Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol played a key role, working with the Uganda People’s Defence Forces and the Arrow Boys Auxiliary Force, to defeat the Lord’s Resistance Army in Teso subregion; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows: 

That Parliament conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Teso Subregion and the people of Uganda for the loss of a notable cultural leader and citizen. 

Parliament recognises and appreciates the contribution and service that Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol rendered to the people of Teso Subregion and Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business. Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the Government Chief Whip, the Vice-President, Hon. Bahati, Hon. Obiga, Hon. Harriet, the Minister for Teso, Hon. Ogwang, Hon. Asamo, Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Elijah – by the whole House. Thank you very much.

Members, the reason I am mentioning some names is for purposes of the Hansard. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to speak to your motion?  

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Emorimor Osuban Augustine Lemukol, the Paramount Chief of the Iteso Cultural Institution.

On Saturday, 5 February 2022, we received sad news of the death of the Iteso Paramount Chief, Papa Emorimor Osuban Augustine Lemukol. He died at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

Emorimor Lemukol was born on 12 August 1934 in Kumi District. 

He attended the following schools: 

Madera Boys Primary School from 1942 to 1946; 

Holy Angels Junior Secondary School, Madera from 1947 to 1950; 

St Peter’s College, Tororo from 1951 to 1953; 

A School of Agriculture, Houghall, Durham, UK, where he acquired a National Certificate in Agriculture (1957 to 1958);
 
Dundee Technical College, Scotland, where he attained a Higher Certificate in Mathematics, Physics and Chemistry (1958 to 1959);

Edinburgh University, Scotland, UK, where he got a Bachelor of Science in Agriculture (1959 to 1963); 

West Virginia State University, USA, where he obtained a Master’s of Science in Agriculture and Economics (1963 to 1965). 

Madam Speaker, Emorimor Lemukol served in various capacities: 

In 1954, he was Laboratory Assistant in the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Cooperatives at Serere Research Station; 

In 1965, he taught Agricultural Economics, Farm Management and Agricultural Extension at Arapai Agricultural College; 

In 1968, he was the Principal of Arapai Agricultural College;

In 1970, he was the Regional Agricultural Officer for northern region; 

In 1972, he worked as Assistant Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture; 

In 1977, he was Deputy Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture; 

In 1979, he worked as Minister of Works, Housing and Urban Development; 

In 1980, he was Acting Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture; 

In 1982, he was a Commissioner in the Ministry of Agriculture.

Madam Speaker, Emorimor Lemukol retired from Government service in 1989 and carried out several consultancy studies for various agencies such as FAO, UNDP and USAID on agriculture.

He was a board member of Kinyara Sugar Works, Uganda Tea Growers Corporation, Produce Marketing Board and Uganda Medical Stores from 1989 to 1998. 

On 21 November 1998, Emorimor Augustine Osuban was elected, unopposed, to be Emorimor Papa Iteso. He was enthroned in April 2000 as the Emorimor, the Paramount Chief of Iteso Cultural Institution and worked hard to foster unity and harmony among the Iteso. 

Emorimor Lemukol was greatly loved for his wisdom, humility and humanity. He wrote a number of books that added to the literature of Ateso.

Madam Speaker, His Highness Emorimor Papa Osuban Augustine Lemukol dedicated his life to serving the nation and the Iteso Cultural Institution. His legacy will be an inspiration to many people. 

We extend our sincere sympathies and condolences to the family, friends, Teso Region and the country at large.
 
Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, may his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, for that message. As people of Teso, we appreciate and indeed may his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Before the seconder comes in, let me recognise the presence of the following: Ow’ekitiibwa Robert Ssebunya from the Buganda Kingdom, Hon. Jacqueline Amongin, former Woman Member of Parliament for Ngora District; you are all most welcome. Leader of the Opposition, you are most welcome. (Applause) Thank you.

Honourable Leader of the Opposition, you have shown us one thing; that when death occurs, there is no being partisan. (Applause) You have also shown us that you value culture a lot. We are very grateful. Whereas you have not been in the House, you are welcome back to the House for this purpose.

2.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Madam Speaker, we take seriously -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, we have free sitting. Please cross over to this side.

MR MPUUGA: We take seriously, your well-considered comments. In addition, as the Opposition, at our own motion, we decided to return to the House today to specifically pay our most deserving respects to this senior citizen and our cultural leader -(Applause)- and in honour of the people of Teso who have lost a dear leader. We thought it very critical that no amount of partisanship could deter us from being a part of this motion to pay our respect to the fallen citizen. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I join the House to pay tribute to the late Paramount Chief, Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukul, a revered cultural leader of the Iteso Cultural Institution, an accomplished statesman and advocate of peace.

Madam Speaker, when I was whiling my leadership skills inter alia at the service of His Majesty as a young man in the great Buganda Lukiiko, during the katikkiroship of Ow’ekitiibwa Mulwanyammuli Ssemwogerere, in the background, I attended a number of meetings in which the fallen statesman was part, as a cultural leader from Teso. I can stand here to attest to his humility, deep intellect and presence wherever he was to be part of these meetings.

I wish, on my own behalf and on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament, to sincerely condole with the people, the bereaved family initially, the Iteso Cultural Institution and the people of Teso for the loss of the Emorimor.

Madam Speaker, the Emorimor’s counsel for tolerance will dearly be missed in these our turbulent times, as we all know, whose hallmark is oppression, disappearance of citizens because of political disagreements, abductions, detention without trial and unabated torture of citizens because we disagree. 

The fallen statesman, for those who knew him closely, immensely, never wanted to associate himself with these kind of vices. Little wonder, in the face of a lot of civil strife, he led his community back into unity and stability; we shall dearly miss him. 

Madam Speaker, in his memory, the Emorimor’s efforts towards advocating for peace, social economic transformation and development in Teso and the entire country, deserve to be pursued to fruition.

However, this is bound to be a form of rollercoaster, Madam Speaker, given the fact that at his demise, the Government, charged with service delivery, is characterised by patronage, corruption and autocracy.

Madam Speaker, drawing inspiration from the steadfastness that was espoused by the Emorimor, we ought not to deter our spirits and the pursuit of a new Uganda characterised by inclusive growth, a nonviolent government, servant leadership and quality service delivery.

The nation, therefore, is encouraged not to mourn the demise of the Emorimor; rather, it should celebrate his life and his contribution to our country because he did so with conviction, vigour and commitment. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to use this opportunity to invite the energy of Government and government agencies and apparatus to desist from working towards dividing cultural institutions because their purpose is to unite our people. We have seen efforts, in a bid to sustain power, attempts to keep our people divided by creating hitherto unknown cultural institutions in this country. 

This platform, while mourning one of the unifying factors of our generation, the Government should take note of the fact that dividing our people helps no one, but rather keeping solid, well-known, documented, acceptable cultural institutions will only be the only remedy of keeping our people united.

Finally, Madam Speaker, many cultural institutions have come to Parliament with claims against Government but Government seemingly, for the bigger part, is reluctant in compensating cultural institutions for either usage or appropriation of their properties, land and other assets. Instead, Government is very comfortable in trying to patronise them, in addition to keeping them under patronage to try to make them an instrument of political adventurism.

We invite Government to consider it important that these cultural institutions are part and parcel of our endeavours towards development, and so, we must make them a part of our development agenda in our budgets and plans, but not keeping them as instruments of patronage and dividing our people.

To the family of our fallen leader and the people of Teso, we stand with you and we shall be with you through and through. May the good Lord receive and bless our fallen cultural leader. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Leader of the Opposition. We really want to thank H.E. the President of Uganda for promoting the cultural institutions.

When I was growing up, I did not even know about the cultural institutions. However, from the way the President is very passionate about the cultural institutions, no wonder the Emorimor has been a leader of peace in Teso. 

The person we are paying respect to here has died corruption-free. He was non-violent and has been a peacemaker in Teso. When paying tribute to him, we should do so with humility: as a calm person and he will be happy wherever he is because of the humility that you are giving him. Thank you. Leader of Independents –  

2.52  
MR DAVID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On this occasion, I am representing the “gallant Independents” in the House. I rise in support of the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol, the Paramount Chief of Iteso Cultural Institution. On behalf of the Independents, we are humbled to have the privilege of paying tribute to this now resting gallant son of the soil. 

The Paramount Chief was a loving man whose infectious smile and boisterous laughter exemplified love for not only the people of Teso but all Ugandans. The Paramount Chief understood that he led beyond the Teso geographical boundaries and as such, he was always reaching out to cultural regions beyond Teso. 

On the 6th of April 2016, while meeting the LCV chairpersons of Teso Region, in reference to the uprisings in Kasese post-election challenges, he opened and I would like to quote: “I ask my colleague, Charles Wesley Mumbere, the Omusinga, to advocate for dialogue because the path of war is destructive”. 

Madam Speaker, he understood the preciousness of peace not only in the eastern region, where the wise people come from but across the nation. (Applause)

In April 2019, he visited Busoga Kingdom to interact with the Iteso community in Busoga Subregion. As he was being welcomed, you should have seen the smile of this Paramount Chief as he met his people. He has been a darling of Busoga as well as a great friend. Tomorrow, Friday, 11 February, the Kyabazinga of Busoga - the cultural institution of Busoga - will commemorate our 83rd Kyabazinga Day. One of the guests who will be dearly missed on the very grand and auspicious occasion of the Kyabazinga Day will be Emorimor Augustine Osuban of Iteso.

He has been and he continues to be - because I subscribe to the notion that the departed are not really departed. We still have them except in the metaphysical world. We will remember him for his love for peace, propagation for unity and pacification of our nation. 

Once again, on behalf of the Independents, together with Busoga Kingdom, - where, tomorrow, we will miss a great guest - we wish to pay tribute and to reiterate our support that this House resolves to convey condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of Teso Subregion and the people of Uganda for the loss of a notable cultural leader and citizen. As a House, we should recognise and appreciate his contribution and service to this nation. 

Fly strong even as you reign in the after-life, Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol, Papa. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Zijjan. Members, I will give you two minutes to allow everybody to speak. Before I allow the Members to speak, I will first allow the Vice-President. She is not a Vice-President you would ask, “Who is the Vice-President of Uganda?” 

2.58
THE VICE-PRESIDENT OF UGANDA (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to support the motion in honour of the late Papa Emorimor Augustine Osuban Lemukol. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and the seconders of the motion for the very good remarks they have attributed to our late Paramount Chief.

Madam Speaker, I may not have understood our late Paramount Chief in detail but I have some very strong and important attributes that I would like to mention here in light of the few moments of privilege that I had with him personally, and also because of the very many things that we have heard about him.
I think he deserves the respect that the leaders of Parliament, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, have accorded to him. 

I would also like to thank Government for according him an official burial. The late Papa Emorimor Augustine Osuban was my personal friend and I have had very many engagements with him, including some official engagements, like indeed all of us have heard. 

First, I would like to note that he was – and when you look at his curriculum vitae, Madam Speaker, you will realise that he was an academician, he was a practical and technical person and with a very clean track record from wherever he has worked. That is an issue that we need to emulate as we honour him today. 

Secondly, whereas he was also a very distinguished academician, a practical and a thorough technical person, he understood the strong attributes and advantages of culture. He was elected unopposed 23 years ago. He was enthroned in a very distinguished ceremony. 

I would like to note one or two things; for instance, that Papa Emorimor was always reminding us that some of the very clear and good attributes of culture that we should always carry forward as Iteso is speaking our language - that is Ateso. He would remind us very quickly that even as you speak your language, you must respect other people's local languages. (Applause) 

He would also remind us that we should have our cultural dress. Madam Speaker, you can see my necklace. (Laughter) It is a cultural necklace, which I particularly chose to wear today in his honour because he used to remind us that we should value our cultural dress. He always said that even when we value our cultural dress as Iteso, we must also respect the cultural dresses of other people. 

Finally – I can see Hon. Cecilia Ogwal wants to stop me but I would like to say the final point – he would also remind us that we should value our cultural food but also respect the cultural food of other tribes. (Applause) 

Not so long ago, we were in Hon. Elijah Okupa’s constituency planting trees with MTN. Our cultural leader valued the preservation of the environment. He would always say two points; environment for ecosystem but also environment for science and therapeutic purposes. 

Madam Speaker, our cultural leader loved education. When we had a meeting with His Excellency, the President on Soroti University, he was present. He asserted himself that Government needed to establish a public university in Teso. We now have that public university in Teso.

Our cultural leader was very humble and interacted with all politicians. He would never meddle in the controversy of politics. (Applause) He was a very clear-headed cultural leader, who told us last month, at a church in Madera, that in our culture, a cultural leader was supposed to be a symbol of honour. He was never supposed to be involved in anything to do with the controversies of Government leadership; he was supposed to entrench himself in ensuring that his people benefit from Government programmes. 

As Iteso, as we continue with these ceremonies to the end, we should continue pursuing the values which Papa Emorimor Lemukol Osuban valued; no controversy. Government programmes were a priority for him. 

I would like to also mention that our cultural leader would never miss meetings. If it was a cultural meeting, he would attend whenever he was invited. If it was a political meeting, he would attend and contribute his ideas, which he thought were appropriate for the occasion. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, once again, for according Parliament this opportunity to pay tribute to him. I would also like to thank Government for offering him an official burial. 
Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Vice-President. I am sorry I am not in cultural attire. I had to be in official attire. (Laughter) And because Papa Emorimor believed in our local language, when we close, we shall sing our Teso cultural anthem in memory of Papa Emorimor. 

As one of the efforts of not sabotaging Government programmes, let us maintain the legacy that Papa has left. 

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (TESO AFFAIRS) (Dr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Kalaki, whom I represent in this august House, I extend my condolences to the family of the late Papa Augustine Osuban.
In addition, on behalf of the people of Teso whom I represent in Government, I express my appreciation to His Excellency, the President of Uganda, for the love and care that he gave to Papa Augustine Osuban right from the time he was enthroned to the very last moment, when he passed away. 

The President always showed concern for the welfare of Papa Osuban. (Applause) Only a few days ago, in Cabinet, he, again, brought up the issue of the welfare of cultural leaders, especially with regard to the life and times of Papa Osuban. 

The President, at an appropriate time, will make a request to this House to approve a package that is exemplary of what a cultural leader is supposed to live on. I think this should be supported by all of us as a way to promote the independence of these institutions that we all value. 

If I am to describe Papa Emorimor Osuban, I used to call him the “triple H”. He was a humble, honest and hardworking man. This was all exemplified in his time as a civil servant, who served this country without any blemish. 

And at the moment, when he should have retired to the comfort of his home, he was called by his people to give the ultimate service to them - a leader of a people united together by their culture. In the 20-plus years that he led his people, he was plagued by schisms and intrigue. He spoke about it at his very last public appearance on the 3rd of January. He decried the greed that was plaguing even this cultural institution.

To the very end, he did not lose hope in it. Every time he spoke, it was with pride in his people. It was with pride in his culture. He always knew that the people united were stronger than the individual. He was always quick to remind us about what service to the people meant; it was service above self - it was not about personal benefits. I know of several occasions, where Papa Augustine Osuban had to fuel his vehicle using his meagre resources so as to be able to meet the many public engagements that he was invited to. 

This is why I appeal to all of you that when the proposal comes to this House to properly take care of our cultural leaders, we should all support it. (Applause) I also appeal to the people of Teso - we have a challenge. Papa Osuban leaves us with a big challenge; for 23 years, he had to work from his private home. We must, in the next four years, build a palace for this cultural union as our legacy and as a show of the appreciation we have for these cultural institutions. If we cannot take care of them, then there should be no pretense of having them.

These people are very important to our values; they bind us. Papa Emorimor is dead but he is alive; he lives in the culture of the people he served and therefore, the living and unborn are linked together through the dead. That is our culture and this is what he was proud of. My people from Teso, this is what we should promote.

This cultural union has a lot of challenges. I speak as a son of Teso, who has traversed Teso, who knows that Papa Emorimor has been holding Teso together by the sheer will of his power. Now that he is gone, I urge you to carefully look at the fabric of Teso and bring it back together. From Kaberamaido to Kenya, we have grumblings; so, we need to face these realities or the sacrifice of this great man will have been in vain.

I loved him as a role model, I served him in several ways and I truly pray that the Lord receives his soul in eternal peace. He loved his people, fought for them, he was happy when they were happy, swore by them and lived for them. We should always keep that in our minds and remember him forever as the people of Teso. May he rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have Hon. Asamo and then the Member for Dokolo. We shall have three minutes for ministers and two minutes for the others. It seems the timekeeper is not doing a good job.

3.13
THE STATE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the House, on behalf of the people with disabilities, especially from Teso, to condole with the family, the Iteso Cultural Union (ICU) and the Iteso in Uganda.

I want to start by first of all, thanking His Excellency the President of Uganda, with his Cabinet for accepting to give this Parliament to pay tribute to Papa Emorimor Osuban. I would also like to thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker because when this death occurred, as a person and as a daughter of Teso, you accepted that this body must come to this House. (Applause) I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for accepting to move this motion because if she did not, maybe we would not be seated in this House.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about Papa Emorimor. I had a friend from Norway; he was an ambassador to Uganda in the 1980s. He once asked me, “What is the name of your king?” I told him that he is called Papa Emorimor Osuban Augustine. He said, “No, I know him as Augustine Osuban.” I asked where he knew him from and he said, “He was a very good friend of mine, when he was working in the Ministry of Agriculture.” He was a golfer and all of us know what a golfer is. Golfers are people of high class and integrity. This is the man we are talking about. 

Madam Speaker, my friend from Norway told me that Papa Emorimor Osuban Augustine was a man of peace, humility, a very good listener, timekeeper and very patient. Indeed, when I got to know our king, I found these attributes in Papa Emorimor. I pray that the Iteso community emulates what he did.

Papa Emorimor was a cultural leader but a very good Christian and I think you mentioned it. On the 3rd of January this year, when we were called to Madera for prayers for the leaders of Teso, he told us, “This is the church in which I was baptised.” I said wow, a cultural leader! Madam Speaker, I am happy that his body will lie in state in that church, in memory of this great man. 

Papa Emorimor has left us with challenges but his attributes will never be forgotten. (Member timed out.) I want to conclude by saying that Papa Emorimor was a leader who extended leadership from Uganda to Ethiopia and Kenya. He was a leader of a certain calibre. Madam Speaker, I want to thank you.  Fare thee well Papa, until we meet again. For God and My Country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Mama Cecilia, the fifth prime minister. (Applause)

3.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to pay tribute to this great man of Uganda. It is a rare occasion for Ugandans to come together and speak one language of unity. This is why I feel that the Rt Hon. Speaker has done a good thing for us Ugandans, particularly our generation. 

It is important to know that before Uganda was born, cultural institutions were in existence and so, what we can do is to congratulate the governments that have taken us from the pre-colonial stage up to now. We should thank them that at every stage, we promoted cultural institutions. 

Madam Speaker, I thank God that you come from the Teso community. I have always shared with the late Emorimor that the birth of unity of Uganda is in an area, under the rock called Kangai-Dokolo, which was part of Kaberamaido. This is where Uganda was born and where a strong resistance was put to ensure that Kabalega, Kabaka Mwanga, Rwot Awich remained firm that the British could not uproot them and it proved that Uganda is one. (Applause)

The people of Dokolo shed their blood, the people of Teso died to protect the King of Buganda and Bunyoro, under the strong leadership of Rwot Awich. It is, therefore, important that when we bury these great men -(Interjections). Madam Speaker, I am now on this side so you have to protect me. Madam Speaker, protect me from yellow. (Applause) This is not a joking matter. 

The Emorimor of Teso understood the concept of conflict resolution and peaceful resolution of conflict. We know that northern Uganda and eastern Uganda were devastated by rebellion. The Emorimor stood firm and it was in Lango, Acholi and Teso that we mobilised our own Arrow Boys and Amuka and they stood side-by-side with the Government forces to fight the menace of rebellion. Therefore, it is important that we remember this great man as a man of peace. He was a man who put Teso first and the rest would follow. So, those of you who played a role as Arrow Boys, some of you were very young. I played my role as “Amuka Boy” – I was not called a “girl” then; I was called “Amuka Boy”. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I knew Papa before he became the Emorimor and I was privileged to attend his inauguration. It was massive. We had the Iteso from Kenya. I did not know there were Iteso in Tanzania; I saw them on that day. Therefore, he was a very strong and powerful man who had actually created East Africa around Teso. Therefore, you, the Iteso, are very fortunate that you had a leader who had shown you the way before we reached the East African Federation –(Member timed out.) 

Madam Speaker, if you could ask your technical team to have mercy on me. I am a senior citizen. (Laughter) Some of the young people do not know that some of us were humbled when we saw the Emorimor coming out of his closet as a distinguished researcher that made Serere Research Centre become one of the top research centres for agricultural produce, that improved agriculture in this country.

However, he chose to abandon his profession in order to lead the Iteso. This is a humbling choice and the Iteso should never forget that. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Emorimor remembered and knew that the role of a cultural institution was to promote justice. Justice did not start from the making of the Constitution. In our cultures, we had traditional justice. We used to have Kayo Cuk and the Iteso understood it. That is why when we talk about conflict these days, we should seek the wisdom of these old people who are still around to tell us what to do and not to be swayed by politics. Politics started yesterday but these old people were there with our cultures for generations and they fought for the unity of Uganda. Today, we have independence because they were firm. Can we also prove that we can be firm, just as they remained firm? 

Madam Speaker, I have one request: can we make sure that we honour all the traditional leaders who are here in Uganda because the Government has taken it as a responsibility to promote cultural institutions and make sure - (Member timed out.)

I said, finally –(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, let us make sure that they do not live in misery. For God and my Country. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is good we have the agemates of late Emorimor here in the House. I request that you try your best to promote justice in the House and do some peace-making as one of the elders – the OGs – of the Emorimor.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORT (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to the late Papa Emorimor on three fronts. On front number one, as the fraternal family of the Ministry of Education and Sports, the late Papa Emorimor gave the country a son who served in a senior position. Unfortunately, recently, he went to be with the Lord. As we pay tribute to his late father, Papa Emorimor, this is a double tragedy, within a very short period of time, to the people of Teso. 

Secondly, as a son of Lango, the people of Teso are brothers and sisters. I say this because when you look at our clan systems, whereas in Teso you have Itekok, in lango, we have Atek and this is regarded as one of the finest clans in Lango and Teso and I come from that clan. (Laughter) Whereas in Teso you have Ikaribwok, in lango, we have Okarowok. Whereas in Teso you have Irarak, in lango we have Arak. 

Therefore, I stand with you, the people of Teso – our brothers and sisters – in this very trying moment when we have lost our own giant, Papa Emorimor; the centre of peace, a person who exuded unity in diversity and unity of purpose, not only for the people of Teso but for the people of Uganda. 

I pay tribute, as a neighbour of Teso. Alebtong shares a border with Amuria. I share a border with Hon. Gen. Jeje Odongo. When we are campaigning, we invite each other. I invite JeJe to a place called Akisim in my constituency. When I am there, I speak in English and it is translated because it is full of Iteso and we do the same thing. So, as a neighbour, I condole with the wider community of the people of Teso. Papa Emorimor, rest in eternal peace. God bless your soul. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. He only did not say that even the Speaker is an Atek.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (ECONOMIC MONITORING) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Ngariam County in Katakwi District, I stand here as one of the subjects of Papa Emorimor to pay tribute to him. 

First, I would like to thank you for highlighting our history as the Ateker people. Papa had been the Emorimor for all the Ateker people, right from Ethiopia up to here in Uganda. This must be made as a point of emphasis. 

Secondly, I would like to put this on record. When I was growing up, I was told that “Iteso” in full means the following;

“I” means we are very intelligent people. It is a fact. (Laughter) We are very intelligent people.

“T” means we are very trustworthy – and you heard the type of people the Rt Hon. Speaker read here. They speak for themselves. 

“E” means we are very educated people.

“S” means we are very social. If you want to see a sociable person, Peter Ogwang is here. (Laughter) 

“O” means we are very organised people. We can speak for ourselves; the late was one of the most organised cultural leaders we have had in this country. No wonder, our cultural institution could never have issues of disunity. 

Madam Speaker, to us who have remained, the following are my prayers:

We need to unite our people for development;

We need to work with our youth to help our cultural institutions grow beyond where Papa Emorimor has left us today;

Madam Speaker, I am conflicted here. The late appointed my father-in-law the Minister of Security in his kingdom. I marry from Tororo and I have my in-laws from Kenya. It is true our programme here talks about Papa Emorimor only remaining in Tororo. I would beg that Government accepts that the body of Papa Emorimor crosses to Malaba, Kenya, where his subjects are because I know Papa Emorimor has been crossing to Kenya to look after his subjects. Therefore, it is my humble appeal for the Ateker people who are in Kenya; and

The last is for us, as Ateker people, to build a palace for our kingdom. We must stand together and work hard to put up a big palace for our kingdom. May the soul of Papa Emorimor rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (BUNYORO AFFAIRS) (Ms Jennifer Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Kibuku District and Bunyoro Kitara Kingdom, I bring sympathies to the family, the Itesot and Uganda generally.  

Papa Osuban was a uniting factor. He was a person of excellent character, high integrity and he inspired many of us. As a former Member of Parliament for the greater Pallisa, we observed Papa Iteso and he did not interfere in the local politics. He supported all of us. He was a wonderful mobiliser. He corroborated very well with all the other cultural leaders. We shall miss him.

I want to appeal that as leaders in all spheres, we should emulate the late. He was a source of inspiration to many and was a humble leader who really mobilised everybody. 

Madam Speaker, as a country, we have lost an icon who went beyond the borders of Uganda to mobilise everybody for development, education and social development. We shall miss him because he left us at a time when the country is focusing on socio-economic transformation. May his soul rest in peace.

3.34
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Tororo and Teso, I would like to pay my condolences to all the children, the mothers and the women of Teso. 

In 2009, Papa Emorimor visited Tororo. That day, we had a serious downpour. However, the people of Tororo lined for more than 10 kilometres to receive the late. More than 50 cars appeared from all directions escorting him. That tour ended in Kenya. Works and business at the Malaba border up to Magoro in Kenya came to a standstill.

Papa Emorimor made my work very easy. He negotiated, discussed with the President and also engaged other cultural leaders to ensure there is peace. 

I take this opportunity – I have received calls from the people of Kenya. For the information of some of us who might be here but not in the know, part of Teso, Magoro, which is in Kenya was transferred to Kenya in 1902. 

His Excellency, the President is a promoter of unity and peace in East Africa. It would be very good and important that the body of the late crosses to Malaba, Kenya. The Governor has appealed to you, Madam Speaker and Government - the people of Kenya are waiting, including the Deputy President and the President of Kenya. 

I received a call from Governor Ojaamong who requested me to put this on record for the Government of –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, that is the request.

Finally, in memory of the late, I request the President to resolve the outstanding question of Tororo and bring that matter to a conclusion so that the issue of the district is resolved amicably now that there is consensus both in Tororo County and West Budama. May his soul rest in peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Obiga, Tororo issue?

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker,  I stand to extend my condolences to the family, the people of Teso Region and the people of Uganda, upon the death of our great elder and leader.

I do not come from an area with a strong and big cultural institution but I recognise the importance of culture in our lives. There are two reasons, for which I want to pay tribute to our elder. Many of us as we grow and go to school, we think we should abandon our cultural values. This leader did not abandon his cultural background.

As an individual - perhaps we are paying tribute to him as a group. The big challenge would be, as individuals and leaders, are we capable of following those cultural practices, which he did? That should be the challenge to all of us. 

He was highly educated but that did not adulterate his desire for his culture. He remained a cultural person and a great personality. A person without cultural identity is not a complete person. You are only what you are because of your culture. Many of our forefathers, because of religion or education, abandoned their cultural practices in Africa and as a result, we have had to copy what we cannot practice best. What we are copying a mere a copy. Therefore, we cannot be the masters of what we copy. 

Therefore, when we talk about the culture promoted by Papa Emorimor, we must have our own identity. There are good practices in our culture, even in the religious sector. I was told he is a Catholic and yet he was practicing culture within the Catholic Church. 

Therefore, my appeal on this occasion to all of us is, this should not be a cause for us - education and any other thing should not be a cause for us to abandon our cultural practices. 

Finally, many of our children today are getting out of control because of the absence of the cultural practices, which used to teach them good manners and good ways of growing up. I suggest we go back to those grounds. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.41
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to rise in support of the motion to pay tribute to the late Emorimor Augustine Osuban.

Madam Speaker, allow me applaud the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition for the tributes they laid down about the late. I met the late in July 2016 in Bukedea and he called me slowly and spoke to me. He said, “I know you, Muhammad, but I know your Mzee more because we worked together in the civil service.” Then he told me, “I am glad you visited Teso but do not leave Teso with nothing.” When I asked him, he said, “At least go back when you know the Teso anthem.” 

Then I said “but I do not even know a word. I only know Biaibo, Sir.” He said, “Now I will give you this gentleman…” There was a gentleman behind him who taught me a few lines in the anthem. To date, I still remember those lines that start, “Emuria Kolia Koliayi, Emuria Kolia, Koliayi, Kojai Aipuc K’ainapakin Neja Iteso.” (Applause) I learnt it that day. It was played that day. On that day, I remember we were launching the ambulance that was being donated by the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker; I think it was on 16 July 2016. 

The diversity of our culture - you can imagine I did not know any Ateso but he told me that I must leave knowing something. Therefore, I would like to commend all the people that know the wealth embedded in our cultures and traditions. Our diversity is not for us to disunite but to unite. 

The words from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal on how the leaders stood side by side in the fight against colonialism, by trying to keep the unity and diversity of the African people, is what we shall and must uphold. The promotion of culture across borders from Ethiopia, Kenya and elsewhere, including those in the diaspora - the Iteso in the diaspora –(Member timed out.)

MR NSEREKO: Okay, can I wind up? Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Iteso in the diaspora is a manifestation that if we agree that God has not created us in the same way, that we shall have man and woman, that we shall be from different tribes; that we shall have different ethnicity but also accept that we are one humanity, then that shall build a country and a world where we shall live in peace and harmony. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. 

3.45
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Busoga Kingdom, Kigulu South Constituency and myself, I wish to convey heartfelt condolences to the people of Teso and the family of the late Augustine Osuban, who is being seen off. 

Madam Speaker, I have three things to talk about; about the East African integration - up to now, we are struggling to entrench and popularise the East African Community. However, the late Augustine has been an icon in promoting the integration of East Africa by crossing over borders and following up Itesots in different districts in different countries. Hence, we salute him for that. 

I would like to tell the House that I have been to every district of this country performing different obligations both for my party and also parliamentary work. One thing that should be on record is that through the late, the people of Teso did embrace education. 

During my first visit to the far Teso, I was going to Katakwi when Her Excellency, the Vice President, organised a memorial service for the late Epel, her late dad. I got lost somewhere along the way and I stopped at a bridge where people were cultivating rice. The people in the swamp spoke fluent English. This endeared me to like the Teso people so much. I heard words like “Moti Moti and Etamit.” These are sweet words that are really endearing. Madam Speaker, as we see off our senior citizen, we need to push forward his legacy. 

On culture, there is a lot of moral decadence in society. It is cultural leaders and cultural institutions that we should appeal to, to preach mentorship, parenting and ensure that we get back on track. Otherwise, our children, our – (Member timed out.)

3.47
MS CATHERINE MAVENJINA (NRM, Older Persons Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to our late Papa Emorimor Augustine Osuban. His record speaks volumes. No wonder he was a uniting factor. Papa was somebody who valued education very highly; he contributed a lot to peace and the development of this country. 

When you hear the age of Papa Emorimor Augustine, I think he was very highly educated. At that age, it was very rare to find Ugandans who were very highly educated. He served this country; he worked for the Government at the level of a Commissioner in Agriculture. It was not easy to get such education amongst our people. Even today, we are still struggling to raise the standard of education. Therefore, we would like to praise Papa Augustine for all that he has done. 

I would also like to thank the Government, led by His Excellency, the President, for according him this befitting state funeral, which he very much deserves. 

Papa Augustine has led by example. He served the country and he fully accomplished the motto of Uganda “For God and My Country.” On behalf of the Alur Kingdom where I come from, and also on behalf of the older persons of Northern Uganda, whom I represent, I would like to convey condolences to the family that is here with us, to the people of Teso and to the entire Uganda. 

I thank the doctors who struggled to treat him and prolong his life but we have to accept the will of God. We celebrate the life of Papa Augustine the Emorimor and we pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The timekeeper has forgotten. I have a message from the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament:
“The family of the late Emorimor Osuban Lemukol, Soroti, Uganda. Condolence Message. Last week, we received extremely shocking and devastating news: Emorimor Augustine Osuban, a pillar of peace and a library of wisdom breathed his last in Mulago National Referral Hospital, where he had been hospitalised for nearly a fortnight.

The people of Teso are mourning; the nation is mourning the demise of a gentle, honest and most of all, a kindhearted leader.

Papa Osuban will be remembered for his contribution towards ensuring a peaceful, prosperous Teso Subregion; employing diplomacy and honesty at every single opportunity. 

I pray to God to grant his family and the people Teso the strength to get through this trying moment, as well as the wisdom to replicate the life of Papa Emorimor Osuban. May the soul of Papa Emorimor Augustine, rest in a peace.”

He sent this letter and we printed it out. As you are aware, he is away. We thank him for the condolence message. (Applause)

There is an elder here, an age mate to Papa Emorimor. There is also Baba there, his fellow age mate. 

3.53
MR JAMES NSABA-BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I come from Kisoro District. In Kisoro, we do not have cultural or traditional leaders in the same way other parts of the country do. However, what caught my eye about the late Emorimor was his distinctive emphasis on two vital areas that have given this nation the chance to be what it is.  This nation depends on two vital areas; unity and morality. Adherence to moral values by nationals will save this country. However, as it is today, we see deterioration in the values that would normally make this nation a great nation. 

The late Emorimor was distinctively above many of his colleagues in putting emphasis on those two vital areas of unity and morality. I, therefore, share my grief with those who are bereaved that this nation has lost a great man.

Finally, it is essential that we recognise - all of us who are leaders - that much as we must be proud of where we come from, the bigger factor - and this is where the Emorimor was particularly appreciated - the emphasis of unity of Ugandans. It is good we talk about unity in a tribal sense but we have to go beyond that and put emphasis on the unity of Ugandans. The Emorimor did that. May his soul rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. 

3.55
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Madam Speaker, isn't it an honour and a real privilege that you, the daughter of Teso is the one presiding over this sendoff of your Paramount Chief? I congratulate you for honouring this.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the Emorimor has left this earth after his subjects have risen to some of the highest positions in this country. The Vice-President is here, you are here, I do not know whether Jeje Odongo is here, the Ogwangs, the Adoas, the Ecwerus have been dotted all around during his reign. We say “thank you to the Lord” for blessing his subjects in this Government. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I come from Koboko and I am a Kakwa. I believe as a Nilo-Hamite, I have some relation to the Iteso. Let me say why: The Iteso call a cow “akiteng”, we call it “kite”; they call a goat “akinei” and we call it “kine”; they call the sun “akolong” and we call it “kolo”; aren’t we really related to these people? (Laughter) Therefore, I want to plead that the next Emorimor should find his way to Koboko and integrate us into the Iteso family. 

I congratulate the Iteso for choosing the name “Emorimor” for their Paramount Chief. I am told that word means “unifier”. Whereas other cultural leaders are in chaos, the Iteso are united and working together. Thank you. May God bless the Emorimor.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, elder.

3.57
MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very difficult to mention and sometimes very difficult to believe. When I heard about the death of Papa Emorimor, I was so confused that I could not immediately believe it. However, at the end of the day, I came to terms with it.

Many people have mentioned it; so, I may not need to repeat it but the Emorimor was all that people have mentioned here.

We pray to God that his successor takes after his good heart and hardworking character. We ask God to put him in the right house and rest him in eternal peace. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

3.58
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti City): Madam Speaker, I join our people in Teso - and from wherever they are - to mourn the great son of Teso, Papa Emorimor, a man who was very humble that some people took his humility for weakness. 

I thank Papa Emorimor; he called me to his house, prayed for me and told me, “You are going to become a Member of Parliament” and indeed, today, I am here as a Member of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, the Emorimor was a very good negotiator. Whereas situations dictated that he makes political statements, he stayed away from that. He negotiated with Government, especially in the area of cattle compensation. I am only disappointed that he has died before the issue of Teso cattle compensation materialised. 

Secondly, I want to raise this matter here. The Iteso were No.2 next to the Baganda but these young men and women in the Population Secretariat and the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) have manipulated figures to reduce us to No.6. That is where we are today. Historically, we were No. 2 next to the Baganda and this is on record. I would like to tell you that Iteso are known for two things: 

1. 	We are very fertile people. 

2. 	In Teso, we marry more than two women; we are very polygamous. (Laughter) 

Therefore, in our homes, we are producing because we are very fertile. What causes the reduction if it is not artificially manipulated? Madam Speaker, I would like to use this occasion today, as we pay tribute to Papa to call upon the review of the figures in UBOS and the Population Secretariat.

Finally, when Papa was addressing the council in 2008, he said that the Government of Uganda had earmarked Shs 250 million to build a guesthouse in Soroti. Madam Speaker, this money has never reached the cultural union to date. I want to know: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, did you give us the money or not? If not, where is our money for building Papa a house? May God bless you. I thank you.

4.01
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. You are aware that since I got involved in an accident on the 9th of November, I have not been able to make it to Parliament. However, because of the greatness of Papa, I had to travel from the constituency today, to be part of this programme. Among the respected leaders in this country, the clan leaders are there and the people of Teso highly respect Papa. 

Madam Speaker, as a unifying factor, it was during his time that the people of Teso were able to meet other “teker” groups from South Sudan, Kenya, Ethiopia and Tanzania and we are really very grateful about it. He promoted cultural values. 

Papa had a team of people who were moving from one district to another, one parish to another and settling conflicts about land ownership. We really applaud his leadership because a number of families settled down and a number of conflicts were resolved. 

Most of our colleagues have spoken about the characters and attributes of the late Papa. However, he spared time to attend most of the cultural organisations. I witnessed Papa attending the enthronement of clan leaders. He had to spare time to be in Ogooma and Chile, meaning that he was not only stationed in one area; he was able to move to various areas to witness enthronement of various cultural leaders. We want to challenge the various cultural leaders across the country not to forget the values that Papa taught them at the time he was still alive. May his soul rest in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.04
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kanyum County, where I am a guardian and on behalf of the clan of Ikaruwok, I would like to pay tribute to the late Papa Augustine Osuban Lemukol.

Philippians 2:17 reads: “Even if I am being poured out like a drink offering on the sacrifice and service for your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all.” The late Papa was named to bring about salvation to the people that he led. No wonder they gave him a name “Osuban”. Osuban comes from the Ateso word “Asuban”, which means sacrifice. 

That word originates from the name of the Almighty meaning creation. No wonder, they added his other name to mean Lemukol, which is a bull of a certain colour, “lukol”. 

Therefore, it is not surprising that at this particular time, in the timing of the Almighty father, he decided to take him. However, it is a message He has left behind for the people of Teso and Africa as a whole, that your salvation in whatever suffering you have been going through has come; get ready. I thank you very much.

4.06
MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Permit me to pay tribute, on behalf of the people of Usuk County and Teso. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the President of the Republic of Uganda, who, during the promulgation of the Constitution deemed it right to restore the cultural institutions. We are sitting here paying tribute because of the enactment in the 1995 Constitution.

As people of Teso, we would like to thank the President for according us this official ceremony. We do not underrate the compassion that has been extended to the people of Teso across the divide. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said. The character of Papa is on record: he was an enviable character, the humility and the beacon of peace. The unity as the name connotes is not something easy to come by. He was selfless and very sacrificing; listening to the people of Teso. His cry has repeatedly been, “I pray that the people of Teso are united”. 

As a young man of that age – he had not reached the age of the elderly - we still looked up to him for his guidance and wisdom. As the youth of Teso, we feel that we have lost our advisor on culture. It is not surprising that when you go to Teso, many speak English and it is true but we have paid a big price - the culture has been eroded. Our language is getting corrupted in Kampala. Thank you. Rest in peace, Papa.

4.08
MS JOAN ACOM (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank all of us for standing with the people of Teso. 

A lot has been said but I just want to add my voice and say that Papa always told us, whenever we met him as Members of Parliament – it still goes back to cattle compensation. His wish was to witness the compensation for our cattle take place in Teso. 

It is very unfortunate that he is no more and he will not be there to witness that. He also added that with all the 44 Members of Parliament in Teso, we have ministers, the Deputy Speaker and the Vice-President; there is no way Teso can fail to be compensated. If he is to be happy wherever he is, as the Teso team, let us speak one language and ensure that we fulfil Papa Emorimor’s dream. 

He was also very passionate about education, especially girl-child education. He was also ready to speak for us and to come out to ensure that the Government brings back the scholarship issue in Teso. It is our humble prayer that this is brought back so that our children can be educated. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Before Anna comes, I need to assure you that the compensation will take place. (Applause)

On the issue of education, we have Soroti University. The Iteso will always remain on top. They will always remain educated. When the Vice-President was minister, she negotiated for scholarships and we still have them. Thank you, Vice-President. We will always remain educated. 

4.11
MS ANNA ADEKE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to offer condolences to the people of Teso, on my behalf and on behalf of the Forum for Democratic Change party, wherein I serve as the deputy president. 

I also bring condolences on behalf of my party president, Hon. Patrick Amuriat Oboi, who is also part of the Ateker people. He defined the deceased, our Emorimor, as an icon, a unifier, an agriculturalist, a lover of peace and a custodian of the great Iteso people.

The presence of a cultural leader brings so much unity among the people. We enjoyed unity because we had the Emorimor. It is at this time that my heart goes out to the Rwenzururu people who are also a nation state like us, the Ateker people, and have for long been without their leader. Now that we are sending off Papa Emorimor, I feel their pain yet their leader is still alive; he is under political persecution. 

My appeal to the Government is that these traditional leaders are a symbol of unity. They are a symbol of belonging for our people. Return and restore the Rwenzururu king to his people so that they can also enjoy their cultural heritage just like other nation states, tribal states or kingdom states within our country are also enjoying the presence of their cultural leaders. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Adeke. We will continue enjoying the unity in Teso even when our Papa has gone. Unity comes from our hearts. 

4.14
MS STELLA ISODO (FDC, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ngora District and my clan, Irarak, I would like to add my voice to the country’s to pay tribute to Papa Emorimor. He promoted unity among the Ateker people. He would never want to identify with cattle raids. He promoted dialogue.

For Teso subregion, Papa Emorimor not only advocated for a university but a science-based university. This might have been because he was a scientist and was educated by Teso district. 

I would like to call upon all of us, the Ateker people, to advocate for and promote the idea of a palace. A palace is a decent official residence for a king. I would like to add my voice to Hon. Ogwang’s that we should have a very large and prominent home for a king in Teso. I beg to submit. 

4.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, the people of Kumi District, the people of Teso, Ugandan nationals and other nationals, I convey my deepest condolences to the family of Papa. 

The late was our first cultural leader after the enactment of the 1995 Constitution. I am proud of him. 

When you look at Article 246(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, it states,

“Article 246

Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the institution of traditional leader or cultural leader may exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs, traditions or wishes and aspirations of the people to whom it applies.” 

Our leader stayed by the Constitution. I never saw him at any moment against the law. He tried his best to be on the side of the law. And we have learnt to be like him. 

The people of Teso will always miss this very kind person. He has left a large legacy. I am surprised today that two things happened in this House. One, Hon. Cecilia Ogwal crossed over to the other side and used the microphone on the Government side, for the first time, as we paid tribute to Papa (Laughter)

The other thing is that the Opposition has been out of the House in protest, but managed to come back, solely, to pay tribute to the fallen king of Teso. 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

4.17
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the people of Teso, Parliament and everyone in celebrating the life of Papa. 

We share a lot in common with Iteso. We have a belt that cuts from Karamoja, Teso, through Acholi to West Nile. 

My prayer is to those who are alive and in the kingdom. We are thinking of replacing Papa after sending him off. I pray for calm. I pray for a character that will precede the unity Papa had ushered in and the culture he always believed in.

I love you very much as a Roman Catholic and a sister to you, Papa. I ask that you always remember your people so that nothing changes when you are not there. This is especially in reference to your family. I see very many girls. I have a brother who has married from there. We enjoy your food. We share almost the same food. 

May your soul rest in peace. 

4.19
MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Butebo District, I would like to extend my hearty condolences to the family. Death brings hopelessness. 

The establishment of the Emorimor institution brought greater peace, unity and development, all steered by Papa Emorimor. He did not achieve these without specific qualities of good listening and consensus building. One time, I was in a heated meeting where Papa was present. However, as people made outbursts, he just calmly listened. The attribute of good temperament is not for all but Papa Emorimor had it. 

I would like to thank the council up there who helped him steer the establishment and I thank the Government for according him an enabling environment to serve his people. 

The people of Butebo will greatly miss him; for once in my adulthood, I saw people going across districts for cultural competition. This was amazing. I urge all of -(Member timed out.)

4.02
MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): On behalf of the people of Busia District, the Basamia-Bagwe and all people living in Busia, I would like to join the rest of people of Uganda to celebrate the life of Papa Emorimor, a great leader from where the sun rises.

Many words have been talked about him but I can say that I am a leader because partly, I got a blessing from him through the Chairperson of the Teso Cultural Council. 

We have linkages with the people from Teso land. That is why in Busia, we have clans like “Abakomolo” who, in Teso, are called “Ikomolo.” We have “Natikoko” and they have “Ikatekok” and so, we are the same people but in general, I want to thank and celebrate his life.

He was a leader and a politician who knew how to work in all situations. He was one of the ministers who never went to exile, which means he knew how to study the political temperature of all the times.

I, therefore, want to strengthen the people of Teso land and at the same time, pray that the coming king should continue to unite the people of Teso land so that we work together to build stronger cultural institutions in this country.

I will not leave before talking about how the people of Busia appreciate the Teso culture. Teso women are very good cooks. They know how to-(Member timed out.)

4.23
MR PASCAL MBABAZI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion. A lot has been spoken about the fallen King. However, I will categorically single out a point that he has been a unifying leader in this country.

In 2018, he organised a conference in the United Kingdom that unified all Ugandans from Karamoja and Teso subregions. It was in that conference that the Karamojong started the foundation known as Karamojong UK Foundation, which is still important in this country in terms of promoting education, health, agriculture and others. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternity. Thank you.

4.25
GEN. PETER ELWELU (UPDF, Representative): Madam Speaker, I rise in support of the motion but also to mourn our departed elder. Today is a special day for Papa Emorimor and as the Bible says; “Greater is a day of death than the day one is born.” We give glory and honour to the Almighty for his life and contribution to humanity. May His Grace lead him home.

I interacted with Papa twice when I visited him at his home. He received me, cooked for me and we shared a meal. He told me the four things he cherished very much, which were passed over to him by our ancestors. These are the values of obedience, humility, honesty, hardwork and self-reliance. That was what Papa Emorimor valued and cherished; you could see it in him.

Even when they stopped him from going to Tororo, he never fought and there was no teargas. He was law abiding. He remained with his humility. I saw him one day when the Vice-President went to greet him, standing up from his chair to greet her. He used to dress in leopard skin but did not have a leopard heart. He had a very good heart.

Madam Speaker, he has left and his generation is gone. The new generation has a challenge to make sure we promote the values that he believed in. I know we have our own challenges but if we fail to follow those values, I assure you we shall perish. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.28
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion to pay glowing tribute to the late Papa Osuban who has left at a time when the country needed him most.

I was seated there wondering about this country; if such persons who have held this country together keep leaving the stage, what will befall this country?

Anyhow, I thank the Lord for the life and gift of life that he gave Papa and I regard him as the light of this country. First of all, he was an accomplished academician, a researcher and had tolerance and humility. He was not a mere cultural leader but he was serving his people and was very well informed; we are saddened by his sudden demise. 

I was sharing with Hon. Alanyo and we wished we had had an opportunity to pay this tribute, when he was still alive so that he could see tribute pouring in from the north, the west, central and all over the country, to know the kind of person the Ateker produced for this country. 

Therefore, once again, I thank God for his life. And on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Lwemiyaga County and the people of Uganda, particularly my church, the Uganda Orthodox Church, we are together with you in this time of need. We pray that the Almighty God rests him in peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have the Sabakristo of the Catholic Church, where Papa belonged.

4.30
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute and to celebrate a life that has been talked about generously. On behalf of the Parliament of Uganda Catholic Chaplaincy, the people Acholi and my lovely husband, who is from Teso, I convey my deepest condolences. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to give testimony that when two communities come together, it is beautiful. On 12 December 2009, Archbishop John Baptist Odama joined us in holy matrimony. And he told us, “Irarak clan and the Boro clan of Lamogi; today you are one.” And that day we became one. That is why today, I am a proud daughter of Teso because I was loved, I am still loved, and I will always be loved and that is why I am here as a daughter, not a daughter-in-law but a daughter because I was accepted. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say one or two issues regarding some of our policies. I have heard extensively how the late dedicated his time and read extensively –(Interjections)– just a second; on agriculture. But as a country, as we are struggling and working on our Budget, how much of our budget is going towards agriculture? Can we make this a special tribute to Papa, that even as we look at our Budget, we make it a priority that agriculture begins to shine because this is a sector that is employing over 70 per cent of our people? 

And then, all these institutions that Papa worked for: Serere and Arapai, in what state are they now? In his memory, can we do something that will uplift these institutions that will promote agriculture? Rest in peace, Papa. Eternal rest granted unto him, oh, Lord, and let perpetual light shine upon Him. May he rest in peace. Amen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As we think of increasing the budget of agriculture, we should be able, as Members of Parliament, to also look at mind-set change. How much have we educated our people about agriculture? How much have our people embraced agriculture? That is something that we need to do. We can allocate the money but it will end up being wasted. 

4.34
MR AMOS KANKUNDA (NRM, Rwampara County, Rwampara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At this time, I would also like to condole with you and the people of Teso for having lost a great leader. As I was sunken in my seat, I did not know how to describe the feeling I had. I was feeling sad but at the same time, happy. This reminded me of the words Shakespeare used in Romeo and Juliet; “Why are you sad? I am sad because I am missing that which makes me happy.”

Knowing that I hail from Ankole, I hope you understand what I mean. Noting that we have you, would have made me happy and to say I am happy on your behalf, for having a great leader like the Emorimor. Of course, we are sad for, he has passed on. 

However, even when Jesus died, we were sad and at the same time, we were very happy - sad because he had passed on but happy because he had saved us from our sins. I am happy, on behalf of the people of Teso, for having a great leader. I am also sad that we have not had an experience with him in Ankole. 

I was thinking of talking to my brothers, Hon. Okiror and Hon. Ogwang, on whether I could have a piece of land in Teso- Madam Speaker, I have learned some words like biaibo, ejayi isirigin,  you can give me a piece of land-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I can add you another word of aberu. 

4.36
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of West Budama instructed me to deliver a written text and you will permit me to run through it for about two minutes. 

On behalf of the people of West Budama and Tororo District in general, permit me to add my voice in paying tribute to the distinguished Teso cultural leader and Paramount Chief, Papa Augustine Osuban Lemukol. The Emorimor passed on, on Saturday, 5 February 2022 at Mulago National Referral Hospital. 

Madam Speaker, the passing of the Emorimor Papa Iteso is a great loss not just to the Iteso people but to the country as a whole and humanity in general. Personally, I was introduced to Papa Emorimor in early 2000 by Hon. Mike Mukula; I heard you introducing him. 

The Emorimor, Papa Iteso, is indeed a title that Papa Osuban Lemukol deserved. He was the epitome of kindness, loyalty, generosity and he was a father-figure to many of humankind and this includes people like the Japadhola, who hail from the great padhola.

Madam Speaker, as communities, our cultures are slowly getting lost because of the other cultural values and practices. In the process, we continue to forfeit rich cultural norms and practices of the African people. The death of Papa the Emorimor, viewed against this background is indeed a great loss.
 
In traditional societies, the underlying expectation is that a leader should judge rightly and act ethically in pursuance of the common good. Papa Emorimor always passed this test. He was a sage, an embodiment or encyclopedia of indigenous wisdom, well-grounded in his responsibilities to the community, the nation and the world. 

He liberally and eloquently dispensed his wisdom through a mastery of language, folklore, proverbs, songs, ceremonies, dutiful cultural artefacts - I heard you talk about the leopard skin and performing arts - myths and he was very knowledgeable in traditional law. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.40
The government chief whip (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues, on my own behalf and on behalf of the NRM Caucus in the House, to mourn with our colleagues in Teso, you, Madam Speaker, our Vice-President, our President and the country.

It is very important to note that whereas Papa was a chief or king of the Iteso, he was a nationalist in nature. I never heard any politician on any day complain that they had lost an election or that they had not been welcomed in Teso. Despite having a son of Teso as a presidential candidate, he welcomed everyone in Teso. We never had any situation where you could say that the Iteso cultural institution is supporting so and so in the elections. He was very clear; “Everyone is welcome in Teso.” He never got himself involved in the politics. (Applause)

Papa also supported Government programmes. He knew that Government is a partner and never tried to compete with it. I think that is a very strong message to other cultural institutions; that you do not compete with Government but you partner with it. Government is a very strong institution, which cultural institutions cannot challenge but can only work with. We thank Papa for that. May his soul rest in peace.

I pledge to our colleagues that the moment you start – of building the palace, we members of the NRM Caucus in Parliament, shall mobilise ourselves from Karamoja, Ankole and Kigezi, come to support you and ensure that we get the palace for the institution of Iteso Cultural Union. Thank you. 

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you very much, Government Chief Whip.  We will always appreciate. Of course, what you have said is very important – co-existence. 
Hon. Elijah, give us direction. You are not going to speak; you will speak at the funeral. Hon. Elijah is the area Member of Parliament.

4.42
Mr Elijah okupa (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second and support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Papa Emorimor - His Highness Emorimor Papa Kadugala Osuban Augustine Lemukol - as moved by the Prime Minister, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and a number of colleagues. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you because when His Highness was referred to Mulago, you were called. The doctors at Mulago said, “Your patient.” In fact, they gave him the name, “Your patient.” I want to thank you for the role that you played. It is only as written in Ecclesiastes 3:1-18 that there is a time for everything. There is time to be born and time to die. The Almighty God took his life. 

Allow me also thank the Vice-president. Last month, we were in for prayers that were called by the Christian leaders of Teso, headed by Bishop Eciru. The Vice-President was the guest of honour. I thank you for the assistance that you gave on top of what you had been giving. Without your help, Your Excellency, maybe he would have died sometime back.

We thank the doctors of Soroti Hospital, who took care of his life for a number of years when he started feeling sick. Most especially, allow me, on behalf of the people of Serere - where on the 19th we shall be laying him to rest - to thank His Excellency, the President for the help that he has always accorded to His Highness and the kingdom. Many of you are aware that sometime back, he had a problem with this knees and he was flown to India where he had some kneecap replacements. We want to thank Government for that. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, we want again to thank Government for giving a befitting send-off that also enabled you to give this sitting today to honour Papa Emorimor. Thank you for the official offer that you gave for that. (Applause)

A lot has been said and mine is to thank you - being the area MP - for all those kind words that you have given to this son of Teso; the son of Serere. We are proud yet humbled by the kind gesture. 

Allow me now to say that Papa will be laid to rest on the 19th of this month. This was upon the request by the family, but we also thank Government for accepting that. It will be in Serere; it is not very far from Serere Town Council. It is barely two kilometres. I ask all of you to join us on that day as we say, “farewell”.

There is a detailed programme that will be passed on. The Minister of Gender will give it to you. Even the people of Kenya have been asking - the Iteso of Kenya have been asking: “Is it possible for the body to cross to Bungoma?” We leave it to you, Government, whether that is possible. 

The people of Sudan and Ethiopia are represented here by Engineer Piyat. The Minister of Gender will give detailed information. 

We are a big group and we thank God for that. With these few words, we want to pray that the Almighty God that gave us Papa Emorimor receives his soul and puts him in eternal life. 

We pray for journey mercies as we journey to Serere to say, “Farewell” to Papa Emorimor. To the family, we are indebted to you and we shall always be with you; we pray with you. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you. Can we hear –(Hon. Ogwal rose_)- motion? I thought we would hear from the minister first before you bring a motion. Okay, let us first hear her motion.

4.48
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, before we pronounce ourselves on the prayers, I beg to move under Rule 61 to amend the prayers by adding parts (iii) and (iv). 

Part (iii) to read, “Parliament requests Government to revive Serere Agricultural Research Centre in the memory of the late Emorimor, who played a critical role in the establishment of this institution.”

iv. The Government to fast-track the building of the official palace of the Iteso Cultural Institution in memory of the late Emorimor, who displayed a high level of unity in the region and the country. I beg to move.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know very well that in the Constitution, any motion which has financial implications must come from the Government. Even when such a motion comes from the Government - the Government has ways it works; we would need it to first go to the Cabinet and have it approved and then, the Government is able to present it here. Procedurally, if it is just for urging, it would be okay but if it is a prayer to say give it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If I heard it very well, it says, “urging the Government.” 

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: That was not on “urging.” The “urging” was on the Serere Institute. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, can you correct your prayer? 

MS OGWAL: It is “urging the Government…” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In her first prayer, she is urging the Government to ensure that Serere Research Station is revived. The second one is urging the Government to ensure that there is fast-tracking of the kingdom and the palace. The word is “urging” not “instructing”. When urging, you take it back to the Cabinet. That is okay. 

Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Elijah Okupa, Member for Aruu, Hon. Amos Kankunda, Hon. Ekanya, Hon. Anne Adeke, Hon. Joan, Member for Alebtong, Member for Tororo, Hon. Cosmas Elotu, Dr Florence, Hon. Chemutai and the whole House.
  
MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the unanimous support that has been given to this amendment. The Papa we are paying tribute to today was not an ordinary person. This man dedicated all his life to research and to ensure that agricultural production and quality of production was improved in this country. 

It is very disheartening, Madam Speaker, that under your chairmanship, Serere Research Centre is almost vandalised; it is no longer in existence yet we are very grateful that Papa played a critical role in its establishment and ensuring that agricultural production was improved in this country. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is very important that the palace be built not only for Teso but for all the cultural institutions in the country. I beg to move and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.53
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to first thank the family and the institution of the cultural union of Teso for the hard work that they have been engaged in, that resulted into the programme and the determination of when we should send off our leader. 

I would like to also thank Hon. Cecilia Ogwal for the motion, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and all those who have spoken. I want to thank you all and associate myself with all the achievements that have been articulated. 

However, let me reaffirm the question of his role as a cultural leader. He was one of those cultural leaders that was very instrumental in developing the culture of the people of Teso. When he got into office, he started by determining, with this Executive, the Iteso flag, because that is the embodiment of culture; the Teso Anthem, the constitution and the logo. This is because no cultural institution can operate under the Ministry of Gender and the government without a constitution. Hence, gazettement is on the basis of this cultural embodiment of the institution, which he spearheaded. 

He fought for customary land ownership rights. In most circumstances, land rights and how to code land is very crucial. This is why in the Constitution, there are four types of land tenure systems. Under the customary land tenure system, each of the cultural leadership is supposed to come up with how land is managed and this is one of the cultural institutions that came up with the guidelines on customary land ownership under his leadership. 

I was with him in the Juba Peace Process and he committed himself at that time, in 2006, to make sure that as a cultural leader, he was among those who spoke to Joseph Kony to accept peace talks. 

He worked hand in hand with the Ministry of Gender to campaign against early marriages, teenage pregnancy and gender-based violence. He was very instrumental in initiating a scholarship, which is called “The Emorimor Scholarship” of which about 200 children have benefitted and some have graduated. 

He also initiated the Iteso Cultural Union Development Forum and he has participated in several development initiatives. During the COVID-19 campaign, he has been very instrumental in the campaign for vaccination. 

When he was in leadership, he raised the issue of the palace. Someone alluded to the Shs 250 million; yes, that money was earmarked but on the premise that the cultural institution would give a land title. However, since we had not got the land title – it is recently that we have been notified that the Soroti District Local Government has given plots 15 to 17, Serere Road, in Soroti, as land for building the palace. Therefore, we will now request that they tender this officially under the Iteso Cultural Union, so that we are able to process this and build the palace. I welcome the “urging” of this motion and commit that once we get that commitment, we shall proceed with that. 

I would like to also respond to the issue of the programme.  Through consultation with the family and the executive of the cultural union, we discussed the issue of the Iteso from Kenya being able to pay their last respects to Papa. Their proposal, which was adopted by the Government was that Tororo is a district near the border and that the delegation from Kenya would be able to cross and come to Tororo. 

We have consulted with the Tieng Adhola Kingdom and they have issued a press release to welcome the Tororo programme, which is on Wednesday.

Therefore, I want to, first, thank the Tieng Adhola and the people of Tororo for joining and uniting in this very important programme. I propose that – since it was in consultation with the family and the Iteso Cultural Institution and because the Tieng Adhola has welcomed it in the spirit of togetherness – the people of Kenya could cross to Tororo. I would prefer and request that we encourage them so that we unite in Tororo on Wednesday.

However, we have our inter-ministerial organising committee meeting tomorrow. I will still make that proposal because the representative of the cultural union will be there, so that we review this proposal. The other is the issue of whether it is okay to push it to Kenya and then the foreign relations implication and looking at how soon we can get a go-ahead from the Government of Kenya.

I think we will be able to review that tomorrow and update you accordingly. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the honourable members. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Minister of Gender. We sincerely thank you because from the time the old man passed on, I called you and you have been involved. Thank you for that devotion. As the Iteso, we are highly indebted. I also thank the Prime Minister. Do you have something to say? 

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I felt I should give you this information, on behalf of Cabinet. The President has directed that we organise an inter-ministerial committee to look at all cultural institutions so that we bring a budget here that can help them. He was talking of at least Shs 60 million per month. The President wishes these cultural institutions well such that these institutions can perform their mandate. (Applause) 

I thought that as we mourn the Emorimor, I needed to give you information that as Government, we are in the process of making sure that these cultural institutions can have some better funding than what they have now. Thank you. May the soul of Papa Emorimor rest in eternal peace.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, for that information. Toto Jessica Alupo, what would we, as Iteso, do without you? We want to thank you for your contribution, guidance and calmness. I think you are learning from the late that you have to be calm.
 
I now put the question that this House pays glowing tribute to the late Paramount Chief of the Iteso Cultural Union, Emorimor Papa Augustine Osuban Lemukol, for his distinguished service to this nation, with amendments from Hon. Cecilia Ogwal. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

(Iteso Anthem)

(East African Community Anthem)

(Uganda National Anthem)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much for coming to the House. I now direct the Clerk to extract the resolutions from today’s session and give it to the family and Cabinet for implementation. 

As we conclude paying tribute, I would like to make the following appeal to the Iteso and Government; to strengthen the cultural unions by constructing the palace as it has been promised, and also to coexist. Cultural institutions should coexist with the Government. 

As the Government Chief Whip has said, Government is a very strong institution and we cannot live without it. Therefore, we need to coexist. We need active involvement of the youth in the affairs of cultural institutions. 

I also urge my own people, the Iteso, to pursue unity of purpose. The Emorimor has gone; I know there will be issues but let us have unity of purpose. Unity will help us to develop Teso. The Iteso are very proud people: an Itesot will tell you, “throw my mat out” if you annoy an Itesot. However, it is out of this unity that we remain with that pride. 

Lastly, as we conclude, I would like to thank everybody: all the Members of Parliament, the members in the gallery and the family. Thank you. God bless you all. 

I say all these for God and My Country. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 15 February 2022 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 February 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)




