Tuesday, 3 February 2015

Parliament met at 3.19 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome all of you to the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session. I want to welcome you back from the recess and hope that you had time to take a rest and do some work -(Laughter)- some kind of resting and to meet your constituents. 

One or two announcements: First is that the Prime Minister has lost his brother, Mr Rwandere, who will be buried in Kabale on Thursday. So I want to request you to stand and observe a moment of silence. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I want also to report that some progress has been made on the accommodation issues. The Clerk today received Development House and in due course we are going to occupy it. Once it is furnished, Members will be a little bit more comfortable. 

Also, the floor on top of the building is almost ready and very soon we shall be able to sit and work properly. 

I also want to remind Members that the Inspector General of Government has written to you all. You are reminded that your forms should be submitted by the 31 March this year; declaring whether you are rich or poor. (Laughter) So please, take note of those conditions so that we do not get into deep holes.

Also during the recess, a former Member of Parliament, the late Sherali Vandali Jaffer, died. He used to be a Member of Parliament representing the Kabaka Yekka. So, I have proposed to his family that next week we table and debate a motion in his honour. 

Then, of course you are aware that the king of Saudi Arabia died. We are allies of Saudi Arabia so we shall also have a motion to honour the late king.
The parking state remains as before. As soon as connections are made, you will be advised if there are going to be any changes. 

As for business, we have a lot of it but what is ready is the Registration of Persons Bill, which we ended up last year with and which we hope to finish as soon as possible during this sitting. 

As for the Bills which are in the pipeline, I ask Members to do their bit so that we work and finish within the time limit. For now, I will communicate up to there. I will talk about other things tomorrow. Thank you.

3.21
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara District): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am moving on a very sensitive matter of national importance regarding health service delivery in this country.

Madam Speaker, there is a very serious issue of intern doctors in this country and right now, most of them are on strike. I got a phone call from one of the intern doctors and a nurse from Mbarara this morning to the effect that they are not working at all. They have left all the work with the nurses and the other consultants who are rare in hospitals both during day and night. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk, intern doctors and nurses in this country have not received their salaries for the last four months. They were last paid in September 2014.They have neither received the salaries nor the arrears. 

Madam Speaker, I still wonder who has been meeting the bills for these interns for this long if they have been working? If they have been very kind enough not to ask for money from patients honestly, something has gone wrong. 

When a patient is coming to the hospital, the first person they will see is either a nurse or an intern doctor. The clerking of patients and giving the first treatment is done by intern doctors and nurses. Madam Speaker, now that the strike has been going on for two days, it means when the patients go to the hospitals, they have to die because there is nobody to treat them. 

The coffin sellers, however, are in jubilation because business has come to them -(Interjections)- I can take information from hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi, my educated colleague.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Bitekyerezo for giving way. I rise on a point of information to supplement what he is saying.  In the medical profession, when you complete medical school; - and this is true for the medical doctors, nurses at graduate level and the pharmacists - you must undergo one year of internship. 

But, you are basically part of the public service because you get partial registration and you do your internship for that one year before you are fully registered. I recall when I was an intern, Government paid me a regular salary. 

The problem that the hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo is raising is that intern doctors, nurses and pharmacists were last paid in September of last year (2014) and have not received their allowances for the months of: October, November and December, 2014, and January and February of 2015. 
In some hospitals like Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, when the interns went on strike, they were arrested by police and evicted from their hostels. 

Like my colleague has said, in the national referral hospitals and the regional referral hospitals, health services are largely provided by intern doctors and postgraduate students. 

So, the question is: why isn’t Government paying the intern doctors and nurses as well as pharmacists yet they are known and Government must have planned for their allowances? That is the information I want to give.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, my colleague. Madam Speaker, we have the Minister of Finance in this House. We have the Minister of Public Service and the Minister of Health too; I am seeing the Rt. hon. Muganwa Kajura seated here acting as Leader of Government Business.

My problem is very simple. As Members of Parliament, we are insured and we can get better treatment in private units whenever we fall sick. What about those poor people; our voters in the villages for example, in Mbarara Municipality and those in Kampala here in Kisenyi who want the services of these interns? Who is catering for them?

Can the three minsters mentioned, Madam Speaker, tell us what exactly they are doing in these ministries when health service providers cannot be paid leading to deaths of patients?

Surely, if you are the Minister of Health and you have intern doctors and nurses who have not been paid for three or four months and you are happy –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, I am kindly requesting your office to reign in on these three ministries to tell us what has happened to the money Parliament appropriated for the recruitment of intern doctors, nurses and pharmacists in this country? Where is the money? –(Interjections)- I can take the information.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I know it is a happy day for us to resume working together. But, I want us to do just one more thing, which is to amend the order paper to enable the Minister for Energy lay a paper on the Table. 
The other matter I had forgotten to communicate to you about relates to the screens you see above on the walls of the Chamber. They are being prepared for electronic voting and registration. So, once they have been fixed, the magic will happen.

But also you might have seen some new gadgets around your seats. Please, do not be frightened; those gadgets are awaiting connection because they are part of the system we will be using to do electronic voting –(Interjections)- not where you are looking. Once they are fully installed, you will be able to vote electronically; we shall tell you how to go about that voting. 

But, in order to use those gadgets, we are going to create a database concerning Members. This integrated electronic system has been installed to facilitate Members to access Parliament, record attendance and so on. 

We are also going to give you instructions about the registration and how to access the website. Thank you  -(Interjections)- soon we will not need registers once this system starts to work. It will also record as you enter and leave. (Laughter)

Hon. Opendi, the hon. Bitekyerezo had a problem.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTHCARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to say, happy New Year to colleagues. I would like to indicate that what hon. Dr Medard Bitekyerezo has raised is true. The interns have not been paid yet but we had a bit of difficulty. However, the good news is that I want to indicate that the money was released yesterday. As we speak, the payments for the interns have begun. That is the information that I want to give the House. Thank you.

3.35
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of great public importance to this House. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you could be aware that at the end of last year, a very prominent school, Nabagereka Primary School, in the suburbs of Kampala City Centre with a pupil population of 1,443 was demolished.

The media has been awash with stories about this demolition. The pictures we have indicate that actually 1,443 pupils are stranded. More than 22 teachers are equally stranded.

Madam Speaker, from time immemorial, even in our high school economics, education has been regarded as one of the factors that can bridge income inequality in any society. It is where you allow the poor of the poor to get good education, rise through the ranks to improve on their status in the society.

But, what we are seeing now, Madam Speaker and members, is the trend for the total destruction of these education facilities. We are talking about Nabagereka Primary School, but the same thing happened to Shimoni Demonstration School, Bat Valley Primary School and many others.

Madam Speaker, it is a shame that as we sit here, there are the poor of the poor who cannot afford to go to these big schools. How many parents in the city can afford City Parents School, Green Hill Academy, Sir Apollo Kaggwa, Lohana Academy among others -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Happy New Year to you all, honourable members.

Madam Speaker, I was one of the teachers in Shimoni Demonstration School. If that school had stayed, I would not have been here -(Laughter)- because  I brought a motion to stop that school from being sold and it was defeated. One of the reasons advanced by Dr Maggie Kigozi, the then Executive Director of the Uganda Investment Authority, was that children in that school were causing traffic jam in Kampala. I do not think traffic jam has stopped ever since it was sold off. 

While in the holiday, Mbuya Army School – the pupils and teachers - was also relocated while the buildings remain unutilised to date.

When you go to Hill Road Primary school in Masaka Municipality, it is the same story. Anyway, the information I want to give to the House is that the construction of schools in Uganda was done as a result of the need in that sector.

The now defunct Nabagereka Primary School was being used by children of the poor people who live in Kisenyi. This school was at first protected by police from being demolished but later, the same police came in to protect demolishers of the school.

So members of Parliament, my information is that as the mission that has been placed here today reads, we have to work hard concerning our schools. It is happening everywhere; in municipalities and it continues to happen yet the ministers are there and four of them in that ministry are Catholics. They are watching KCCA and nothing is taking place. 

I am sorry but they know why I always say that to them and they have always heard me say the same. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please close, hon. Ssekikubo.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, one is at a loss on how to go about this. Twenty years ago, this government came into power on the backs of the peasants. Now as we proceed, the peasants are forgotten. It was largely the peasants who moved to put this government in power through an armed struggle headed by the President, amongst them –(Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, hon. Ssekikubo, for giving way. The information I want to give is that I think we need to look back and find out what is happening in our public schools around the city or municipalities. There seem to be some people who are interested in land because we are talking of Nabagereka Primary School but there must be a case going on between some so called investors and City High School and that is a public school. 

Those are the few that we know but there are even others. I understand that they wanted to take away the playground of Buganda Road Primary School. So Madam Speaker, I think we need to find a solution for our public schools in the city not to be simply taken away and our students are displaced. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Who owns the land? Minister of Lands or Education? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Both, Madam Speaker. We demand for contingent measures to be put in place to cater for the pupils. We demand for an undertaking from Government as to what they intend to do regarding the Education Sector and land grabbing, particularly land that belongs to institutions so it falls either way, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Would the minister want to say something?

3.43
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. (Rtd) Jessica Alupo): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to join hon. Ssekikubo and hon. Ssewungu –[Hon. Ssewungu:“Order!”]  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the minister has not said anything. Please sit down. Minister, please give us some answers.

MAJ. (RTD) ALUPO: Madam Speaker, what I was saying is that the feeling of hon. Ssewungu and hon. Ssekikubo is exactly my feeling. The matter of the demolition of Nabagereka Primary School is a matter of concern in the Ministry of Education and Sports. What I can report is that there is an allegation that the person who demolished the school owns that land title. I would expect the Minister of Lands to explain exactly whose land Nabagereka Primary School stands on. 

Madam Speaker, we have had similar cases not only in the KCCA area but in other municipalities. You wake up in the morning and realise that a school has been demolished without prior notice or consultation.

So Madam Speaker, I have nothing to hide. The information I am giving is that the Ministry of Lands should tell us whose land that school is situated in and who owns the land title. That is when we shall be able to appreciate exactly why the demolition took place. However, I have a feeling that the children who go to that school should have been given the information earlier so that they can re-arrange with their parents. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the matter has no clear answer. We may need to think through it and design -

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. The procedural point I am raising is with respect to coordination between government ministries. As we stand on this floor of this House, we have a deputy Leader of Government Business, the Minister responsible for Lands, the Minister responsible for Education and the Minister responsible for the Police yet we are not told whether these people had a court order. We have not heard of any arrest or investigation and we do not even have knowledge as to who has the land title for this.

We have a Minister responsible for Education with no knowledge at all of where the land title for this school is and she throws the ball to the Minister responsible for Lands and he remains quiet. Meanwhile, the government has not convened to discuss such a serious issue in this country. 

Madam Speaker, by simply listening to the minister lamenting without going into the depth of this matter, are we proceeding correctly? And we are not talking about one school, we have heard about City High School where people are sharing this land as if it is ancestral land. Are we proceeding well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I was about to talk about the same thing. Different schools in different locations are affected and as such, I think we need a more holistic investigation. Schools have been demolished.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. There are seven competent ministers and the Front Bench is full today. We have hon. Henry Kajura, the deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, the Minister of Lands, Daudi Migereko, the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima and the Minister in charge of Kampala, hon. Frank Tumwebaze.

Madam Speaker, we need a definite response from Government right now on this matter. If they are not able to respond, it should be them to tell us that they want to respond on another day. We need to be assisted as these are very powerful people. There are two Generals in the House and therefore, we need a response. If they are quiet, I will be compelled to move a motion that Gen. Aronda or Gen. Moses Ali responds to this issue.

We have convened and are fully constituted in the House chaired by the Speaker of Parliament. Are they in order to keep quiet when the whole country is waiting for an answer? (Laughter)

3.50
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to welcome my colleagues from the recess and from the way they look, I think it was very nice. I wish you a happy new year, notwithstanding these problems of Nabagereka Primary School.

In the last Cabinet meeting, we had very serious issues and Cabinet has appointed a committee on the problem of land but this particular one, I think we will ask the Minister of Lands to come very expeditiously with the report about this issue of Nabagereka Primary School - what has happened and how could these things happen as if it is happening in a country where there is no government? 

So, the Minister of Lands is hereby directed to bring a report to this House next Tuesday. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the Leader of Government Business has directed. So, we wait for the minister. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: In the meantime, Madam Speaker, because the pupils have started school, can we have measures taken by Government to consider this as a disaster that has happened at the hands of Government. Can we have remedial measures to be taken right now to accommodate the stranded pupils and the teachers and the parents who are shocked at this point? Can we have the contingent measures right away?

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard the directive from the Prime Minister but Nabagereka Primary School has been demolished and we have other schools in Kampala that are to be demolished very soon because their land has been allocated. We have Kansanga, Katwe and Bukasa. All this land has been allocated to the so-called developers by the Land Commission. 

What I would like to ask this House to adopt is that Government stops allocation of land where we have public utilities, until their report comes out so that no other allocations of such land goes ahead because as we wait for this report, another school will be demolished and we cannot handle these issues piece meal. So, a directive from this House, Madam Speaker, should go to Government to stop any allocation of land where we have public utilities.

MRS BOONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support hon. Ssimbwa about the Land Commission. I live in Mbarara, in an area where about 300 homes are very scared about a similar act. The Land Commission has taken over their land and there are rumours that, that residential area is going to be allocated. Therefore, I would also like to propose that it is not only the schools, it is also people’s lives and their homes that are at stake. 

I would also like to support him and request that before the Land Commission allocates land, they should look at the people that are going to be displaced, the lives that are going to be homeless. In addition to that, in a public place like a school, the Land Commission should liaise with the people before such an action is committed so that people are not made homeless and the children in schools, even hospitals and other public land should not be allocated in that manner. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I do not know how I can make a similar resolution on all of them, with different conditions, different land holdings - [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Motion”] - can I suggest that you draft a clear motion and with a clear resolution on different issues and we look at it tomorrow? This is important but a resolution that is not focused will not help this House. (Members rose_) Can you draft that motion about the interim measures and we look at it tomorrow? I think that is better.

I want to invite the Minister of Energy to lay a paper.

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D'ujanga): Madam Speaker, the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act, 2013 requires the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to report to the House, all areas open for bidding for exploration license, following Cabinet approval. I wish to report that on 14 January 2015, Cabinet approved the following areas as open for bidding for petroleum exploration license. These areas include Semliki and Kanywataba prospects, Ngassa  discovery, Taitai and Karuka discovery, Ngagi prospects and Mvule prospects. 

I wish, therefore, Madam Speaker, to lay on Table a copy of the detailed report dated 27th January 2015 entitled, “Report to Parliament of all areas open for bidding to the petroleum exploration license.” Thank you, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that document is now a property of the House. Please, access it and you have information in it there. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had gone some way in listening to the report but the debate had not taken place. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, this report was presented a few months back and we went on recess. Knowing how detailed this report was and how important it is to us as a country, I do not know how many of us can effectively recollect the contents of this late report. 

Madam Speaker, if the rest of my colleagues are as empty headed as I am in as far as the contents of this report is concerned - Yes I must admit this because it is two months since and you cannot recollect everything. If they are like me, I would appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that we be given some time to recollect our minds so that we come and take this work on with full understanding of what the contents of this report were. 

As of now, I do not know how many of us can recollect the presentation that was made to us. Two months are not few in terms of time to really follow up this important debate. I beg to seek for your advice, Madam Speaker.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I recollect that day that we tried to handle this particular Bill and there was an issue of laying the right statement of financial implications and I remember you said that it would be handled later. I do not know whether that issue was already sorted out, Madam Speaker. It was a very contentious issue and we could not move forward because of that.

THE SPEAKER: No, it was sorted out; my deputy was here.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are faced with another problem because the chairperson of that committee is not here and neither is the vice chairperson. We see somebody else trying to come to the front to present the report. I am wondering whether the person going to present the report is the person we have on the list as a chairperson or a vice chairperson of this committee.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, can’t the chairperson delegate?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may recall that we requested for this Bill before the exercise of the ID registration took place and you may recall that the minister then pleaded with the members that the exercise goes on and then they would bring this Bill, which we are about to handle at this particular moment. 

However, Madam Speaker, the issues that are highlighted in this Bill in respect to what hon. Kassiano Wadri has said are very pertinent to the lives of all Ugandans including Parliament and the Constitution of Uganda because there are particular issues, which we have seen that contravene some Articles in the Constitution of 1995. 

In that regard, it would be fair and in the interest of all of us as a country not to have this matter rushed. We should handle it soberly so that the outcome can be sustainable for all of us. That is the issue that I want to bring to the attention of this House that we should not handle it in an urgent manner and yet we have pertinent issues that we should be looking at first of all.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to talk about the Bill. As was indicated by hon. Wadri, the Bill was read here two months ago and when a Member of Parliament says that in two months he came back un-composed, not ready and empty headed to debate a Bill, which has been on his iPad for two months. Is this a Parliament we are expecting results from? 

Madam Speaker, we cannot fail to compose ourselves in two months and say we shall compose ourselves in two or three days. If you are not ready, let those who are ready continue with the Bill because we came here on different tickets. If there is one part, which is not ready, there are those who are ready. 

Madam Speaker, we are here getting Government money to debate and deliberate for our people. When the honourable member says that we are not ready, I do not concur with him. Madam Speaker, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want anyone to go with the impression that we are rushing. This matter was on the Order Paper and it was partially discussed here so it has been on. So those who are ready, speak. Those who are ready to contribute, please contribute. When we are giving notice of the meeting, we included this Bill. Yes. 

4.08
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, thank you so much for giving me a chance to speak on this Bill. This Bill, which was brought by the Minister of Internal Affairs, is a very interesting one. But for me, I was touched by one specific item and that is clause 45 where they talked about cancellation of a national identification card.

Madam Speaker, I was born in Rukungiri in Western Uganda and I stay in Mbarara. I am telling you that I will not cease being a Ugandan until I die. Even if I die, I will rot here. I will not just be buried somewhere else, I do not think so. Therefore, I do not think that anybody can cancel my citizenship because I was born here. 

Madam Speaker, what I wanted is very simple and I urge the Minister of Internal Affairs to let that apply to those who are coming here as investors to sell mandazis but not to Ugandans because for us we were born here. 

Another thing that is hurting us is the expiry of citizenship. They say after 10 years it should expire. Tell me, how can I expire to be a Ugandan after 10 years? That word is killing us. It will completely tamper with our constitutional rights which I think we are entitled to by birth. Honourable minister, I think you should go and remove that provision on expiry of citizenship.

And secondly, I was wondering whether the minister, in this Bill, must give me another card or can give me a card to become Ugandan. Who gives to him a card when his expires as minister of Internal Affairs? And I am very serious, I am seeing very good lawyers from the Ministry of Internal Affairs seated there; I want to ask you, who will give the minister the citizenship after ten years of expiry? Does he give to himself?

That is why we are saying that this Bill need serious debating and consideration. There are some words that should not even be put here, they should be removed immediately. There was another issue where they say that there should be an authority. Everybody now wants to form an authority; there is Uganda Revenue Authority; there is going to be now another National Identification Authority. That means every minister now wants an authority, and authorities have got financial implications. When you establish them they will take all the government money. I do not know why there are no other standards like the Registration Bureau.  In this Bill, they want to take over all the roles of those people; I do not know where we shall put them.

Madam Speaker, I beg the honourable minister of Internal Affairs to be kind enough to Ugandans as far as this Bill is concerned and make sure that some insensitive words like giving citizenship after 10 years - renewal and expiry should be removed, because after all, we are born Ugandans and we shall die Ugandans. We do not need to expire. Once I am here, I am around. Thank you for giving me a chance to speak. May God bless you. (Laughter)

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am aware that there is a minority report and normally we dispose of the minority report before we move to the main one. And the minority report was presented but we did not have time to discuss it. So I am wondering whether we are proceeding and forgetting the minority report.

THE SPEAKER: We are debating all of them. Speak to any of the issues either in the major or in the minor. This is the Bill we are discussing.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker and members of this House, I think this way of procedure - on Friday we solved the contentious issue of the certificate of financial implications; whatever way it went. Then we were asked quickly to go through the principle position as to why we objected to the Bill. And we ended at that point. I would like to beg the House and I find it difficult that what we can ordinarily do is to have somebody quickly go through the key salient issues in the report then in about three minutes raise again the salient issues in the minority report so that Parliament may proceed to debate with a full view of what you are talking about.

But to simply go the way my good friend has proceeded; we will completely miss the big debate and we will have it wrong on this day. I beg, Madam Speaker that we proceed that way.

THE SPEAKER: So do you want to speak to your issues? Well speak about them.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, we raised a minority report basically on two contentious issues. And we completely agree with the rest of the report. The first issue raised in the minority report was the issue of establishing a Registration Authority. The second issue we raised was section 40(2) of this Bill which is unconstitutional and therefore should be deleted. Instead we argued that section 40(3) should be amended -(Interjection)- I am going to read it. It should be reinforced and adopted by this House. I will start with the latter.

Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General gave an opinion to the committee of Parliament; his argument was in regards to the establishment of the Authority which read: “The functions of the Authority of the Citizens’ Immigration Act were defined by Parliament and not a creature of the Constitution”. The same argument was carried to section 40. “The functions of the Electoral Commission under Article 60 were established by the Constitution” and one of them, particularly subsections (e) is “To compile, revise, and update a voter’s register”. 

This Constitutional provision was carried and placed in the Electoral Commission’s Act section 18 which spelled out that “Electoral Commission shall compile, revise and update the voter’s register”. Clause 42 of this Bill, because they are spelt out in Clause 40, the functions of the use of data: “Data will be used for taxation, public administration and many other functions”. But now, when they reached subsection 42, they said: “The Electoral Commission may use the data to compile, revise and update a voter’s register”.

Madam Speaker, this is the function of the Electoral Commission by the command of the Constitution. There is no way this Parliament without first amending the Constitution can now shift this function and give it to the Registration of Persons Bill. That would be an Act that is unconstitutional. The Attorney General reasoned the same way when he was justifying the creation of the Authority. “That the functions of the Authority were a creature of Parliament and therefore we can amend them. They are trying to hoodwink Parliament by saying they did not use the word “Shall” because if they used the word “Shall” it would have been unconstitutional; that they used the word “May”. Madam Speaker, the word “May” when an opportunity arises turns out to be “Shall” in Law – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you Madam Speaker and hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi for giving way. Actually that information he is talking about is reinforced by Article 61 of the Constitution: Functions of the Electoral Commission, “The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions -” mark the words, “Shall have the following functions, to compile, maintain, revise, and update the voter’s register” Now, it is obligatory on the part of the Electoral Commission by command of the Constitution - the word is “Shall”. 

Now, when you go to an Act of Parliament, and you say “May”, you are amending the Constitution by giving the Electoral Commission an option. In other words, when you say “May”, it is in their discretion and the discretion in this case will be absolutely up to them, yet the Constitution commands them as a matter of obligation - they must. 

The next question is, what happens to a person, who did not register as a citizen when the time comes for voting and he wants to participate in an election? He did not register previously, now he wants to register knowing that the Electoral Commission has a calendar for registration. And the Electoral Commission has in its absolute discretion decided not to do fresh registration? That is the information.

4.18
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, the argument and impression people are trying to create is that we are trying to stop the Electoral Commission from being a user of the information collected in the national register; that is wrong. 

And this is what we have tried to articulate, that (1), let me use your example and do not feel offended. Rt. Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga, you go to the polling station where you will vote from. The Electoral Commission may have gotten data on a computer and say you are Rebecca Kadaga, you go when they have announced a time for registration. And you say, I am Rebecca Kadaga, I have come to register. They will check and establish that you were registered during the identification registration process and then they will have your full detail, the biometric data. So they will not repeat the fresh exercise as to where, but if you give them provision two, this is what the chairman of the Electoral Commission has told us to do; they are going to simply use the data and compile a register and pin it up for verification only.
 
And this is contained in a ministerial policy statement of Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 2014 and 2015. So, they are speaking about the use of data; they are saying “The Electoral Commission will update the voters’ register using the data collected by the identification registration process”, which is wrong. Now, for us to make a provision of the law that can be broadly abused, and Madam Speaker, we are very passionate because when they were registering this data they said it was non-political and not even you as an MP was allowed to come nearer that exercise.

It was done to the top level, collected by intelligence and security operatives. They will use that data in any way they need and differentiate some people. We have had history of rigged elections in this country and therefore it is incumbent upon a government and party that will win an election to win fairly and squarely.

The next issue we are opposed to is the creation of the authority. In this country we have numerous authorities. Our humble view is that this same job can adequately be done by fully operationalised secretariat in the directorate immigration. 

It can fully be done. It is a question of giving them adequate money and personnel, otherwise we have MTIU, another registration of bus and whenever. We are not going to turn it into a project because the arrangement the minister undertook when he was telling us to justify this project was that they were trying to do a special task. That is why they brought up the security and other resources in order to do a specific task. 

What those same personnel are doing is to come to Parliament with the Bill now to give them permanent jobs. And they are talking about using over Shs 190 billion. The Ministry of Finance has said they do not have that money in the certificate of financial implication. The only assurance they have is that they are going to commit Shs 25 billion in the coming financial year. Annually they are going to need Shs 195 billion. 

Now, even if they are saying they will collect and use NTR, apparently the law is very clear, even NTR goes to the national consolidated fund. So they cannot just use it the way they want. But even if they did so, for an authority to be able to generate that kind of money, it should be fully operational. But how long will it take for it to be fully operational?

Our humble option is that there are no resources both in the short and medium term in the budget and that is well-articulated in the certificate of financial implication. And for heaven’s sake, Uganda is not about to be turned into a nation governed by authorities because every other bills we are getting in this Parliament, they are creating some authority for bacteria and whatever. The other day we threw out some authority on rubbish.

So, Madam Speaker, our humble opinion is that we can do without the authority. Let this Parliament legislate for a mini Government that uses our resources in a kind of economic manner. So, that is our bone of contention on the two broad provisions - this authority is uncalled for. And secondly, clause 40(2) should be deleted and clause 40(3) should be reinforced. And this is what it says, they have created a subsection that says “A government ministry, department and agency shall access the report of the committee as the reinforce centre says, access and use the information in the voters’ register that surfaces to cater for the interest of the electoral commission”, I beg to move Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, of course that is one side of the Bill, but there are other issues in that Bill. There are many sections.

4.28
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is in clause 44 (4) “A National Identification Card shall be valid for such a time as a minister shall prescribe by legislation.” 

Madam Speaker, supposing I was standing with the minister and we have a wrangle, he decides to come and deregister me - I think we should not give powers to the minister to say that I am withdrawing your national ID or to give powers to him to deregister me. That is not allowed at all; we are citizens of Uganda and born here, no one should deprive us of that right to be citizen of Uganda. So, for me, we should amend this not to allow the minister to do that. Thank you, very much.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, there will be a committee stage, let us do general debates now. There will be a committee stage to deal with each and every clause of that Bill. So, let us debate generally now.

4.30
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern in this Bill is that I need some clarification from lawyers, the people concerned or the ministers. Is it legally right to enact a law that is against the Constitution before amending the Constitution? Articles 16, 60, 61, and 62 are not yet amended in the Constitution, how can we enact a law before the amendments have taken place? We have many Twinobusingye’s around who can take us to court.

The Bill seeks to establish an authority; I would like to know within the Constitution there is a citizenship immigration board which has the same role and mandate of registering persons in the country. What has it failed to do for us to establish an authority and that is fully stipulated in the Constitution? What are the activities that they have failed to perform. Those are my concerns. If you enact this Bill without first amending the Constitution then we are not right and we are not prepared for that.

4.32
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you Madam Speaker, it is good that we are debating generally because we shall go clause by clause to look into these issues. 

My issue is about clause 40(2) which appeared in the minority report. The way I understand it, because of the things we went through during elections where some of the voters were voting twice, one could run from this polling station to another polling station, rubs off the ink and then votes again. People were voting in 3 or 4 polling stations. These issues were raised here and even during our primaries. A person would write a name here, go to another polling station and also writes a name. This is because we lacked a mechanism which could indicate that this person has already voted.

With the new technology, this Bill started in the ICT Committee where I sit, we wanted to take over ID registration exercise and the LOP is aware of this. The problem came when the Internal Affairs Ministry brought in the security issue and it sounded louder than the rest of the issues. That is why it went to the Ministry of Internal Affairs but it was the initiative of the ICT Committee.

To me, it was put there so that the Electoral Commission may use this information, but that really is not a function of the Electoral Commission. It may use the information, it or may not -(Interjections)- members we should respect each other. When compiling information, the Electoral Commission gets from all corners so long as you compiled the information they need. It does not mean that it is a final copy. This section is indicating that it may get information from the National ID registration, which is also a pool of the nation.

The only challenge is that we do not have a national data bank which we have been requesting for all along. It would be the key tool to use in this thing; it is not yet there. We now have this information, it will delete all the underage, and it will delete all the neighbours. For example, I neighbour Cong, the people would come from Congo to vote and return. Who differentiates between a citizen and a non-citizen? This ID registration will do that. For a person to say that this will be manipulating a certain organisation - this is not their function, they may either use the information or not. 

The other issue is on section 44(4): “A national ID card is valid for 10 years”. I don’t agree with the main report.
You cannot say that I am a citizen and then my citizenship is expiring in 10 years. Let that work on Indians and whatever other people who are coming to train Ugandans but not people who are born in Uganda and who are citizens of Uganda. So Mr Minister, I will not concur with you on that.

The issue about using your own discretion to cancel my citizenship or update it should not be yours, Mr Minister because this card is quite different from other cards. It is not a driving permit, a student ID card or an employment card. This is a national ID card and it will be used in many areas. So you do not have powers, Mr Minister to cancel my citizenship unless you convince me otherwise.

4.37
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Madam Speaker at last I had to agree with Kassiano Wadri that really this Bill needed some serious revision because there are a lot of lacunas in it. We don’t know the intention of those lacunas in this Bill. If you look at section 40(3) of this Bill, it reads: “For the purposes of this section, a ministry, department or government department may access the information contained in the register.” Where is the confidentiality? It confuses me because it contradicts with the Constitution. It means that our data is not protected. 

When you look at Article 62 of our Constitution, it talks about the Electoral Commission, that “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the commission shall be independent and shall, in the performance of its functions, not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority”.

So an agency like the EC going to get the details of the person, where is the independence of the commission. This shows that our data is public and everybody can access which makes the commission dependant on others.

If you go back to section 39(2) of the Bill, that “For the purposes of this section the authority may use the information from other databases in government agencies relating to registration of persons to update the register”, there is also again another lacuna. It means that even our data, which has been collected by the commission, can be doctored. We have got very many enemies, Madam Speaker - (Member timed out.)

4.37
MR RAPHEAL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minority report has made two fundamental points: access and use of information by the Electoral Commission and establishment of the authority. I would like to talk about these. 

It might be true that the Electoral Commission, just like any other government agency, could access information and make reference to information in other government departments; I do not see anything wrong with that. Indeed, as they come to register you during voter registration, the Electoral Commission may want to know whether you are a Ugandan citizen and they may want to know whether you actually have a valid national identity card. However, this Parliament has a responsibility, which I do not think is negotiable, to protect, defend and ensure the independence of the Electoral Commission. We must make sure that the Electoral Commission, in doing its work, does not feel obliged to use the database of somebody else so as to draw up the voters register. Surely, if we lose on that one, then we shall have - In my understanding, we may need to look at the Constitution seriously. I thought the Electoral Commission had the type of autonomy and independence that ensures that it is not under the control or reference of any other authority in exercise of its obligation. So, I think the minority report really has a point on this one.

The second point is about establishing an authority. Authorities may be required but in this particular case, I thought our attention was national identification – the national identity card. When you look at the main report, they overlook this question of transferring the responsibilities of the National Registration Services Bureau to this particular authority, especially in terms of registration of births and deaths. As somebody in public service and local government, I wonder whether we are going to establish another structure from the sub county to the district upward to register every death and birth. I think we are taking up too much in terms of this particular obligation. Surely, within the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there must be a department or a secretariat that has already been handling national identification. So, why can’t they simply strengthen this one? Indeed, the entire -(Interruption)

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: I just want to inform my honourable colleague that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, presided over by the honourable Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, has a Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration with the expertise, infrastructure, resources and everything that we need.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, colleague. So you can see now that the minister wants to take up the responsibility of the National Registration Services Bureau with the entire structure. So, we need to re-look at the certificate of financial implication, to look at the salaries, the establishment of staff, from the sub county -(Member timed out.)

4.44
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my young brother, hon. Kivumbi, for realigning the debate and I also support hon. Wadri because much as we are not empty headed, from what I have seen from the start of the debate, I realised that members were not well informed about the Bill. I would therefore propose that the minister first withdraws the Bill, goes back and he prepares himself very well. 

Nobody has clarified on how we are going to ensure the integrity of the data given the fact that we have so many databases which look like national databases. You have talked about the Uganda National Registration Bureau Services; it has data for Ugandans. We also have UBOS, the Electoral Commission, the Citizenship and Immigration Department and even ICT, which all have databases. So, we have so many databases which look like national databases, in my opinion.

Madam Speaker, I suggest that we need just one national database so that the integrity of the data is not doubted and manipulated by any other person. If you have so many databases and you are giving the minister authority to use information from any other database, - somewhere it is stated that the minister can use the other information to compile information on that person – we run the risk of allowing people with negative or ill intentions to manipulate data on citizens of Uganda. So I would propose - (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. When you come to clause 29 (1)(b), compulsory registration, it says, “subject to this Act, alien residents issued with a permit, certificate or pass under the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act.” We have been to many countries and people have work permits there but it is not mandatory that they actually have to be issued with identity cards of those respective countries. Therefore, when hon. Majegere points out that you may not understand the motive that Gen. Aronda may have in using this data, actually you see that there is a sinister motive in this process. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, honourable. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I would propose - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when the mover of the minority report refreshed members, the chairperson of the committee had no time to do so about his report. So I think that before we proceed, let the chairperson just give a synopsis of his position and then we shall continue.

4.48
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank so much, Madam Speaker. I am rightfully here as a member of the committee and within the rules to represent my chairperson and also to speak for the committee. 

I wish to agree with colleagues that it is important that we recapitulate on the contents of both reports so that we debate from a point of knowledge. I would therefore urge and encourage colleagues that indeed as we debate along, look through both reports. This is because a number of things that are being raised either have answers provided for in this very report or we can look for some middle ground or move such amendments as we shall deem necessary. 

Madam Speaker, the committee did, after receiving the Bill and as directed by this House, interact with key stakeholders to be able to obtain the information necessary that constitutes the reports to the House. As a committee, we did hold meetings with the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Finance, the Attorney-General, the Electoral Commission, the Uganda Registration Services -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just go to the gist.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I am just trying to build the point to the effect that -

THE SPEAKER: Recommendations, please.

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, I am just trying to build the fact that we did consult widely because colleagues have made mention of some institutions whose functions could have been taken away in favour of the proposed authority­­ –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, you gave an opportunity to the honourable member to make specific responses to the issues raised by the minority report. What he is doing now is telling us that those are functions of those particular agencies, which is also technically wrong and substantively. Those are not their functions; those are our functions as Ugandans, which we have conferred onto those agencies to exercise on our behalf. 

By the honourable member failing to respond to those specific questions put across and also derailing this Parliament and actually giving wrong information that they consulted the owners of those functions and they gave them away, is he in order? Do they even have the authority to give them away? These are functions conferred by law. The question is: is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I think you wanted an opportunity to respond to areas which they were not satisfied with and then the debate continues – not to read the whole report.

MR MULONGO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. On the issue of the authority and the independence of the Electoral Commission, this Bill is very specific in its content: one is to ensure and guarantee that the Electoral Commission remains independent and that instead the sources of information that can be used by the Electoral Commission can be enriched, including – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Hon. Simon Mulongo is not even the chairperson or the vice chairperson of this committee and he has not even signed the report of this committee. Is he therefore in order to continue gambling and confusing the whole House? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the vice chairperson of this committee?

THE VICE-CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Peter Eriaku): Madam Speaker, it is true that hon. Mulongo may have not signed the report but I think our rules, and Madam Speaker you will guide us on this, do allow a member of the committee, as long as he has been delegated, to make a presentation. 

In some of these defence related issues, for strategic reasons, we decided that hon. Mulongo makes the presentation as we give backup. So, I would like honourable members to know that the rules of the House permit hon. Mulongo to make a presentation –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. The member has told this House that it was because of strategic reasons that hon. Mulongo was asked to present this report. Can you clarify and tell this House those strategic points? Is he therefore in order to tell this House the issues were strategic? Can you clarify to this House those strategic issues?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I was thinking that I should not say what I am about to say. Madam Speaker, we were progressing very well and I thought you guided so well that after hearing a recap from the minority report, it would have only been prudent that we also get a recap, to refresh our memories, from the other side. That was very fair. 

Now, I know hon. Mulongo, whom I have very high respect for, is a very detailed gentleman. Madam Speaker, I was seeking your further indulgence that his recap should be restricted in response to areas that show what the main report is saying about the main position - where they depart from. I think that could have helped us more. 

Of course, the vice chairperson did not do well by disclosing – (Laughter)- I am still wondering how strategic that was, but I think it would be fair for all of us that he responds to those few areas and – (Interjections) –  The vice chairperson was not here then. Madam Speaker, I think that would help us to continue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is necessary for all of us to refresh - the chairperson, the vice chairperson and the members. So, debate on this matter is deferred until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-CORRUPTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2013

5.08
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Oleru and several members. Proceed.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we have had this Bill on the Floor of Parliament for some time. This Bill comes because of three or four reasons: Firstly, it is our obligation as a country to ensure that we localise the UN Convention on Preventing and Combatting Corruption. One of the provisions under this convention is that party states should make sure that they legislate and make laws that can ensure the confiscation and forfeiture of property that belongs to the corrupt. By introducing this Bill, therefore, we are trying to ensure that this part of the convention is localised in Uganda so that we make a law that can ensure the confiscation and forfeiture of property belonging to the corrupt. 

Secondly, Uganda ratified the African Union convention on the prevention of corruption. Article 16 of this convention is about partner states putting in place laws to ensure the confiscation and forfeiture of property belonging to corrupt persons. So, this Bill before this House is aimed at ensuring that this part of the convention, both at the UN level and at the African Union level, is implemented locally. 

Madam Speaker, there are other provisions within this law that we need to ensure are put in place so as to assist government institutions that are involved in the fight against corruption to do their work diligently. We have been talking about Uganda having enough laws to fight corruption. We have done research and benchmarking and found out that many countries in this world have comprehensive laws that really bring out all the procedures that are required to ensure that the property that belongs to the corrupt can ably be confiscated and forfeited in case of a conviction for corruption. 

This Bill looks at conviction-based confiscation. There are two sides: the non-conviction and the conviction-based confiscation and the forfeiture of property. The major part of this Bill looks at the conviction-based type of confiscation. I believe, honourable members, when we come to consider this Bill, we shall ensure that we pass it to give room and authority to those officers and government agencies involved in the fight against corruption to do their work diligently.

Madam Speaker, during our benchmarking and research, we also looked at other areas of the constitutionality of criminal or conviction-based confiscation. We are aware that our Constitution talks about the deprivation of property but we are also aware that there are countries under the Commonwealth with the same provisions like our Constitution which have enacted this law. 

Some proponents against this law have gone to court; a case in point is South Africa. The Constitutional Court of South Africa ruled in favour of the provision of confiscation and forfeiture, arguing that in this case of forfeiture, because it is conviction-based, this property does not belong to a person because he illegally achieved and got that property. So, for some of the colleagues who might be looking at that side, we have done enough research and found out that this Bill can stand the test of time. I can only request us to give it support and pass it into law.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to say that the process of criminal asset confiscation or forfeiture is a measure intended to restore the ex-ante legal situation. My colleagues here, hon. Katuntu and hon. Sseggona, will explain that later when we go to the debate. It is aimed at restoring the ex-ante legal situation by depriving the offender of what is not legally his. So, what we are proposing to be confiscated does not belong to the person who claims to own it because in the first place, he acquired it illegally.

Madam Speaker, I want to move that this House passes this Bill and it becomes law, to ensure that we can fight corruption to the letter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have the committee report?

5.08
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. This is a report from the sessional Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013. 

Madam Speaker, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and now we present the report. The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013, which is a Private Member’s Bill introduced by hon. Ssimbwa, was read for the first time on 27 February 2013. It was then referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In scrutinising the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Background

The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013 as mentioned, is a Private Member’s Bill intended to amend the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009. It provides for the mandatory confiscation of property of persons convicted of offences under the Act. The Bill further seeks to widen the scope of categories of persons who may commit the offences of embezzlement and causing financial loss by inclusion of political leaders and private companies. 

The Anti-Corruption Act, 2009 gives court the discretion to order for the confiscation of property of a convicted person derived directly or indirectly from the acts of corruption. However, due to the nature of offences under the Anti-Corruption Act, it is very difficult to prove that a particular property was derived directly or indirectly from an act of corruption.

This, therefore, creates a lacuna in the law given that securing a conviction does not necessarily guarantee that the convicted person will make good the loss occasioned to the government or any other entity.

Madam Speaker, in doing our work, we received memoranda from: 

    1. Hon. John Ssimbwa, who is the mover of the Bill 
    2. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/ Attorney General 
    3. The Uganda Law Reform Commission 
    4. The Law Development Centre 
    5. Makerere University Law school 
    6. The Minister of Ethics and Integrity 
    7. The Inspectorate of Government

The committee also conducted benchmarking tours in South Africa, United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland and Republic of Tanzania to gain broad exposure to the concept of confiscation of proceeds of corruption and to benchmark the best practices.

The committee further held workshops to consider the draft report on the Bill.

The objective of the Bill is to amend the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009; to provide for mandatory confiscation of property of persons convicted of offences under the Act.

The proposal to amend the Anti-Corruption Act, 2009 intended to ensure that Government or any other company or organisation recovers the loss, if any, caused by a person convicted of an offence under the Act.

The Bill also seeks to vest the confiscated property of the convicted person with government and for management of this property to be by the public trustee appointed by the minister in accordance with the Public Trustee Act.

Observations

The committee made the following observations:

    1. That the law is necessary since existing provisions give court the discretion to confiscate the property of the convicted person but the confiscation is specifically restricted to properties acquired directly or indirectly from acts of corruption. This is difficult to implement since it is difficult to determine which property was derived directly or indirectly from an act of corruption.

    2. Political leaders will be included in the category of people who may be culpable for their actions in facilitating corruption through their influence or administrative processes, procurements and decision-making.

    3. The crime of corruption is vague and in many other jurisdictions, it was noted that they have laws that comprehensively recover proceeds of crime rather than proceeds of corruption as in the subject of this legislation. The responsible minister will, therefore, have to come to Parliament with a comprehensive law on the proceeds of crime.

    4. The committee noted that the confiscation and forfeiture of properties or assets can be extended to even those properties elicited outside the physical boundaries of the country.

    5. The confiscation of properties can either be after a conviction has been secured or even before a conviction has been secured where an individual has accumulated an unexplainable amount of wealth.

    6. Any form of recovery forfeiture or confection is legal and constitutional because property derived from crime or any benefit thereto cannot be said to constitute the right to property. In essence, therefore, property acquired through corrupt means is property of the defrauded entity or person.

    7. The conviction-based form of recovery empowers the government through its agencies to bring an action against a convict to recover assets that are proceeds of crime or corruption.

    8. The non-conviction-based recovery of assets is generally premised on civil proceedings against the property of a suspected criminal. In this case, an individual has the burden of highlighting the source of the acquired wealth. Failure to satisfy the court results in forfeiture with property under investigation.

    9. It was noted that under this form of recovery, that is non-conviction-based, there is no need for criminal proceedings to have commenced as long as investigations point to the fact that a crime was committed and property was generated as a result. 

    10. That prosecuting authorities are given powers to consider whether or not it is in the public interest to conduct a criminal investigation and at a later stage, if sufficient evidence is obtained, a prosecution. In these circumstances, relevant prosecuting authorities may also consider whether or not the public interest might be better served by losing the non-conviction based recovery procedure.

    11. The DPP and Inspectorate of Government have powers to apply to court for an order for confiscation, recovery, freezing and forfeiture upon conviction of the suspect.

    12. The standard of proof in civil recovery is that of balance of probabilities. This is because the proceedings are civil in nature. The person against whom an action is brought is under a duty to give an explanation although the prosecuting authority is bound to bring evidence that the property in question was derived from corruption.

    13. That care should be taken in implementing the laws related to recovery of property to avoid abuse of the implementers. Institutions involved should be accountable to Government and applications for orders for recovery, confiscation or forfeiture should be made through the High Court. 

    14. Property should be widely defined to include whether within the jurisdiction or not, all benefits interest and property real and personal, tangible and intangible, and gifts made for the purpose of avoiding detection or a forfeiture; property, which is held by a third party should also be capable of being subject to a restraint order.

    15. Where a person is convicted of an offence under the Anti-Corruption Act and owns property or has owned property within the period of 10 years preceding his or her conviction, it shall be presumed that such a property represents the proceeds of the offence for which he or she was charged and convicted. 

	The person convicted should be able to rebut the presumption by proving on the balance of probabilities that the property did not represent such proceeds.

    16. Where a person accused of an offence under the Act dies or absconds, court shall have discretion on the application of the prosecuting authority to make a forfeiture order in respect of his property.

    17. There is need for an inter-agency cooperation among institutions charged with fighting corruption if the fight against corruption is to be successful. The existing multiplicity is hampering the fight against corruption.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that there be a Government-led effort to bring a law to Parliament that will comprehensively deal with the matter of confiscation of assets acquired through crimes other than corruption. Assets acquired through trafficking of persons, illicit trade in drugs, arms trafficking, smuggling and tax evasion should also be confiscated.

The committee further recommends that an inter-agency forum be created to bring together the different corruption fighting agencies in the implementation of this law.

With those observations, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, we would like to thank you for according us an opportunity to consider this very sensitive and difficult subject. I am sure the debate and the final decisions of this House will show the people we represent our willingness to fight the evil of corruption. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your colleagues. I understand that there is a minority report.

5.20
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA, (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank my chairperson and the majority, for the presentation made. I must state that it is not the practice of our committee to come up with minority reports and we do our very best to avoid that.

In this particular incidence, however, I have been compelled by conscience to bring a minority report on specific provisions.

Introduction 

The Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, 2013, a Private Members’ Bill was read for the first time on 27 August 2013. It was referred to the committee in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of our Rules of Procedure.

In accordance with Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure, some members of the committee, with respect to the majority, wish to present this minority report and I have reproduced the provisions of that rule. The reasons of dissent of this minority report are largely based on the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which the citizens enacted, promulgated and bestowed unto themselves and posterity for good reasons.

Experience also shows that a law made in good faith, if not carefully considered, may be abused and people, the subject of the state may want to only lose the protection of the Constitution. It is imperative to strongly caution ourselves that whereas it is compelling to make laws that will guarantee a corruption-free society, the apparent societal pressures must not stampede Parliament and tempt legislators to invent legal friction, outside the purview of our Constitution that we gave unto ourselves.

Background

The majority report analysed the background to the Bill and the minority agree with that analysis.

Methodology

The minority concurs with methodology adopted by the committee as a true reflection of events.

Objects of the Bill

The minority concurs with the majority of the objects of the Bill as presented on page 2 of the Bill. 

I refer you to page 2 of the long title - it has a long title to the Bill. The minority wish to add that, “Except as expressly stated to be in dissent, the minority agrees with a large number of observations and recommendations subject to the point stated to be in dissent.”

Points of dissent

The majority observe at page 4 of the report that “The confiscation of the property can either be after a conviction has been secured or even before a conviction has been secured, where an individual has accumulated unexplainable wealth.” With respect, there should never be any confiscation of property where there is no conviction and I will explain.

The Bill is a penal proposal, in other words, criminal in nature. Its provisions and principles can only be criminal and not civil. The confiscation of property in the proposed law is a remedy, which is part of the criminal process. It can only be a sentence following a conviction by a competent court, exercising criminal jurisdiction. The recommendation by the majority members, if accepted, will amount to a negation of the core foundation of our criminal justice system and will certainly constitute egregious derogation and abrogation of the existing and much cherished constitutional order. We observe that Ugandans whether majority or actually the entire country’s mandate is limited by the Constitution and we can only amend but not abrogate it. The search for a solution against corruption in this country, which we agree is a serious vice in our country perpetrated by those we entrust with public offices, must of necessity be within the four corners of our Constitution.

And the words “unexplainable amount of wealth” as used and relied on by the majority are speculative. They are falsely based on a misapprehension that the failure to explain or remember one’s wealth as an offence, whereas not. And the point of emphasis I want to make is that this law does not propose to bring an offence of failing to know or remembering the source of your wealth.

Observation No.6

The majority observe that “any form of recovery, forfeiture or conviction is legal and constitutional because property derived from crime, or any benefits thereto cannot be said to constitute a right to property.” In essence, property acquired through corrupt means is property of the defrauded. 

The minority fundamentally disagree for the following reasons: One, the observation of the majority seems to hinge on a presumption that the property that is a subject of confiscation is acquired feloniously, which is a fact not proved. This thinking would out-rightly offend the spirit of Article 28 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

The point I am emphasising here is that there are two types of confiscations we are talking about. The first is conviction-based, and on the conviction-based, I am entirely in agreement because you have been established by the process of the law, not to own that property rightly. But the non-conviction based confiscation is speculative and based on suspicion, that we do not have evidence to prove you stole that book –(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I am raising this matter because I think it would be proper that my colleague presents his report and if we are to debate, we can debate later. He is debating while he is still presenting, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, you do not have to debate. Report what your minority group has come up with.

MR SSEGGONA: I am obliged, Madam Speaker. I only was trying to emphasise but since there is no need for emphasis, I will continue to read.

Point number two, the phrase “Property acquired through corrupt means is property of the defrauded entity.” Still this presupposes that there is an entity, proved to have been defrauded, whereas not. This actually is the reason for the failure to prosecute the suspect. It also assumes that the person is holding the property acquired corruptly. This conviction is itself and such thinking is based on a legal delusion. A suspect is innocent until proved guilty or until one pleads guilty. The guilt is a criminal phrase and not a civil connotation by any stretch of legal or juristic imagination.

Accordingly, under no circumstances can the property of a suspect be subjected to confiscation without circumventing the due process of the law. In this non-conviction-based confiscation, there is actually nobody proved to be defrauded.

Observation No.8

The majority observe, on page 5 of the report, that the non-conviction-based recovery is generally premised on civil proceedings against the property of a suspected criminal. In this case, an individual has the burden of highlighting the source of their acquired wealth. Failure to satisfy court, results in forfeiture of the property under investigation.

Madam Speaker, there is no such thing in law as suspected criminal. The use of such language is misleading whether conscious, sub-consciously or unconsciously. A criminal is a convict. A suspect is undergoing trial and the two have different sets of rights under both law and elementary common sense. The two do not rhyme. Instead, they sharply contradict.

Observation no. 9

The majority observed that, “It was noted that under this form of recovery, there is no need for criminal proceedings as long as investigations point to the fact that a crime was committed and a property was generated as a result.” This again is contradictory. If investigations point to criminality, the option of the state is to prosecute since corruption is already under the same law.

Property generated fraudulently is already provider for and the remedy is forfeiture among others. The minority observed that, it is imprudent to allow state agencies to hide their inefficiencies and deficiencies under the curtain of such provisions. This kind of legislation would promote arbitrariness, laziness, corruption as well as unguarded and unguided exercise of powers on the part of the prosecution.

Observation no. 10

Page 5 of the report is to re-effect that, “Prosecuting authorities are given powers to consider whether or not it is in public interest to conduct a criminal investigation at a later stage if sufficient evidence is obtained, a prosecution.” In these circumstances, relevant prosecuting authorities may also consider whether or not the public interest might be served by using the non-conviction-based recovery.

Madam Speaker, the minority respectfully dissent determining public interest on a case by case basis; this would encourage arbitrariness and discrimination, which offend Article 21 of the Constitution. The principles of fairness would also not be served if the discretion of the prosecuting authorities is unguided and limitless.

The principles of consistence, certainty and predictability would also greatly be compromised by speculative imaginations which would often be based on imperfection in the course of the investigation. Madam Speaker, the effect of this thinking and observation 10 above lessens the standard of proof and also shift the burden of proof as enshrined in section 101 of the Evidence Act.

Whereas the committee observed the need to take care, to avoid abuse by the implementers of this law and ensuring that agencies of Government are accountable, the committee proposes no such measures as to ensure accountability. We must at all times avoid making a law that would be used against people for political or other mischievous means. A number of laws have been applied for such. Indeed, there are no measures to curb human mischief. The only safe-guard can only be to keep the burden on the prosecution and the standard where it is. 

The need to combat corruption needs no emphasis. This protects public property as well as morality. The need to protect individual liberties and rights is of proportionate if not of greater important. Constitutional liberties must not be sacrificed at the altar of fighting corruption.

Observation no.15

“Where a person is convicted of an offence under the Anti-Corruption Act, and owns property or has owned property within the period of 10 years preceding his or her conviction, it shall be presumed that such property represents the proceeds of the offence for which he or she was charged and convicted. The person convicted should be able to rebut the presumption by providing on a balance of probability that the property did not represent such proceeds.”

Madam Speaker, the above majority observation creates the following absurdities:

    1. The rebuttal presumption alluded to has the effect of shifting the burden of proof onto the suspect, to disprove what ought to be an ingredient in the charge of corruption. It is the duty of the prosecution authority to prove all the elements of the offence, including what was actually stolen or obtained corruptly.

    2. Where a person has already been convicted, there is no further procedure for disproving the presumption of illegality, which in any case is unconstitutional. The Constitution in Article 28 enacts presumption of legality - post-conviction proceedings must also be defended.

The summary of the objectionable observations above is that:

1) (a) They offend the presumption of innocence guaranteed by the Constitution.

(i) 	They limit the discretion of court by providing for a mandatory confiscation of the property of the convict or suspect. They raise very serious constitutional ramifications and this minority report points them out as they are here under:

(ii)	Presumption of innocence: As observed above, these presumptions are a creature of the Constitution in all civil and criminal matters. Following the promulgation of the current Constitution, the provision was stated by the hon. Justice Richard Oscar Okumu Wengi to be at variance with the Constitution and I refer to the case of hon. Betty Nambooze v. Uganda, criminal appeal, which I did not point out is no. 32 of 2003, to the effect to this end, providing an non-conviction-based confiscation would re-enact the provision of the law existing before the Constitution.

(b) Limiting the exercise of court’s discretion - it has been held by the Supreme Court of Uganda and Constitutional Appeal, I established to be No. 1 of 2007, Susan Kigula and 99 others v. the Attorney General. That the power or discretion of court is the creature of the Constitution, as such, an Act of Parliament cannot limit it. Therefore, the mandatory confiscations alluded to may be constitutionally challenged on two fronts namely: a) that it is outrightly unconstitutional for encroaching on the constitutionality of protected territory and b) that it is legislating to reverse decision of court as stated above.

Recommendation

The minority agree with the majority report that the Bill be passed into law subject to the observation herein.

The minority disagrees with the proposal for Government to bring a law that would comprehensively deal with matters of confiscation. Instead, the minority recommends that, the proposals to deal with confiscation be put in this amendment since it is the duty of Parliament to do so, under Article 79 of the Constitution. This is a perfect opportunity for that.

The proposed amendments by minority members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, as per the recommendations above; we propose to delete the provisions on non-conviction-based confiscation. We also propose that the procedure for post-conviction proceedings be provided for. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the minority report. 

Now, honourable members, there are a lot of issues arising from both sides of the report. So, we defer debate. I also want to give notice that on Thursday, 6th February, we shall have Business Committee Meeting. So, the chairs and vice chairs, take note of that.

With that, we come to the close of today’s proceedings. House adjourned until tomorrow 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 4 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
