Thursday, 20 February 2014

Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, I received communication from the Chief Opposition Whip making nominations on the leadership of the committees that are designated for the Opposition: the Committee on Public Accounts, Committee on Local Government Accounts, Committee on Government Assurances and the Committee on Commission, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises. 

I received a list making nominations for the leadership and membership. I have also received the list of what the Opposition propose to constitute or be members of the other standing committees.

Under the rules, I am supposed to announce this list but I have only received the list from the Chief Opposition Whip and I have not received the other list from the Government side and the Independents side. So, I will not be able to make the formal announcement and constitute the committees today. 

But I would like to inform the House that I have actually dully received the notification on membership of Standing Committees and leadership for those committees from the Chief Opposition Whip.

At an appropriate time, when the entire list is there, we will bring it back to the House and constitute the committees. 

Hon. Members, yesterday, I received a petition from PersonsWith Disabilities on the issue of physical education and introduction of sport affirmative action and I had engagements with people from the Paralympic Committee. They presented a petition that should have been presented to the House today. When I consulted and having looked at the text of the petition, I found that the issues are clear and just require the direct attention from the House. 

Therefore, instead of taking it to a committee to handle as a petition, I have now given hon. Alex Ndeezi leave to present it as a formal motion to the House so that we finish it on the Floor here and it is handled quickly so as to deal with those issues of People With Disabilities, especially their request on matters of physical education and sports in their engagements. 

I thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT BY THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON ITS FINDINGS DURING THE BENCHMARKING VISIT TO SRI-LANKA

2.16
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Mr Speaker, in accordance with Rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure, I beg to lay on Table a report by the delegation of the Committee on Health on its findings and lessons learnt during its study visit to Sri-Lanka. The report has been uploaded on members’ iPads. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and at an appropriate time, we will find time to have a look at the issues raised from the recommendations of that report.

PETITION BY THE PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE UPGRADING OF FORTPORTAL – BUNDIBUGYO- LAMIA ROAD, BUNDIBUGYO DISTRICT

2.18
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Mr Speaker, allow me to present to you a humble petition of the people of Bundibugyo living along the Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamia Road.

The subject matter of the petition is to highlight the plight faced by the people living along the Fort Portal-Lamia Road as a result of the destruction of their properties, crops, livelihood and economic activities during the construction of the Fort Portal-Lamia Road.

The petitioners are people from the districts of Kabarole, Ntoroko and Bundibugyo in Western Uganda. They avert that the Government of Uganda through the Uganda National Roads Authority contracted CICO which is CQCICOConstruction Company to construct the Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamia Road, which has 103.6 kilometres through the districts of Kabarole, Ntoroko and Bundibugyo. This was done in 2010.

The construction of the road necessitated the acquisition of land in the above districts for the road reserve because the other sides of the lower part was mostly covered by the game reserve and the game reserve could not allow the road to pass through the game parks. So, they had to go through the people’s land. 

The acquisition of land for roads construction was undertaken by Ugasurv Surveying and Mapping Consultants Limited and affected some 1,321 people in the above districts.

Several properties, which were affected by the road construction in the districts of Kabarole, Ntoroko and Bundibugyo were surveyed, valued and verified and payment vouchers signed by the owners were made but since then, no compensation has been made.

Several meetings and attempts to get compensation from Ugasurv Surveying and Mapping Consultants Limited, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and Government have been made but all in vain, save for the constant promises from the parties concerned.

Government allocated Shs 6,333,333,333 on 18 August 2012 to cater for the compensation but to their surprise, no payment was made to the affected parties up to now save for a few individuals in one parish along the Lamia-Bundibugyo road.

The failure to pay compensation to them has left the 1,132 people homeless; destroyed their business because most of them had commercial houses along the road where they were doing business. They are now unable to pay school fees for their children and facing bleak failure. 

Therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament resolves an investigation surrounding the circumstances of non-payment of the affected persons be undertaken, Mr Speaker. We pray that Government of Uganda takes steps to pay the affected persons compensation without delay.

Your petitioners as duty bound will ever pray. Here, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.
I am going to lay a list of signatures of members who have signed. I beg to lay the petition on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Petitions are covered under Rule 29. A close look at Rule 29(6), “The Speaker may refer a petition to a particular Minister where he or she is of the view that such petition would be better handled by such a Minister and the Minister shall report to Parliament within 45 days.”
It is my opinion that this particular petition does not have to go to a committee; the issues are direct, no investigations are required. It is only action from the minister that is required.

Accordingly, I direct that this matter be handled by the Minister of Works in accordance with these rules such that within 45 days, we have a report on how you have handled this matter.

The Clerk is accordingly directed to extract a letter forwarding these petitions to the minister for his action.

2.23
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Eng. Abraham Byandala): Mr Speaker, I am very happy with your decision because this is an issue I have discussed with my sister.This is an issue where the numbers are exaggerated; we have done a lot of payments.

We had to do surveys or valuations; the first one we had about 100 people we have not paid. Because of the nature of the terrain there, we had other valuations, which are less than 100.

As I talk now, we are paying some people and my sister, this issue has been raised for a number of times. There are some technical issues where H. E the President offered a lawyer to assist our people to sort out these issues.I am happy with your decision, Mr Speaker. I will come back here with a report. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE ALLEGED ATTEMPTED ATTACK ON THE RIGHT HON. SPEAKER’S OFFICE

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, this is a statement to this House on the package that was addressed to the Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, which was raised by hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona,Member representing Busiro County, on Tuesday 18 February 2014.

It is alleged that the package, on being opened by a one Harman Kaboggoza, exploded and injured him. This was on 22 January 2014.  Mr Harman Kaboggoza is an Office Attendant in the Office of the Speaker. 

The facts of the matter are as follows:
The office of the Speaker received notification by the main Post Office in Kampala of a package addressed to the Rt hon. Speaker. Mr Kaboggoza was, therefore, sent to collect the package from the Post office.

When the package was brought to office, Mr Kaboggoza was requested to open it. He did this in the presence of Ms Judith Awol the Senior Administrative Officer in that office.

On opening, it is alleged that the package made a pop sound and emitted a strong foul smell, which is said to have affected Mr Kaboggoza. He complained of a headache and other irritations.

Mr Kaboggoza, on his own without being accompanied by anybody, went to Agha Khan Hospital at Diamond Trust Building on Kampala Road for medical attention. He was attended to. However, he continued to have headache and other irritations.

Two days later, on 24 January 2014, he went to Kampala Hospital where he was attended to by Dr Kanyerezi. He is also referred to as Prof. Kanyerezi.

Following receipt of this information, the Parliamentary Police wrote asking the hospital to furnish the Police with the findings of the examinations and their diagnosis. 

Dr Kanyerezi of Kampala Hospital responded that there was no physical trauma found on Mr Kaboggoza. Mr Kaboggoza was, therefore, given some tablets for treatment just in case.

Mr Kaboggoza was not satisfied with the treatment he had received. So, on further consultation with the Medical Personnel, Mr Kaboggoza, was recommended for a blood test at a Nairobi hospital. Other people who came close to the package are also reported to be asking for the same test.This matter is still being refused. 

Immediately after, I would like to lay on Table the letter the Police wrote to Prof. Kanyerezi and his comments on the treatment he gave to Mr Kaboggoza, which is all on the same document. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BABA: Immediately, information of the alleged pop sound and foul smell were detected, the Parliamentary Police Counter Terrorism Unit was called in. They came in with a full complement of equipment including an x-ray machine, sniffer dogs, a mobile field explosive detector and a radiation detector.

These did not detect anything of an explosive or radioactive nature. The package was then wrapped and taken to Counter Terrorism Headquarters for further investigation. The Counter Terrorism Unit completed their investigations and produced a report.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the Police Counter Terrorism Unit report on the matter. The report is entitled, “Final Technical Report on Suspicious Parcel Picked from Parliament on 24 January 2014.” I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BABA: Upon completion of their investigations, the Counter Terrorism Police Unit together with the Parliamentary Police took the package to the Government Analytical Laboratory for further analysis.

Hon. Members, immediately the incident happened, the Police took steps to identify the origin of the parcel. They went to the Post Office for more information. There, at the Post Office, they were informed of similar packages addressed to nine other people including one sent to H.E the President. These were retrieved by the Police.

Upon receipt of consent from the Special Forces group, the one sent to the President was tested alongside that sent to the Rt hon. Speaker by the Government Analytical Laboratory. The Police that submitted the packages requested analysis to be conducted to ascertain whether or not (a) the contents are harmful to human life and (b) whether the parcels are from the same source.

The other parcels that were retrieved from the Post Office by the Police are being kept at the Government Analytical Laboratory pending outcome of the on-going investigations.

Results of the tests on the two packages, namely, the one to the Rt hon. Speaker and the one to H. E the President are of similar nature. They exhibit traces of the volatile organic compounds, which are more likely to have come from ink and other substances used in the print industry rather than intentional additions.

They do not contain explosives or materials of explosive nature nor radiation or biological, chemical or microbial agents commonly used in terrorism. All packages are intact and do not show any sign of explosion.

Mr Speaker, I have the two packages here with me, which I would like to show the hon. Members. This is how the packages were sent and addressed from where they came. They are all similar and there is no evidence of explosion on any of these packages but sir, because the investigations are still on-going, I will not lay these ones on the Table because the Government Analytical Laboratory and the Police still need them. These are the kind of parcels that came; a letter forwarding them and the main document. So, both of them did not show any sign of explosion in that office of the Rt hon. Speaker.

Furthermore, a comparison analysis of the two parcels showed that there was no difference in regard to the origin. They were all posted from P. O. Box 7007, 3109AA, Sweden and this is an address in a city in Rotterdam Metropolitan area of the Netherlands.

Mr Speaker, I lay on the Table the government full analytical report on the matter. This is the complete final analytical report on the investigations on the parcel. I will lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BABA: In conclusion, the tests conducted by the Government Analytical Laboratory clearly show that the packages did not contain any materials harmful to human life. They do not contain explosives or materials of explosive nature nor radiation materials nor biological, chemical or microbial agents commonly used in terrorism.

Mr Speaker, it is true that the security of Parliament is paramount. This is why Government upgraded the Police Unit here to a full directorate with a full complement of the necessary Police Units. As indicated above, they are now equipped with x-ray machines, a canineunit, a mobile field explosive detector, a radiation detector, a walk-through machine metal detector, hand held metal detectors etcetera.

All these are geared towards ensuring the security and safety of Parliament and all its personnel. 

In addition, Government recently signed a contract for the procurement of additional machinery and equipment all geared towards enhancing the security of Parliament and all buildings around it. The machinery and equipment are being shipped here. I want to assure the House that this additional capacity will greatly increase the capacity of the Police to ensure security and safety of Parliament and its surroundings.

Hon. Members, terrorism is a global phenomenon. We are, therefore, collaborating with regional and international security agents organisations to fight the vice. In this regard, we received guidelines from the Federal Bureau of Investigations of the USA on how individuals can take personal initiative to improve their safety while receiving parcels. I wish to lay on Table a copy of these guidelines and I encourage all Members of Parliament to acquaint themselves with the guidelines.

I beg to move. This is the FBI advisory on how to handle parcels that are addressed to somebody, which they think is suspicious. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Minister for this statement. It was requested and indeed, you have responded. We will have some discussion on this subject.

2.42
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you, hon. minister but I am not contented with your report. First, how can you make a report before concluding your investigations? You said in the statement that a report is already out, yet you said that similar packages addressed to the President were there. Secondly, you have the exhibits with you and you tampered with them; how can we access them; which one belongs to the Speaker and which one belongs to the President? 

You are the Minister of Internal Affairs and you are telling us that upon completion of investigations, the Counter Terrorism Unit together with the Parliament Police took the package to the Government Analytical Laboratory for their analysis. This comes after the conclusion of the report by Police. 

Further, you are taking this matter as a light thing; putting in other people. And what if hon. Ssegona had not come; what would you have done? Nothing was coming from your ministry. Why do you wait for Parliament to intervene before bringing such matters? These are matters of national importance; whether they are attached to the President or Ssewungu. So, bringing it up after being raised in Parliament is not fair. 

Mr Speaker, I am not contented. You have told us the origin of this material but you have not given us any communication on how you have dealt with the senders of these items. I want to assure you that I am not contented with your report. Go and prepare another report and bring it here. You have tempered with the exhibits, though you are the minister of Internal Affairs; they should still be under investigations. And you are playing another role by saying that Kaboggoza had no problem but according to the story in the press, he even sustained injuries. So, where is the truth; do not stomach something you cannot carry. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister for the report. Definitely, we take these kind of threats extremely seriously because all of us are mortal beings and when we get such threats, we should treat them with the importance they deserve. 

I have listened to the minister and I thank him for the progress so far. But I want to ask him, in his own view, how does he assess the capacity of the Government Analytical Laboratory to cross-check and be able to confirm that there is no evidence of bio-terrorism materials? You know the kind of technology required like, we have to find an electronic chip; fiber optic tubes, and the avalanche photodiodes, which you can use to detect whether such materials are there. But I doubt whether our Government Analytical Laboratory has such capacity. 

I do recall, when we were carrying out the post mortem examination of the late Nebanda, the laboratory could not carry out some of the basic tests we do. And you are assuring us that the tests, which you carryout using the laboratory are confirmatory and conclusive? I want you to assure us and satisfy us that you have exhausted whatever can be done to rule out the possibility of bio-terrorism agents in these packages. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

2.47
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for making the effort to tell us what has transpired since the nasty incident happened. However, the tone of the statement from the government side is defensive and doubtful statement because in this statement, the minister kept on emphasising that Mr Kaboggoza was actually not hurt and yet, from this statement, apart from what he has presented to us,it is not from the view of the victim. 

I see that even when they were opening that letter, there was a witness and there was a pop – I do not know whether it popped in his hand or not. But if the witness saw the first one popping, I do not know whether they were tested for popping or whether they just concluded that they were not harmful. 

Secondly, it is indicated here that the ones tested were those sent to the Speaker and the President and yet, there were similar parcels addressed to nine other people whom we do not know. Why is it only the two that were tested? That leaves a lot of questions in my mind. Why didn’t you test all of them and who are the other nine people who were sent similar letters? We want to know what kind of people were targeted; is it the top cream; that had to come out clearly. 

It is stated here that all the tests – and I thank Dr Baryomunsi for stating that we doubt our capacity to make conclusive investigations in such a complicated area. There are suggestions already that the victims would like to go to Nairobi for further investigations but you are dillydallying with the reviews as if it is not an emergency. How do you guarantee the lives of these people and how independent were the investigations you are presenting to Parliament? 

I still call upon Government to carry out more neutral investigations into this; give it an open hand so that we can get more information on what happened rather than going defensive and downplaying the threat to life. 

This could only be addressed to the nine people you mentioned but while at the same time, being a massive undertaking to put very many people at risk. 

Therefore, rather than concluding and sweeping it under the carpet, please, open up investigations from independent sources so that the country can get the whole truth of this. And for those people who are already victims like Mr Kaboggoza should be given an opportunity to go and have further investigations from an independent source rather than doing it with Dr Kanyerezi. We want this done; we do not want you to play with life because this is for all of us. Today, it might be the nine you mentioned but tomorrow it might be you, who read it. 

Mr Speaker, we want it to be done as fast as possible to save us from doubting what could have been the source of this letter. Thank you.

2.52
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only two issues about the minister’s statement; one is on paragraph 12. In that paragraph, he says, “Every equipment necessary for detecting explosives here is already here.” But the same paragraph says, “Additional machinery is being shipped.” That means that something is still missing. We have everything already and at the same time, we do not have – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, that is referring to the parking of Parliament here – the additional underground parking of Parliament – that is what that paragraph is talking about. That is the additional thing that is being procured. Please, guide the House properly.

MR KASIBANTE: Yes, what I wanted, Mr Speaker, is to know what is still lacking so that we can be cautious as Members of Parliament and staff. This is because here, it indicates that everything is here and we do not have anything missing and so, we are safe.

The other issue is on page 2, paragraph four: The point in case is in a sentence that reads, “So, on further consultation with the medical personnel, Mr Kaboggoza was recommended for a blood test in Nairobi Hospital.” Now, it is like Mr Kabagoza must take personal initiative to help Government find out the truth. I think Government must take up this recommendation. So, it should read: “It was recommended that Government take Mr Kaboggoza to Nairobi Hospital for further review.” Thank you very much.

2.54
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the hon. minister for presenting this statement. In his statement, he claims that immediately Mr Kaboggoza opened this parcel, he complained of headache and other irritations. My argument is based on this and the minister’s claim that these parcels were found not to be of an explosive nature. It will look to me that the minister and the Police confined their understanding of terrorism to material that can explode and not that has got volatility.

Mr Speaker, the minister says, “They exhibit traces of volatile organic compounds, which are more likely to have come from ink and other substances used in the print industry rather than intentional additions.” 
In my view, the minister is employing guesswork and is misinforming this House. Who said that ink may not be dangerous; suppose it was designed to cause harm to the reader? Did the minister and those investigating this particular case take interest in this? I think they did not.

Ordinarily, ink is not supposed to be harmful; it is not even supposed to emit undesirable smell or cause headache or irritation. Otherwise, all of us reading from any print would actually suffer such effects. I would like to get an explanation from the minister.

Just to prove that these investigations are not conclusive, the minister even discloses the source of these parcels. Hon. Minister, have you even attempted to trace these persons back to Rotterdam, the origin of these parcels, in order to find out who actually sent these parcels; what kind of ink was used to print the letters and whatever material was found in the parcels? I would urge you, hon. Minister, to take interest in this and see to it that you exhaustively carry out your investigations before coming to tell us funny stories.

Finally, I would like to reiterate what my colleague, hon. Baryomunsi has said; our capacity as a country to detect harmful material coming into the country. I remember sometime back we had a case of anthrax, where harmful material was passing through our post offices and there was fear that terrorists would use anthrax as a weapon to attack us. And if I recall properly, there was a promise by the government to screen whatever comes into this country by post. Is this happening today? I do not think so. I challenge the government to take interest in the safety of the people of Uganda – not only of the leaders. Even the ordinary citizen requires to be secure – not the Speaker, Minister, MPs alone. These facilities you talk about surrounding Parliament – are they available in other Government institutions and public places? We need to enhance, not only the security of the so-called important people but also that of the ordinary man in the streets. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Hon. Members, in the public gallerythis afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of World of Life International School, represented by hon. J.B Mutebi and hon. Rosemary Sseninde of Wakiso District. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

3.00
MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his statement, where he tries to allay our fears as regards terrorism. 

However, I am not standing to refute the Minister’s statement but rather to show my discontent with his conclusion. There is no single person with a science background with whom the minster would not have a problem. The minister says, “Exhibit contains maybe traces of volatile organic compounds, which are more likely to come from ink.” 

This statement is somewhat incomplete; we need to investigate more, which the minister has not informed us. Does it mean that if there were these volatile compounds, therefore, Mr Kaboggoza is allergic to ink? Have we investigated the composition? Parliament needs to hear this. Terrorism is the use of these organic compounds to hurt someone. Recently, even in aircrafts, they used not to care about oils and perfumes because they are not harmful to us but the terrorists use them to mix up with certain formulas for the purpose of conducting a terrorist act. 

We would implore the minister to cause the Government bodies and agencies to carry out more investigations, first of all, on the life of Mr Kaboggoza himself because if there was a reaction, whether it was just an allergy that was caused by ink and the printing reagents. We are not really satisfied and we want more investigations carried out. I thank you.

3.02
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, to us as Members of Parliament and this institution, this statement is very important. But I want to talk as an investigative expert.

Mr Herman Kaboggoza is an Attendant in the Office of the Speaker.   The same Herman Kaboggoza was sent to collect an envelope from the Post Office as an Office Attendant.  The same Office Attendant seemed to have noticed something and I do not know whether they suspected the envelope. 

The same man opened the envelope in the presence of one Judith Awori, which shows that they were already suspicious. So, what brought the suspicion? These same people must also be investigated. It is alleged, hon. Members, that the package made a pop sound and emitted a strong foul smell. Are you getting me clearly?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR OKOT OGONG: Then on five, as an investigator and a psychologist, that immediately the information of the pop sound and foul smell were detected, the Parliamentary Police and Counter Terrorism Unit were called in. So, what did they get there? Did they also smell the foul smell? That must also be known because if it was emitted, it must have been strong and the smell should have been there and should have been smelt by the officers.

This envelope was distributed to seven or nine offices and in the nine offices, there has not been any report and therefore, I feel that without suspecting any party, I think both parties must be investigated because somebody can decide to alarm the country and cause fear, suspicion and political insecurity, which is very bad. Therefore, we need to extend our area of investigations - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I had earlier on restrained myself as my colleague from Dokolo made his presentation. But I have been tempted by his increasing insinuation that a victim of suspected crime is actually being admonished to the extent that my honourable friend went ahead to even twist the context of the minister’s statement particularly paragraph seven onpage 3, “…there, they were informed of similar packages addressed to nine other people including one sent to H.E the President. These were retrieved….” of course, later on, I will ask where they were retrieved from but to the extent that the honourable member is insinuating criminality onto the Office of the Speaker and particularly, a victim of suspected crime discharging his obligation as a Ugandan calling in the Police. Is the Member, therefore, in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members,these matters are serious and urgent and they must be treated as such. The trend of the debate from either side of the House is beginning to look like we are finger-pointing or doing something else insteadof treating the subject of the matter before us. 

I implore this House to discuss this matter with seriousness and within the context. Let us not begin assigning responsibilities to people before we even know what has happened. Please, let us focus on the subject before us.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I am making this statement in good faith and I am saying if we are to get true information regarding this matter, we need to widen the scope of our investigation. I am not actually pointing any finger or accusing any person but I am saying that if we are to get this information clearly, we need to widen our scope of investigation and put everything in place and we need to do it urgently.  

I just want to appeal to the minister that this is just a preliminary report. We want a final report and this final report must cover all areas including psychological investigations. 

3.10
MS MARGARET IRIAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you. I would like to thank the minister for this very important information that he has given us. 

Now, listening to the report that the minister has given, leaves me with many questions unanswered. According to me, first of all, there is already a security threat to our country and our people - that is what I have come to analyse.

Secondly, the officer who was affected was an adult and he complained of headache. Now, the report goes on to say that there were no substances found in the documents that he opened. 

When somebody complained of headache and we say there were no substances found in the documents he opened gives me another question to ask. Surely, the laboratories that we have, are they competent enough to find substances that should have been contained in this document?  

Another thought is if these documents were posted to these very important officers - I imagine there are many important officers in Uganda; how does this Government guarantee their safety?

Mr Speaker, another question, which needs to be answered is that this officer was sent to Nairobi. Supposing they were many officers that were affected and they were supposed to be sent to Nairobi? You think that it would have been possible for them to assist themselves financially?

Now that we get these documents from the post office, how competent is our Post Office to be able to detect?

How is this Government prepared to ensure that the safety of its citizens is within its means? Does it have the capacity to bring a new machine or it is relying on the same old machine in the Post Office?

3.13
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this incident happened, I was on the fifth floor and we all saw what happened when the Police came. But I was disappointed when this matter was reported in the press, when Mr OfwonoOpondo said that the Speaker is just politicking and that nothing happened in office. If that is what can come from the Government Spokesperson, then it is unfortunate.

I am happy that today, the minister has tried to shed some light on what transpired and how far they have gone. But I want to say that we need to move faster to establish what was contained in that parcel because it is coming to a month now from that date. For the people who were affected, the Commission is going to facilitate this staff to go for treatment but I hope they will not be stopped like they stopped Dr Onzivuwa because it involves getting out of the country.

We thought you would speed up and facilitate them to get to Nairobi. I hope that will not happen when Dr Baryomunsi takes charge again.

Mr Speaker, there are definitely gaps in the security arrangements in Parliament here. I will not mention them for security reasons because the wrong elements may get to know about it.

I would like to make a correction; it has been portrayed that the security equipment that is to be procured for Parliament under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security is for only the parking. Because it has been trivialised; when you read in the press, they say that it is to secure the vehicles of the MPs.

The coverage is wider than the parking. It is supposed to be the whole building, Development House and the twin towers where the President and the Prime Minister sit. It is not just the parking. I want to make that correction because it has been trivialised to make it look that way.

The other correction I want to make on the minister’s statement; I am now speaking as outgoing Commissioner; where you are stating that the machinery and the equipment are being shipped here; they are not yet being shipped here. Yesterday, the team that was sent there from SFG, Internal Security and all the other agencies came back.

The manufacturing is still going on, until next month when that manufacturing is complete, that is when the equipment will start moving from wherever they are being manufactured. But the Government must come here and explain because no single cent has been advanced. Yesterday, the Speaker made a statement here apologising that we have come back but we are not ready to park. It is because of the delays from the Ministry of Finance.

How do you expect someone to manufacture, ship the equipment without a single coin. I think the Leader of Government business or the acting Leader of Government Business must take this seriously and make sure those things move faster such that we are able to get this equipment and the installations. 

We have seen the threats. This is just one case, there have been others. I think the faster we move to secure this Parliament, the better.

3.17
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman representative, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there is a lot of paranoia on the issue of security because Ugandans are not sure that individual security is guaranteed.

When we look at standards anywhere, I think our security whether in the consumption of goods that we take, our items from the supermarket, we know very well that security does not stop at our bodily presence but also what we consume.

That is why you see that Members are raising the issue of how the Government laboratory can handle. As we speak, the minister talked about the parcels casually as if it was okay for the President, the Speaker and other seven people to receive suspicious parcels.

I think that is where we should even start. How does one particular consignment go to the Speaker, the President and other seven people and not even raise suspicion. 
Who is this secret person sending? The content of these letters; are they love letters?

When you say that we should not be concerned, I am really worried. Somebody can say, “this was the content”, do not be worried. It was a simple letter and a simple message. You could have allayed our fears by telling us the content.

The other issue would be about security not only for Parliamentarians because I think that is what is raising the temper of the general public that we seem to talk about security when it concerns us.

However, this is an issue that could touch anybody. In the rise of the acid attack, I think we have cause to be worried. The issue is not about biological terror; we have issues of acid attacks in this country. It has not been handled effectively and in the wake of acid, which we are getting used to, unfortunately, we are seeing another kind of terror.

Because we have other terror attacks that are not international in nature, such as acid attacks, but with its rise we are getting more worried. Acid can be used casually in this country to maim, attack and Government has yet to come out to assure the public that we safe.

The minister should talk about the general security of individuals and citizens in this country without bringing FBI guidelines.

We want the national guidelines that we should all be reading; we should all be acquainting ourselves without necessarily resorting to FBI or American security guidelines. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.


3.22
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the report of the minister but one thing I want to highlight is that we should not limit ourselves only to this report and to the security of Parliament. This is a national issue. I have moved around so much and when I look at the security checks that are conducted around the country, I realise that all our people are really a threat.

Returning to this report; you are saying the tests conducted did not contain any materials harmful to human life, yet, we have a staff member who is complaining of headache. We do not know how intense this headache is. According to the tests that were done, we do not know the effects that these contents are causing or have caused. 
I put it to security and other stakeholders to go into details of finding out the cause or the effects of the contents of this package because we might be talking about a headache and at the end of it all, we might have something different.

We also need to look at where we are saying there were no signs of explosion. If the other packages that we are talking about are intact, we could not, therefore, find out about the explosion because they are intact. I think the explosion only comes out when the packages are open. So, how can we be talking about lack of explosion, yet, the packages are intact? Because this came out only after it was opened. I believe that the explosion cannot happen until the package is open. Therefore, we cannot be talking of an explosion with packages that are intact. I think we really need to get clarification on that.

I call upon security to be more vigilant. We need to be more certain because when you look at the way we are being checked even here at Parliament, I think there are very many gaps that we need to fill in order for us to be more secure. Thank you very much.

3.25
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. On page two, we are told that Mr Kaboggoza went to Aga Khan Hospital on his own without being accompanied by anybody. This makes me ask myself of the type of relationship that we have here in this institution. Somebody is hurt here at the work place and this person struggles on his own to go for treatment. Mr Speaker, I think it is high time that we reviewed our relationship.

Also on page three, we are told nine other people received similar packages. When these nine people received these packages, no steps were taken with the first person. According to me, this, therefore, means that Government is not concerned about our security because these issues came up when it happened to the Speaker. Why are we not concerned when such serious issues occur? 

Mr Speaker, I think Government should guarantee the security of Ugandans wherever they are, so that the people have trust that this is a caring Government. I thank you.

3.27
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The beauty with this House is that it has Members coming from various backgrounds and as a postal officer trained at Nakawa, I want to make these observations. 

I have looked at the parcel, which was displayed here by the minister and there is no way in Post Office work that such a parcel could attract a notification to the recipient, never. Notifications to people who are supposed to receive parcels only come when the parcel is very big and they come on postal office form number 13. I do not know whether that form was delivered to the Speaker’s office. If this notification came by a telephone call, for example, this would in itself raise suspicion.

We occupy the same building with the President’s office. How come the Speaker’s parcel was delivered before the one to the President? Was there another notification to the Office of the President that was given and ignored by officers in that office? How come that the parcel, which was supposed to be delivered at the President’s Office was not yet opened up? 

If you look at this report, for example, you will find that it is dated 18th February. That means and this is what I feel, that when hon. Sseggona raised this matter here in Parliament, that is when the Police started the investigations.

How come the Police, which was notified immediately this incident took place in the Speaker’s office on the 24th, did not obtain this report immediately? There were investigations to be done and lives to be saved but no investigations were done until this matter was raised here in Parliament as can be evidenced by this report, which was issued just yesterday.

This report, as given by the minister, is littered with a lot of mistrust in the Office of the Speaker. We should know that an attack or an attempted attack or any situation on the office of the Speaker is an insinuation, is an attack, is an attempted attack on this House. This is not a small matter to leave to the staff of the Speaker’s Office.

The fact that this letter was opened in the presence of someone, as was raised by the honourable colleagues, is not something that we should debate upon. These are communications and letters for the Speaker and you do not expect an office messenger to open the Speaker’s parcels on the way. It is proper that they were opened in front of an administrative officer.

Lastly, when you read paragraph 11, it has a conclusion, which says, “In conclusion, tests have been conducted by the Government Laboratory which clearly shows that the package did not contain any material harmful to human life.” I want to ask the minister, what insinuation is he trying to make? Is he trying to say that this was a hoax? And in view of the contents of his statement, is he saying that now the Speaker’s Office is under investigation for having taken this country for a ride?

This is because if you have drawn the conclusion, then you are almost saying that this thing never happened; that there are some people who took us for a ride. All in all – 

3.32
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague hon. Segona for raising this important issue about the security of our Speaker. I do not know why the Government was quiet about this issue until it was raised by one of our colleagues. I can see in front of me, hon. Dr Kiyonga listening to us as if there was nothing wrong. This is a security issue and you are the head of security in this country –(Interjections)– yes, the two ministers are seated comfortably as if it is nothing serious. If this was Walk-to-Work, everybody would be running up and down. But for this one, they are comfortably seated in front of me –(Laughter)– but I want to inform you that this is a serious issue for the entire country. 

When you consider the security of the Vice President and that of the Speaker, you can easily tell that the security of our Speaker is much less than that of the Vice President. And the Speaker heads one arm of Government. So, we need to increase the security of our Speaker. 

On page 5 of this statement, the minister said: “In this regard, we received guidance from the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) of the USA on how individuals can take personal initiatives to increase their safety while receiving parcels. 

I want to ask the hon. Minister, when did you receive these guidelines; tell us the date and time. We want to confirm it because to me, the authenticity of this information is still unclear. 

Mr Speaker, I have been asking why the Office of the Sergeant-at-Arms is redundant. When I have a security issue, I must approach the police. As far as I am concerned, we must use the security – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, by saying the Office of the sergeant-At-Arms is redundant, what do you mean? I have the sergeant-At-Arms here. 

MR MUGUME: Whenever we ask him about security issues, he says: “Go to the head of security.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you mean they are redundant;they are not doing work?

MR MUGUME: That means they are not doing anything as far as my security is concerned. I am a Member of Parliament and I want to be assured of my security andI must get my security from the Sergeant-At-Arms, not the Police. 

Lastly, on security, is the issue of the parking yard. The Speaker said that this parking yard is for only Members of Parliament and the President’s Office was not included. Now that there is insecurity and we cannot use this parking yard, I have information that we are not going to use this parking yard for all the time we are here as the Ninth Parliament. That means they will keep on claiming security threats – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, we are here as backbench Commissioners and I wish my colleague had consulted with us. I have been forced to get up because this is the second time. At one time, he made a similar allegation in this House. Later on, I called him and told him about it and he understood. I wish he had asked the Backbench Commissioners other than just bringing a matter on the Floor, stating that we are not going to use the parking lot for the whole of the Ninth Parliament. 

I just gave you information here that yesterday, the team that went to verify checks on the security system that has been manufactured for this place came back and said it will be completed by next month and therefore, they will be shipped and installation will be done. 

According to the contract that was signed, it will take six months from the day the contract was signed for the work to be completed. The Minister of Security is here and the honourable member should have asked when this will be done. I do not know whether the Ninth Parliament will have ended in six months from now. 

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you, hon. Mugume and the Commissioner. Even to begin using the parking we are using now, we had to stage a protest and you remember what you did to stop that protest. But this parking had not only been launched by the Speaker of Parliament but also by the President and it was declared ready. But when we came the following day, we found it had been blocked. 

It is a bit of a problem for me to accept what you are saying now as the real truth about that parking. You said it was ready and it was launched by the Speaker of Parliament and the Head of State and the following day, it was not ready until we all parked our vehicles and said we were not leaving. Hon. Okupa is the one who intervened. So, hon. Mugume has enough ground for him to suspect that may be we will never use it. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that the people who prepared the structural plans of the parking did not include a comprehensive security system covering the entire precincts of Parliament. And at that level, the level of alertness, due to terrorism was not at the same level as it has been declared now. 

At the time of handover of the parking yard to the Speaker, we received security advisory from the security organs that it would not be proper to occupy and use that parking unless certain security systems are put in place. It was not in our interest to risk the lives of anybody; the Members of Parliament or visitors of Parliament. So, the Speaker used her prerogative to direct that we use the top level of the parking while security systems are being installed. 

I should mention also that because we did not have funds in the current financial year to procure a security system, at the time the President came to commission the building, that is when we had a private meeting with him in the lounge requesting for the same. He directed that money be provided so that Parliament security system is secured. Out of that directive, the Minister for Finance asked Parliament to accept for this security system to be procured through – of course, it is of classified nature because it is being handled by the Ministry of Security and the Police - so as to secure this building. We as Commissioners, we could not go against a security advisory from the security organs in order to occupy the parking before those systems are put in place. That is exactly what has happened. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please,wind up on this subject and I will make a comment later. 

MR MUGUME: Thank you, Mr Speaker – (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not create situations that are not accurate. The date on which the parking was commissioned was the same date we had a meeting with the President. It was the same date that the Minister of Security, Minister of Defence, the Inspector-General of Police and all of us went to that room for a meeting. These issues were pointed out and the President, indeed, made a directive that over $6 million was required to do this and that that money should be found for these purposes. In the meantime, the underground parking could not be used for those reasons that have been cited. So, it was not some plan that this Parliament cannot use that parking or anything like this. 

I told you, Members that we should debate this thing knowing that the leadership of this Parliament does not intend to do anything that would be disadvantageous to its own Members. So, by making the kind of statements you make, you tend to even impute that kind of motive on the office of the Speaker but we do not think that is fair.

3.43
MR MEDARD LUBEGA SSEGGONA (DP, Busiiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to thank the Minister for the attempt made to make an explanation to this House. I wish to specifically state in bold and underline that it was indeed an attempt. (Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order on the conduct of hon. Moses Ali. Hon. Moses Ali has continuously been closing his eyes in a way that shows that he is in the middle of his sleep or that he is so tired that he is dozing. At one point, I saw him almost fall down. Is he, therefore, in order to continue behaving in that manner in this august House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a heavy security discussion and the honourable member you are referring to is a General. (Laughter) And what I saw was that he is in deep contemplation. (Laughter) And it is hardly human to be in deep contemplation and still keep your eyes open. (Laughter) So, please, hon. Sseggona, proceed with your contribution.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, to begin with, I wish to emphasise the point raised by the Member for Mukono Municipality. You see, when we are dealing with a matter of this nature, we need specifics and not general comments from the minister. 

First of all, there were nine intended recipients of these parcels but only two are mentioned; one is being mentioned by occurrence, being the Speaker and the second – because the statement says, “…including H. E the President.” Who are the other seven? 

Secondly, the minister laid on Table – or attempted to lay on Table – two of the parcels and yet, the statement tells us that they retrieved all of them; where are the other seven and who were the recipients. And that causes suspicion to me that some are left out and others are not. Is it possible that the minister left out the seven because they were harmful and therefore, did not want to risk,and that these two were harmless? The minister did not tell to whom those two belonged. 

Mr Speaker, I have looked at the final technical report on suspicious parcel picked from Parliament on 24 January 2014 tabled by hon. Baba this afternoon. And whereas the final report from the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory is dated 18 February 2014 – that was yesterday. On 3 February 2014, the Counter-Terrorism Directorate wrote to the Commandant of the Parliamentary Police. And what is their conclusion? It is on page two: “The parcel was checked and tested; the results have ruled out presence of explosive or hazardous material.”

First of all, the Government Analytical Laboratory only produced a report yesterday but on 3rd February, the Police had already concluded that the thing was harmless. Again, its marks of suspicion of cover-up, coupled with other factors obviously – that only the Speaker’s office was affected and was notified and the other seven recipients remain anonymous. And even when it came to producing the two parcels, whose contents are not disclosed, we only have two and the seven are missing.

Indeed, looking at the same report from the Counter-Terrorism Directorate, “There was use of Police sniffer dogs and no explosives were detected.”If there were no explosives detected, how about the other potentially hazardous materials? How I wish that dog could be here to tell us – because it could not tell us a lie. (Laughter)[Prof. Kabwegyere:”Dogs do not speak.”]

And Prof. Kabwegyere in a very discourteous manner tells me that dogs do not speak; I thought that is obvious. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, without engaging Prof. Kabwegyere who wishes to engage me, I wish to move to the second element of delay. This officer of Parliament complained immediately upon opening the parcel; Police was called in but we have nothing in the direction of Police taking this man to hospital. Even when they suspected that there could be some terrorist activity involved – he went on his own to a clinic at Diamond Trust Bank Building and later on to Kampala Hospital.

This Parliament passed the Anti-Terrorism Act in 2002 and this is 2014 – 12 years down the road – we are not prepared because the Police in Uganda is not even aware that there could be terrorism as an activity in a parcel. That is why they could not rush this man to hospital even when he complaining of serious headache.

Prof. Lule, Dr Kanyerezi and Dr Musoke made a recommendation that this man be taken to Nairobi Hospital for a blood check-up and that was in the notes appended to a letter dated 3rd February. To-date – forget about the Parliamentary Commission, which is charged with the duty of the officer’s welfare. The Police which is charged with the constitutional responsibility of protecting Uganda, among other things, against terrorism, has never taken an initiative to drive this recommendation to its logical conclusion. And what the minister tells us in his statement is that they are “reviewing”.

I suppose he is an essential apparatus in the investigation who would give information but we are risking Kaboggoza’s life by not adequately attending to his health and after his death, we will not have the assistance we would need from him. I seek to be protected by the Speaker from the likes of Prof. Kabwegyere who have taken on the duty of interrupting my presentation this afternoon.  

So, Mr Speaker, can we have timelines because this is touching our lives. Forget about the life of the Speaker, which is very important and dear to us but our lives. As a membership of this institution, can we have time lines because on the one hand, they have concluded the thing was not harmful? On the other hand, they are continuing to investigate and this investigation also has international complications. The minister is not telling us about the involvement of Interpol because the source of the parcel is alluded to but when you look at the information from the Police is information they only gathered from the internet. We have bilateral relations with this Government. Why are we not taking steps in a matter of this magnitude? 

I will not ask why H. E. the President’s parcel delayed like some colleagues did. I am actually happy that the parcel directed to the President delayed to get there because possibly, we would be talking about a different story and catastrophe. 

I want to thank those that delayed the President’s parcel but it also points to one fact of inefficiency that if the President’s parcels will always take this long, then at one point, we are headed for a catastrophe assuming the information is of an urgent nature involving warnings related to security of the President.  

Mr Speaker, we are talking about events of January 22nd but until February 17th, the Government remained tight lipped. Of course, not forgetting information we received from Commissioner Elijah Okupa of how the Government reacted, that the Speaker was simply politicking. It is a matter I had intended to actually move that the House be recalled from recess but I had very fresh memories of somebody undertaking and promising that Parliament can only be recalled over his dead body and I did not want to see a dead body in the country.  

Finally, the laxity of the State in defending our lives is also exhibited in one of the documents laid on Table - the so-called advisory from the FBI. Since this world became aware of terrorism as a threat to world life, the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs has had an advisory from an experienced organ called the FBI but it is only today the 20th Day of February, 2014 that the minister now seeks to redeem the image of Government as a serious Government caring for lives to tell us about these guidelines and I can challenge the Government to tell us where these have been distributed if it finds it so important that we must look at them today.  

But I wish to emphasise as I wind up that to avoid insinuations of a cover up, one, we need timely reports. Two, the seriousness of Government can only be seen in action not in the rhetoric that is presented on the Floor of Parliament upon being tickled.I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, will this be the time to ask the minister to respond to some of the issues unless, of course, hon. Minister - the Chief Opposition Whip has something to say on this and then you will make some responses.  

3.57
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me opportunity to make a contribution on this very important subject.

The threat on life is very important. We have witnessed so many of such threats particularly targeting Members of Parliament.  You recall in the last Parliament, we had some Members of Parliament who almost got poisoned - the information reached the Office of the Speaker and up to now, we have not got any report of what happened to that attempt.

You know that the issue of the death of Cerinah Nebanda polarised the House. It is because we felt that there are some people who do not feel the pain of death. But otherwise, death is death and it is painful to very body. 

So, we feel that this subject of the threat on the life of the Speaker is something that cannot be under stated, cannot be ignored and cannot be belittled. So if anybody is to say that the Rt. Hon. Speaker was making politics by saying there was an attempt to plant a bomb to harm her, we can also right now condemn hon. Nebanda who died - she probably pretended to have poisoned herself to die! That is what we are trying to say because that letter could have exploded and killed someone and that person could not live to defend herself. 

So, this matter is important and when I look at the statement of the minister, I just want to raise two questions; one, after hearing all this from the media, our partners is in the struggle, including a senior person like you the Deputy Speaker - I do not think there is any way you have known that there were these rumours of an attempt to harm the Speaker we learnt it through the media - at least I learnt it through the media. Whether it was true or not, the Government should have immediately taken action.  I take it that the Rt. Hon. Speaker who also presides over the affairs of the highest institution in this country is No.3 in the hierarchy of leadership.  

Something should have been done immediately to make a statement so that we would have understood what exactly happened. Why did the Government keep quite? That is the first question I want to ask. Even if it was a lie, even if the Speaker was making politics, why did the Government keep quiet?  

Number two, the authenticity of the parcels which are being laid on the Table - the good thing is that this Table does not speak and you can put anything there –(Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those parcels have not been laid on Table. 

MRS OGWAL:  I thought the minister put some yellow thing on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was no request for putting them on Table.

MRS OGWAL: It would have been good if they were laid on Table because I would have been interested in the contents of that letter. But it is good you didn’t lay it on Table. But the little that we all know is that when a letter is posted through the post office and a notice is given, nobody picks that letter unless you go yourself or another person with authority from you. Now who gave the authority for the parcel belonging to His Excellency the President to be picked?  Who gave the authority? I would be interested in knowing - it is a personal letter and I have always had that experience that when a letter is posted to me even when I send my son and approved, “that is my son, please give him the parcel.” They say, “No. It is a must, she either appears or she must write a letter with attached documents to prove that you are the one who has authorised that letter.” How did the letter of H. E the President get accessed and who are you to access a parcel sent to the Head of State of this country? As a citizen of this country, I stand to defend my President; it means anybody can access even some sensitive documents sent to H. E the President, which may be of security nature and can comprise the security of this nation. So, that is important, it is a precedent that we must condemn. 

Finally, this report has only told us one story. It concentrated on the issue of a parcel containing a bomb and our staff Mr Kaboggoza. It ignored the issue of the poisonous pellet, which we also got through the parcel. (Mr Sseggona rose_) I hope the Speaker will not say my time is up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will do exactly that.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and to the whip. You see, in this country, the reaction of Government is always to victimise the victim. You have heard statements before calling for the prosecution of Mr Kaboggoza. When the hon. Nebanda died, I have fresh memory, somebody was prosecuted and my gratitude to Government. 

You remember that officers of this Parliament were actually victimised. Ultimately, a member of the public was convicted and I said I thank Government, but do you know his last comment after conviction? He said, “I am innocent. Government knows the truth.” That is the reaction of Government and that is the information I want to give.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you very much and thank you for the information given to me. I just would like to ask the minister why the issue of the poisonous pellets has been ignored in this report; does it mean somebody lied? Or was the media fabricating stories relating to this issue? And finally, may be, I just want to draw the attention of Members to paragraph 11. 

The minister has actually concluded a research, it is over. He is done, it is finished, Police is well equipped, they have done their research, they have done the investigation and the matter is finalised. So, there is no further investigation according to paragraph 11. Justification is given on paragraph 12, paragraph 13 you are the same institution seeking expert guidance from FBI.

I must repeat the statement of the Speaker himself, by saying nobody is safe, from both sides of the House. When it happens, when a snake comes, do not say that because it has come from the side of the movement, it will kill the movement side. This snake may be so wild and go straight to the side of the Opposition and kill somebody from there. So, we see a snake, we must deal with it. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you need to make your conclusion on this.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba) Mr Speaker, I would like to thank all the Members that have contributed to this debate and to the statement I made. I want to respond in about four or five categories in which the issues were raised. First, on the issue of parcels; nobody knew that these parcels were in this country until the office of the Speaker was called by the general Post Office that “please, there is a parcel here for the Rt hon. Speaker.”

I believe the same call was made for the parcel of H. E the President. The Office of the Speaker was the first to go there to pick the parcel and then, there was this pop explosion sound in the office. Police was alarmed, they came there immediately and immediately they wanted to know the origin of these parcels; only to go to the Post Office to find the other nine which were there, so the Special Forces group was contacted - the counterpart to Police - to say there is a letter for H.E here, what do we do about it? They said, “Bring it over. Let us examine it.” 

That is how the one of the President and the one of the Speaker were taken to the Government Analytical Laboratory. (Interjections) You want to know about the others? I told you in the statement that these were retrieved by the Police and taken to the Government Analytical Laboratory;and these are the people to whom they were addressed. If you thought we were hiding, I will read to you the names. The seven are addressed to, Paul Kihika. I do not know him, Barbra Kaija, Ambassador OlaraOtunu, Hon. Col KiizaBesigye, Mr Peter Christopher Werikhe, Hon. Elias Lukwago and to Hon. Sam Kutesa. 

These are the parcels, which have been retrieved and they are available at the Government Analytical Laboratory. They have not been opened because they have not given their consent yet. I do not know whether Post Office notified them or not, but the police got them because of the threat.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is about a matter of security under investigation by security agencies. One, they have to seek permission from SFG to do their work; secondly, they have not even bothered to contact the others to find out whether these letters contain the same substances. They have just kept them. 

Can the minister tell this Parliament whether they took this matter with the seriousness that it deserves?

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek a clarification from the minister. When they got the other parcels of the seven people whom he has read, from the statement, those ones for the Speaker and the President, they notified the office. They called them that there were parcels. Now, the remaining seven, Government took it upon themselves to go and ask the management of the Post Office to retrieve them. Did the Post Office seek the consent and notify the people to whom these letters were addressed?

MR JAMES BABA: The first issue hon. for Kyadondo East, he asked about the parcel for the President. You know very well SFG is a security detail for the protection of the President. They are the first line of action for the protection of the President, so, naturally, they were the first to be contacted.

So, the notifications arose out of what we found from the Office of the Speaker and the Police. 

Hon. Members, especially hon. Baryomunsi and others, were asking how the investigations were carried out and the competence of the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory. Actually, I must commend the Government Analytical Laboratory for the systematic way they conducted their investigations. When the Police first undertook the investigations with the x-ray detection of explosives and chemicals, they just issued a report. 

The Government Analytical Laboratory now needed to do the detailed analysis of what this was about and what did they do? They screened for explosive devices, chemical toxicants and bio agents. All these were examined bit by bit for explosive devices, for radio nuclides, bio agents for chemical warfare agents and toxic volatile organic compounds. All this was done and this is the report I laid on the Table and the details are all there. So, hon. Members, this study was professionally done and detailed- (Interruption.)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report that the minister laid on Table is here and in paragraph one, the report is talking about two packages containing exhibits. When he was making the statement before this House, he talked about nine parcels. The report talks about two parcels and he is telling us that there were no explosives in all the nine parcels. 

Mr Speaker, is the minister in order to continue misleading this House that investigations have been carried out on all the nine parcels when the report he is referring to and which he laid before this House only refers to two parcels? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, there does not seem to be a clear understanding of what you said. Please, give more information.

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I was very clear and let me repeat this. There were only two parcels that were referred to the Government Analytical Laboratory. The results that are in this report, which I laid on Table is in reference to the two. The other seven are still being held in the Government Analytical Laboratory pending the consent of their owners. They are being held there as a security measure pending the consent of their owners. Well, you asked us to come and explain here and that is why we are here, otherwise, we should be dealing with them by now.

About the safety of Mr Kaboggoza, well, he did seek medical attention. Prof. Kanyerezi’s report, which hon. Sseggona referred to in which there were other professionals, Dr Musoke and Prof. Lule who looked at him- Let me read in detail what their report says. “Mr Kaboggoza was seen on the 24th January 2014 and claimed to have been exposed to what he called poisonous gas. Three days later, there was no physical trauma found on examining him and we had no facilities to examine his blood for poisonous substances. He was treated with tablets pregavalium of 75mgs for five days just in case. The gas was injurious to nerves. However, I recommend him to Nairobi hospital for further tests.”

So, really, from this report and even from a lay man’s point of view, he treated him just in case but there was no evidence that he was injured. That is what this report says. But it was recommended that he should go for further check-up in Nairobi.

More substantively in this report, which I laid on the Table and particularly, page 4, let me read- [Members rose_] – Please, allow me to read first and then I will give you the Floor. One common characteristic of all these agents, which were tested for; the chemical warfare agents and the bio agents is that they are fast acting; producing symptoms associated with them instantly like blood chocking. Nerve agents kill instantly whereas blister agents produce large water filled swellings on the skin immediately on contact. The fact that none of these occurred to the person who opened the parcel by the time the case was reported to the Police, is further proof that they were not in the parcels that I showed here or that were examined.

So, Mr Speaker, Mr Kaboggoza, may have some injuries but according to these reports, they are not life threatening of the type that are received from bomb clusters.

Members raised the issue of general safety of the honourable members here and the population at large and I think that people should be concerned about our safety. Actually, we are in the process of bringing a consumer Bill –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I am holding in my hand two documents; the first being the minister’s statement and if you look at paragraph 10, with me, it tells us, “Furthermore, a comparative analysis of the two parcels showed that there was no difference in regard to their origin P. O. Box … and addressed in the city of Rotterdam Metropolitan area of the Netherlands.” That is the statement.

When you look at the report from the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory page 5 of 11, it is talking about a document; Barcelona of December 2013 and I construe the same to be different even by any stretch of imagination.

Is the minister in order, therefore, to lay two documents, which are conflicting? Does this not point to the fact that they could have submitted a different document to the Government Analytical Laboratory? Is he in order, therefore?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you need to explain those disparities.

MR BABA: We are talking about where the documents were posted from. The documents were posted from an address in Rotterdam. A posting address can be different from where it was written or worked on. Hon. Nambooze said she worked in the postal system; I am sure she knows the difference between the two very well.

They also asked why we did not come out quickly in the open when this thing happened. I would like to accept that we made that error; I wish to apologise. We should have come out immediately and given a statement but we wanted to give Police the opportunity to first investigate this matter properly – (Interjections) –but I am sorry that we did not come up quickly. I hope next time, we will do better. 

Finally, you also asked about the motives and origins. We all know the Catalonian Group who sent these parcels. These are people based in Spain, they are about to go for a referendum; they want to secede. I will not speculate or guess, on whether they are mobilising for international support. I do not know where else they have sent these parcels; but if you see the people they have sent them to, they are people of influence. May be they are soliciting for support. 
We have asked the police to investigate this further to see where else these letters were sent and whether, indeed, they were sent from Rotterdam to us here in Uganda. 

In conclusion, we think and believe that these parcels did not contain explosives;otherwise our friend – (Interruption.)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. From what the minister read as the report from the doctors of Kampala Hospital, I understood that the doctors said they did not have the capacity to detect presence of poisonous gases and that is the reason they referred Mr Kaboggoza to Nairobi and indeed, that is the reason the doctors refer patients; when you cannot act on a condition, and you think higher expertise can help. 

So, is the honourable minister in order to tell us that the referral by experts is just being reviewed by security when actually, Mr Kaboggoza should be facilitated to undergo that medical check as soon as possible? Is he in order to take it as a casual issue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what are you doing about those recommendations?

MR BABA: Mr Speaker, I am not taking the issue casually. I hope Parliament through the Commission can support Mr Kaboggoza to be taken for further examination as the doctor has recommended. What we are saying is that from the Government Analytical Laboratory, that is what we found. 

We have also said in this statement that we are continuing to review the situation. So, everything is still open. But for now, this is our conclusion. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. Hon. Members, you all know that in the rules, this debate should have taken one hour or less. But I have extended the time for an exhaustive discussion on this subject because of its importance and urgency. I am glad we have all treated it in that spirit; matters relating to security are not matters to handle casually. Thank you. 
Hon. Minister, it remains open that this House should be briefed about the results and consultations that will take place. Whatever comes out, you need to come back to the House so that we know what has happened. 

As soon as you have this information, please, come and brief the House. If possible, we need you to come back in two weeks so that the House can be advised about the steps that have been taken and what remains to be accomplished so that we can come to the root of this situation. And if it is something, which is not a big threat, we understand it as such. But if it is a real threat, which we suspect it is, then we should also be informed on how we are going to handle matters further. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION OF THE RESIDENTS OF THREE SUB COUNTIES IN NWOYA COUNTY ON HUMAN WILDLIFE CONFLICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that these two motions were debated concurrently and the debate continues on both item six and item seven but the decisions will be processed differently. And yesterday, by the time the House rose, we had already made some arrangement for which Members will speak on this subject and upon concluding their speeches; we will take a decision on the subject. I had picked the Member of Bukonjo East to kick off the debate for today. 

4.28
MR YOKASI BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will comment on two observations.It was observation No.6 in report two that was talking about handing over dead bodies of poachers who are killed in the national park to the police. 

I represent a constituency, which borders three national parks; namely Queen Elizabeth National Park, Mount Rwenzori National Park and Virunga National Park in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Of particular interest is Mount Rwenzori National Park, which is not only conserved for fauna but also for flora. We have been using the mountain as a pharmacy for the community staying round it. It is the cradle for herbal medicine for the people of Rwenzori and the surrounding area. I do not see any logic as to why a ranger should shoot a herbalist who has gone to look for medicine in the national park. I am reacting to resolution no.6; which states that dead bodies should be handed over. I do not even see why dead bodies should appear in the national park. 

Secondly, those national parks are of cultural value. The guardian gods of the Rwenzururu people reside in Mount Rwenzori. At times, we go there for cultural and spiritual rituals and not necessarily to porch buffalos. Why should someone be shot while going for a cultural ritual in the mountain, which happens to be demarcated as a national park? We have been doing that for centuries; but recently, it was demarcated into a national park. So, people’s right to access medicine and to consult with their gods has been tampered with because when they go there, they will be shot and dead bodies will be handed over to the police. Nobody should be shot in the national park. 

Finally, regarding the elephants, I support the recommendation that says,“more rangers should be recruited”. Elephants are very clever animals and they have specific tracks they use when moving from the national park to the gardens. They do not just pass everywhere. If those tracks are identified and rangers placed in those areas, I am convinced that these elephants will be tamed and they will remain in the national park.

I also support the proposal of using an electric fence. There is an experiment we carried out in my constituency with the Baptist Church with support from some NGO from the United States; we fenced off 10 acres of land with low-voltage electricity and no elephant has ever gone to that garden again – it gives the elephant shock but does not kill it. I know it is an expensive venture but we can do it step-by-step and area-by-area so that in the long run, the whole area will be covered. 


Otherwise, Mr Speaker, if you saw a garden that has been visited by an elephant, you will cry, especially, if it is a banana plantation – an elephant will pull out the whole plant and chew everything including the stem. What remains, it tramples on and continues. Moreover, this is an animal, which weighs about one tonne. Imagine 10 of them in a one-acre garden how much damage they can cause. So, I support those recommendations but we should also put into consideration that the herbal part of the national park and the spiritual part. Thank you.

4.33
MS SARAH NYIRABASHITSI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its good work and I also thank those who brought the petition because the recommendations made are cross-cutting wherever there are national parks. I would like to support these recommendations and also request UWA that as they are making the recommendations, on the issue of compensation, they should add that it should be instant so that it does not take long. If my crops have been destroyed, I should be compensated instantly.

Secondly, I would like to inquire because from the report, they say they did not give out the dead bodies to the relatives. I would like to know where these bodies were put; were they given to the animals or are they keeping them?

On the issue of – in the report, you are suggesting putting up an electric fence but I think this cannot work everywhere. There is a national park because in our place, Mgahinga National Park, the people surrounding that area move deep into the park to fetch water. So, I feel this may not work all-over. Maybe it should be applicable to those places that can accommodate it.

Lastly, on the issue of revenue sharing – the 20 per cent – could we get better regulations on how we should share that money because when you send the money to the sub-county, the villagers ask for 20 per cent and at the end of the day, you cannot see anything it has done after the sharing. I suggest that we get better regulations over this money. Thank you.

4.35
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this report and thank the committee for the good job they have done.

I would like to send my condolences to those who have lost their loved ones all these years. Since I was born, I have been hearing about the disturbance and destruction by wildlife on community property and also death. This is a long historical event and I have been wondering why it has taken all this long; people have always died but there is no action taken. And that is why I think it is high time we did something. And we can do a lot without even waiting for the law – because I have been hearing that there are amendments to the laws to be presented here.

And I also wanted to ask that many times, when I am travelling I see a lot of bushfires in the park; who is starting these bushfires? And this is the thing, which disturbs the animals from their sanctuaries; they become wild and they leave their habitats because the bushes are burnt and these animals end up in the communities. I also want to urge UWA to find a better way of managing game.

My next point is about a resolution, which was brought up that the ministry should come up with a project of tea or chilli growing in order to bar them from crossing into human settlements. I thought this is one of the areas that do not need a law. I do not know whether it is the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for this or the Ministry of Tourism. One of these should come up with a concept to tell us how this can be implemented. What acreage are we talking about in all these wildlife territories? How are the people going to be involved and how are they going to manage it? This will enable us to see how feasible it is. It is the same with electric fencing; I have seen colleagues say that it should not be done because it will interfere with community life but a colleague across there has just said that it is possible. So, let somebody come and tell us what is feasible so that we do not give recommendations, which are not feasible. Thank you.

4.38
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for their report. I come from a district with a game reserve and I would like to inform you that the game rangers are very difficult people. Last year, in my district, under the tractor-hire scheme, people’s gardens were ploughed but when it came to sowing, the game rangers chased them away. But when the district leadership intervened, they allowed farmers to sow seed. However, they took time to give farmers a go-ahead and by the time they did so, the rains had reduced and so, the people had a poor harvest.

Mr Speaker, we need to help the people of Kasese and Nwoya because unlike animals in game reserves, which can easily be scared using even sticks, the elephants are very stubborn animals. So, the minister should guide us on the best way to handle the problem; is it by having an electric fence or planting chilli? Once you have identified the best solution, you need to implement it immediately so that people’s lives, property and crops are saved.

On the people being shot, it is really absurd. We are told in the first report that Jacob Okot was shot at the boundary; he was not even inside the game reserve but he was shot dead. And like colleagues have already expressed, where do they put the bodies of such people? I think there is need for them to record statements with the Police when they do that and hand over the bodies to the relatives for burial.

Both reports tell us that children either do not go to school or drop out because of fear of the intrusion of the elephants. The elephants and the children are there to stay; so to me, Government should think of constructing boarding schools in these areas so that the movement of the children to and from school is reduced and so, the encounter with the elephants is minimised.

And finally, Mr Speaker, there is need for Government to clearly demarcate the boundary between the game parks or reserves and communities so that this confusion between UWA and the communities is settled once and for all. Thank you.

4.41
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we adopt this report, I would like to seek some clarification from chairperson especially on the report for Nwoya on recommendation No. 5 where they are stating that the park boundary should be extended to separate the park animals, especially the elephants, from the community. I want clarification in regard to whether the kind of extension that the committee is referring to is inward or outward. There needs to be some other statement to qualify this recommendation. 

And then recommendation No. 6, they are talking of the number of rangers being increased during recruitment and focusing on the community members. It also needs to be qualified by adding the statement “like communities around the national parks.”

And on the report for Kasese and Kabarole, recommendation (i), they are talking about Parliament amending the wildlife law to include compassion for loss of lives and I do not know whether they are referring to compensation or they have imported another word to that effect. I do not know whether they are referring to compensation or otherwise. Also in (viii), there is UMA which is supposed to be UWA.

Secondly, I happen to come from a district which is actually dominated by national parks. In Kasese the constituency I represent, Busongora County North, has three national parks; Mt. Rwenzori, Queen Elizabeth and Kibaale. The communities are simply within a limited corridor at the expense of wildlife and in most cases, our people have been killed. One was killed in 2012 when they were being chased from land which they were occupying and the wildlife rangers shot at these people and killed some individuals in my constituency. 

In Bundibugyo during the outbreak of Ebola, some of the findings revealed that wild animals especially wild meat can cause Ebola –(Interjections)- yes and Bundibugyo District lost one of the pioneer medical doctors to Ebola and so, the issue that I am trying to bring forward is to the effect that when an area like my constituency and Kasese District in general is surrounded by national parks, the lives of the people are at risk because then it implies that anytime there can be an outbreak of any kind of disease that even the scientists may not easily detect and you find people dying without any reasonable cause.

So, I would have loved the committee to point out an issue where UWA should conduct some sensitisation and education to the communities around national parks; which diseases are likely to be caused by the wild animals or being in close range with wild animals and how they can be guarded against –(Member timed out_)

4.46
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of this committee but I beg your indulgence -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, the rules are clear. Please let us not go into that because there is no indulgence about that. The member for Lamwo.

MS KARUNGI: Much obliged.

4.47
MS SARAH LANYERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you so much for giving me this opportunity to speak. I first of all want to thank the committee members for the work well done and I agree with most of their recommendations and I beg that we adopt the recommendations. 

When we talk about elephants, I do not know how many of you have seen a garden that has been stepped into by elephants. It is very much destruction. I remember hon. Victoria Ssekitoleko, the former Minister for Agriculture said that if you plant chilli, the elephants fear chilli and will bypass your garden. So, I strongly support the recommendation on the chilli and that the ministry should help the members so that chilli is planted around their gardens so that at least food security will be protected.

Yesterday, I listened very attentively to members and one thing that bewildered me a lot was the fact that the people who were interviewed think that the Government will prefer to take care of wildlife more than taking care of the people. It came out so strongly. This is true if you look at the attitude of the UWA officials. The UWA officials would shoot the poachers or the trespassers and I have been wondering and I checked what does the law say about the poachers and the trespassers? Are they supposed to be shot and killed? I do not think so. 

So, I really feel that the attitude of the UWA officials should be improved. The ministry should work on the attitude of the UWA people and that brings me to the recommendation No.6 on both the reports of Nwoya and Kasese. 

Recommendation No. 6 talks about recruiting more UWA members mostly from within the community - that the rangers should come from within the community. Maybe that – (Member timed out_)

4.49
MRS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report produced. I would like to say that wildlife is causing a lot of destruction all over this country especially in the areas surrounded by the national parks and game reserves and Sebei region is no exception to this. 

The animals that disturb our area include monkeys, hyenas, snakes and birds. I want to report a particular case which caused a lot of destruction in our area last year and this was destruction by birds. Birds which were in millions destroyed many acres of sorghum. Our farmers are shifting from subsistence to commercial farming but they grew a lot of sorghum worth thousands of acres. They hired tractors, others went for loans to buy seeds but all this was destroyed within a very short time and it has really grounded our farmers to zero. Right now, they are lamenting and asking who should compensate them after this, so that they can start again. 

These same birds, after finishing sorghum from Sebei region, came to Kibimba Rice Scheme where they were controlled by the vermin controllers. But when this Vermin Control Department destroyed these birds, there was a complaint from UWA saying that they wanted to sue these people because they had destroyed wild life. I would like to know from the minister whether these birds can be called pests or they can be called wild life. If they are really wild life, then our people deserve to be compensated for the crops destroyed by these birds. Thank you very much.

4.52
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to say that the chairperson of the committee and her team did a good job. I am a member of the team on agriculture and we have been moving around and we physically saw what was going on between the two resources which are very important; that is wild life and our farmers. 

As a Committee on Agriculture, at the beginning we were really biased and we blamed the sector in charge of tourism and wildlife for not caring about their animals which affect our farmers. On the other hand, we know that wildlife and under the 1999 Wildlife Policy and even the prior one of 1995, wildlife is stipulated as a very important resource to our nation and indeed we need to look after it and even safeguard this resource. 

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, there is a very big conflict between the populations that are bordering the game parks. You can’t imagine it when you reach there. At one point we saw the damage that had been caused the previous night by elephants in Semliki and really you wouldn’t want to see it. It is high time that we decided that protection of game parks appears in our budgets. Let us start bit by bit; let’s phase this but we should start. Some people think that electric fencing for example is very expensive. We have seen it, we saw it in Botswana, and they have done it almost throughout the country. They have separated their parks with the farmers and they do a lot of animal keeping –(Member timed out_)

4.55
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to start by addressing my concerns to the Minister of Tourism. A lot has been said about the rangers killing people on sight in the game parks and I want to ask the minister where these game rangers get power to shoot somebody on sight and yet we know Article 22 of our Constitution only allows the life of a person to be taken when it is passed by a competent court. Can the minister tell us who introduced these powers that the rangers are using to kill people on sight in the game parks? If they have introduced their own law, then I think that must stop with immediate effect. They can say yes, there are some poachers who go with guns but they have never produced a person killed who was armed. It has never come to record. I think the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be very clear also and let us know the mode of recruitment for the people who are recruited to be game rangers because if you only pick notorious veterans and hunters who care about nothing and you employ them to be game rangers, I think this is why we are ending up with this. 

So, we need to recruit people who are clear, who are patriotic, who are law abiding and then they protect our game parks.

Secondly, I have noted that the Uganda Wildlife Authority is supposed to give back to the communities surrounding the parks 20 percent of the gate collection which these people are supposed to use for projects of their own. But in some cases they force communities to use the money – the 20 percent - for digging trenches to protect the game parks. It is the responsibility of the Uganda Wildlife Authority to protect the park and the animals. Why should they again give the money which the locals are supposed to use for their own projects to dig the trenches? I want to know from the minister why we are doing that and I have evidence to this in Kasese in a parish called Sikimu in Kanyankera; the locals are being forced to use that money for digging trenches. Honourable minister we would take interest in knowing that. 

Finally, it is important now that there are cases of animals straying into communities and it has taken us time to stop this –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a final slot for PWD Western; I don’t know whether PWD Northern would want to take it but I don’t think he is ready to take it. So, honourable minister, would you like to? 

4.59
MR RICHARD TWODONG (NRM, Nwoya, Nwoya County): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need to thank the committee for finally coming out with the report. I remember together with my colleague the woman MP, we petitioned Parliament because our people were complaining. Mr Speaker, allow me correct some few errors that I read in the report - some of the names in committee observation No. 9 the name Odokorach isn’t correct, it is Odokorwot. Then if you read the last line where the figure of Shs1.8 million is written in Anaka Gonchogwo, Gonchogwo is not in Anaka but in Kwochgoma sub-county. If they can correct that, it would be fine. 

We have been interacting with the Uganda Wildlife Authority for a lot of these issues and in some cases we have agreed with them on what to do and what not to do but particularly for Nwoya constituency Nwoya District, I need to put it on the record that we raised the issue of the discovery of oil in the park as a possible problem that could have led these wild animals to move out of the park to the community. I remember there was a need for UWA together with the Ministry of energy to do some research to find out the linkages between the two because due to heavy movement of machineries when the oil fields were opened up, the elephants started moving immediately to the community and we thought that could also have an effect. We are waiting for that report. 

Secondly, on the issue of suspected poachers being killed, I remember sharing this at length with the authorities including giving the names of the rangers who were collaborating with these poachers, the vehicles the rangers were using, the number plates of these vehicles, the names of the drivers, the particulars of the individuals and the names of our people who were killed and up to now we are waiting for that report and I do not see the committee capturing that particular information in their report.

Two, our people have complained that the money that they receive out of revenue sharing with the national park has conditions that are so tight that this money cannot be used to compensate the people who have lost properties out of the activities of these wild animals. So, they were requesting that when we start amending the Wildlife Act, because I see in the committee report recommendations in bullet one, we might have to consider including a portion of that money that is sent for revenue sharing as part of a percentage that can be used to compensate individuals who could have lost their properties or lives at the hands of the wild animals.

Mr Speaker, we pray and request the Uganda Wildlife Authority to restrain the rangers and to recruit more rangers and make the park friendlier to the neighbours. Otherwise it will be difficult for the community to also protect the wild animals. Thank you so much.

5.03
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I just want to thank you, Mr Speaker for saving me from making a reply to my colleague. Thank you very much otherwise my reply would have been very serious but I will reserve it for the future. Should she stray like the animals, then she may not be spared.

I also stand up as an MP because Madi sub region is neighboured by two national parks and these national parks are mostly from our neighbouring country. If you can imagine the map when you enter Nimule, that is where the road enters in Amur and you go into Nimule but west of that, there is River Nile turning and going down. This is Adjumani District but across the river, which joins the Nile and which is the border, over there the national park is in Sudan. But since these elephants do not know the borders, they cross the river and destroy crops 20-40 kilometres inland. So, there must be a remedy, we must find a way. If electrical fencing can work elsewhere, it must start here. If Botswana can use it, why not here? Why don’t we use it here? If our people are going to be killed - in any case they are already being killed without wire fencing. So, why can’t we tell them or why can’t we make two lines; the deadly one before and then the one stopping the people? But they should be informed or the line should be coloured so that if you see anything red, it is danger. If we do not do that then we will not take advantage of technology. We must stop these animals.

On the other side of Moyo, again at the border that is shared with Sudan National Park – [MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: “Clarification”] - What clarification? I do not need clarification or even procedure. So, the park in Difule is the same. People are having problems and the only remedy could be fencing it with electrical wiring – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt my good friend the General who is the Prime Minister but the procedural point I am seeking is, usually when the rest of us Members of Parliament are raising issues, we are raising them to be captured by the team of the Prime Minister for action. The Rt hon. Prime Minister is also lamenting. I do not know who will capture his issues and where his issues will be addressed. That is the procedural issue I am raising because two ministers are lamenting as any other Member of this Parliament. I do not know whether they are-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House should just be happy that this matter is actually being shared by ministers. We should be celebrating instead. Have you finished? Please finish.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: When I started, I said I am speaking as an MP. My being Second Deputy Prime Minister does not stop me from being an MP anyway. So I am an MP, a Second Deputy Prime Minister, a General and I am deputy Leader of Government Business. What are you going to do about all these?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I would even say that the MP must be lucky because if I am the implementer then I am already converted so the implementation would be easier, maybe. I am saying that I support electrification of the border as of now, as of tomorrow and as long as I remain an MP. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Minister, now you know that whatever you come to say, you may not want to contradict some people.

5.09
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report but from this report, I see that the officials of UWA do not have a human face. They seem to value the lives of animals more than the lives of Ugandans. We are all struggling to survive in nature and God gave human beings an upper hand and we should survive more than the animals. Actually, although we live in a symbiotic relationship, these animals in the parks may not be useful if there are no people to come and look after them.

In the report, people have been killed and bodies have been hidden. Where do these officials of UWA get the right to kill? There are many stories from Mt Elgon and everywhere that the rangers have been killing Ugandans and we have never heard information that any of them have been taken to court and charged for killing innocent people or killing people without trial.

The minister should take this matter very seriously because the life of human beings must be taken first. Most of us who are debating are lamenting about an issue, including my colleagues the ministers. We should find solutions to these issues.

First, I think that there is pressure on land from our population. Maybe we have too many parks. The minister should consider long-term planning on whether it is necessary to keep all the parks we have or whether we should de-gazette some parks and leave them for human settlement.

In the past, people staying near parks had a symbiotic relationship with those parks; their livelihood was delivered from those parks. The way it is today, it is becoming dangerous for the two to stay together. Therefore, it is clear that we should demarcate these parks and use all methods – the minister should come up with a long term plan on how to fence off these parks. You can do it naturally with bees, plants like Kamulari. Many countries have fenced off their parks and they do not lament about animals interfering with people’s lives and destroying their crops –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For the future readers of the Hansard, what is Kamulari?

MR OGUTTU: “Kamulari” is red pepper –(Laughter)– most obliged. In many countries, they have done exactly that. I also think people who kill – property destroyed by elephants – should we be lamenting about that? I think UWA should take responsibility of that and UWA should have a fund for compensation because we keep national parks for making money. People come from abroad and they pay money to see the animals. Why don’t we use that money for securing the parks and protect people? Where animals cannot be contained, then we should compensate those people whose property is destroyed and whose relatives are killed. 

This is what I expect the minister to propose to us. It may not be today but in response to this so that we do not have to come back here and discuss about animals which destroy crops. I have heard about this since I came to Parliament; every month, there is a story about park animals destroying crops. There were crocodiles in my constituency eating people. The honourable member from Busia was talking about that yesterday. Government and the minister in charge should handle this and address the challenge in a long-term and more sustainable manner instead of just lamenting. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I have specific issues especially from hon. William Nzoghu. I would like to consider the observation of hon. Nambooze and hon. Todwong that we shall call them suspected poachers. 

Hon. Nzoghu asked why we use compassion and whether we meant compensation. As a committee, we looked at compensation as working for those who have lost crops, property and maybe injury. But at the loss of a person, I think we may not compensate but we need compassion. So, we considered compassion to be broader than compensation because at the loss of life, compensation will not bring back the life of the person lost. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But then you used the two words in the two different reports. 

MS KABAHENDA: In the report, we used compensation but in the observation, the people we interviewed were proposing compensation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, in the recommendations for Nwoya, you said, “Compensation” and in the other one compassion.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, we correct that to read compassion in the recommendations for both reports. The honourable member wanted to know whether the park boundaries are going to be marked inwards or outwards. Our recommendation is that UWA together with the Ministry Of Lands should reclaim the boundaries of the park and mark them to separate park animals from the communities. 

The other issue was on how we are going to recruit community members to add to the park rangers. As a committee, we looked at UWA having inadequate staff in relation to the time it takes them to respond to a call when people have been attacked by animals. We thought that they would impose community members for the sake of language and the cultures –(Interruption)

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The chairperson is saying that they recommend that in Nwoya, land be reclaimed from the people and yet the complaint raised during the visit was that the park boundaries originally had some metal plates put on the trees. Right now, the new boundary that UWA is claiming is inside the communities where people are living; some kilometres away from the metal plates. That means that UWA has encroached on the communities and not people entering the park. Now the committee is recommending that UWA should reclaim land; from where? 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, the minister will answer that but as a committee, we thought from the observation of the people we interviewed in Nwoya that while they say there were boundaries of 1953, UWA and the ministry should use their documents to rectify the issue of the boundaries instead of these that they keep changing. They should demarcate and restore the boundaries so that people can know where the community stops. They may not necessarily take the new boundaries into consideration but we want UWA and the ministry to take stock of where their boundaries are so that each of the two can live together knowing where their boundaries are. 

I was winding up by supporting and maintaining that community members be involved; like we found in Pakwach and some other communities bordering Murchison Falls where every parish had two gang members who maintain the trenches that were dug and ensures that the animals do not attack the communities. For reasons of language barriers, the staff of UWA were inadequate; they could not speak the language of those people in the community so they fail even to understand what is going on among the communities. The cultures that the hon. Bihande was talking about can only be appreciated by people who come from that community and by timely intervention. That is why we supported the idea of having the communities involved in solutions that we are finding to bar animals from coming to the communities. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MRS SEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. Allow me to thank members of the committee that compiled the two reports and I support and commend their initiative. I wish to thank them for the interest they picked in the matter and the effort they made to address the issues raised in the petition. My ministry acknowledges the issues raised in the petition and they are not specific to the areas mentioned; that is Nwoya and Kasese alone, but are of cross cutting nature. 

I also want to commend some of the observations that have been made and some of the questions and concerns that have been put forth on the Floor. There was one from Nwoya mainly that Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation for loss of life, people injured and property destroyed by stray wild animals from the game park. Indeed the Ministry has already started on this; the process of amending the Uganda Wildlife Act is in full gear. 

Yesterday in Cabinet both the principles and Act amendment were on the agenda; we were not able to discuss them but I hope we shall be able to do it next week. And then we shall bring them here to Parliament. So the principles of the amendment of the Act are before Cabinet and the new Wildlife Bill is also before Cabinet.

There was also a recommendation that 36 kilometres of trenches that were excavated by UWA should be maintained within the required standards so as to deter animals. I concur with that recommendation and we shall accordingly be able to implement it. And in fact we have been trying to do that. (Interruption)

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, you have responded that you concur with the recommendation but in the committee’s report, there were people who worked on those trenches but were not paid Shs 1.8 million; I thought you would mention that.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, honourable member. I thought I would talk about that one later but now that you have raised it, I will say that my research from UWA shows that everybody who worked was paid. But I will request, through the Speaker, that I engage with the honourable member so that we crosscheck once again and if anybody has not been paid, I will take responsibility to ensure that that person is paid.

There was a recommendation that Government should consider installation of an electric fence to create an effective barrier between Kacongoma community land and Murchison Falls National Park. Of course this is a plan in the long-term for managing the human-wildlife conflict around the protected areas and electric fences are the easiest way to control animals, especially elephants. However, the fences are very expensive to establish and maintain; they require heavy investment not only in Nwoya but also other conservation areas. So, in the short term, we may not be able to do it. But I promise to come back here – because we cannot start with all of them. We can always come here and show you what it takes to fence off one park and I request Parliament – since it has the authority to allocate funds – to maybe do it in phases until we cover all the areas. It may take us five or 10 years but we are bound to start on that.

But in the short term, Government will continue to establish and maintain trenches, scare shooting by our rangers, bee-keeping along the park boundary and recruiting of community scouts. I remember recruitment of community scouts was again mentioned by members that the locals are always not included. But I want to encourage every district – we have started and this financial year, we are working with 11 districts and in the financial year we shall increase the number so that the district and local communities help us to identify those who can be trained as scouts to be able to manage the stray animals. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was a concern yesterday about the danger to life that the electric fence would cause to humans and I can see here the minister is proposing that Government will embark on fencing off all these areas where possible but this concern has not been responded to. I wish the minister could shed light on it. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, on the game rangers, the Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. Moses Ali, raised a very important concern – about the stray animals that come from South Sudan. My district of Amuru is majorly affected together with Adjumani where Gen. Ali comes from. But when we contacted the Uganda Wildlife Authority, they said they were less concerned about the elephants that come from South Sudan. And when elephants destroyed crops in Atyak Sub-county, they referred us to the askaris that are guarding the borders, especially those who come from South Sudan. So, I do not know whether UWA will be deployed to safeguard the people of Adjumani and Amuru from the elephants originating from South Sudan.

MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way; I would like to give you information that in Botswana we asked about the cost of an electric fence but they said they are not as expensive as we imagine. This is because they use low voltage in these wires – and this is electricity kept in the wires, which is generally not being used. If you have a wire like this and you touch it – so sometimes we have a problem with our technical officers when they exaggerate figures. I think you should compare notes with other countries which have done this before.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, hon. Members. On the possibility of electrifying all the parks – definitely that will not take place in the immediate future; it is going to be selective in those areas we feel is necessary. And in the short run it is not feasible because we do not have the money.

The question raised by hon. Ssempijja regarding the cost – as of now we are carrying out a study with the French Development Cooperation and tentatively the cost is about $20 per metre. And looking at the distances to cover – even if in Nwoya alone – it is quite a prohibitive cost. But we shall come back here in Parliament with costs and show you so that Parliament advises us on the way forward.

Now on the elephants in Adjumani –(Interruption)

MR OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister does not give any indication that she knows where she is taking us. This is because we are saying that we should fence off parks but your response is: “It is very expensive and cannot be implemented now.” What we expect the minister to do is to have a plan and tell us how many kilometres you have to fence off and we plan from 100 years. But we must start planning and fencing off the parks systematically. But you speak as though you were just conversing. I need clarification on that.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said before, the first thing that is coming here is a law and we are going to agree, as Parliament, that this is what we are going to do in that law. And once Parliament has confirmed that then we can go ahead because the Bill is before Cabinet and within two weeks – should be latest March – it should be here in Parliament. And the recommendations we are going to pick from here are the ones we shall be working on. So, I really want to assure colleagues that we are coming back here to show you exactly how we intend to move and the plan that we have.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Madam Minister. I want to get clarification on this issue because I know that this amendment is going to take time and I am very much aware that UWA has a lot billions in their pocket and I am very much aware that every member who is here and is neighbouring a game reserve or national park has faced similar consequences of losing their people. Like me for instance, during this Christmas, one of my people who is a boda-boda rider was killed by one of the rangers and up to today, the body has not been seen. 

So, Madam Minister, with all this money you have in UWA before this law comes into place, can’t you really, through the Speaker, direct and this money – because if we count those people, they could be like 20 because I sit on that committee and I try to follow up these billions of money. If every family was given Shs 15 million, something could be done to help them. So, is it possible? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I also thank my colleague. Indeed we are doing something and as I said, we are promoting the growing of buffer crops such as tea, chilli, tobacco and others. We are also carrying out trenching and so far, we have established over 100 kilometres of trenches around Queen Elizabeth National Park. We have dug 41.5 kilometres around Murchison Falls National Park in Nwoya and about 60 kilometres around Kibaale National Park all meant to deter elephants and other large mammals from crossing the park to destroy the community and property of our people.
So, I want to assure you that we are not sitting back and the huge volumes of money are already engaged and committed to doing work as I have mentioned here.

I want to go back to the question raised by the Second Deputy Prime Minister on the elephants crossing from Adjumani. I know and I have been called a number of times when elephants cross and our rangers have been on the alert to make sure that they are scared back. But of course in the process once they have crossed, they will definitely destroy something either by stepping on it, eating it or uprooting it. That is something that we are now looking out for. Again in the law, once we agree on the method of compensation that we need to give to our people, we shall respond to the people of Adjumani to make sure that they are compensated or given compassionate support but at the same time, we are intensifying our surveillance on the borders especially along Adjumani. I want to assure you, Sir, that we will be there.

Another point was that the Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the way you are proceeding is like a ministerial statement and it is going to take us another one hour to finish just listening to your responses. Could it be possible for us to start processing the recommendations and you respond as we process them so that we do not go into all this that has been raised here.The matters have sufficiently been covered by the committee and it may help us to take a decision before. I want this decision to be taken today.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you. As I said this document – my responses have been circulated and I was trying to answer most of them. It is the same answers especially when we go to Kasese where we concur with the recommendations except one area that I want to talk about -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: - killing of people in response No. 9 on Page 4. The bodies of poachers shot by UWA officials in the park should be handed over to the Police and then to relatives for proper burial. I want to state that extra judicial killings of people are criminal in Uganda and nobody is above the law. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has a code of conduct for staff that does not allow or condone such acts. Any staff who commits a crime must be handed over to the Police for investigation and prosecution.

The Government does not in any way condone the killing of communities but where staff are involved in illegal activity, they should be arrested and prosecuted according to the law. Similarly, poachers are usually arrested and handed over to the Police for prosecution but not shot as alleged. 
The Uganda Wildlife Authority arrests poachers and hands them over to the Police as suspects for investigation and prosecution according to the law. 

I want to request you, hon. Members and any other person with information about the killing of community members by UWA staff to bring this to me and to the Police in order for justice to be dispensed.

I also want to say that at times, there is an exchange of fire if the poachers are armed and that exchange of fire is in self-defence. So, if somebody is caught in action in that exercise of cross fire, definitely that is not meant to kill but somebody may die in the process. We have also lost our rangers in the process. 

So, I want to encourage Members of Parliament to seriously follow up on any incident of somebody lost or killed and we try to establish under what circumstances and definitely, the Police should be called in to help us investigate.

There were questions that were raised on the Floor here; one was from hon. Nambooze on the relevance of the Tourism Police. On that one, we have an answer. There was also a question that UWA does not respond quickly to incidences of animal attack. I want to say that we are improving day by day because we are increasing the number of our rangers and informers and as witnessed in Loro sub-county, at least our people were able to get there within one hour and able to drive the elephants away.

There was an observation that UWA is encroaching on private land and I want to mention this one; UWA is not encroaching on private land. Protected Area Boundaries are established by Parliament, this House, through a statutory instrument establishing respective protected areas. The boundaries of protected areas are gazetted and therefore UWA cannot on its own accordingly change them. It is therefore not true that UWA had encroached on peoples’ land.

But if there is a need to degazette any part, then it has got to come back here to Parliament and that is the only way.

And definitely, it is not the ministry to initiate the cutting off the arm of my child. So, if somebody feels that there is a need, somebody should bring it here and I will be here to defend but not gazette. But Parliament has got the upper hand on that.

Why there are more conflicts of stray animals - could it be the oil and gas activities? We are studying that but I want to assure you or let you know that elephants have got a memory of 30 years and so, if they passed there 20 years ago, they would definitely remember where they passed that time and they will always come back. So, all that we have to do is to increase vigilance and train communities on how to scare them away. 

On working with the Ministry of Agriculture, we have started negotiations and we are discussing with the Ministry of Agriculture to see how to support people whose crops have been destroyed either by supplying seeds or in any other way. So, that is something that is taking shape. We are also working with – in fact this morning, I was with TOTAL and they were having a Private–Public partnership and of course it is hanging because that Bill is still here in Parliament. But we want to see how the private sector can work with us to counter some of the challenges that we have in the park.

In conclusion, I want to say that colleagues here were saying “their animals. Your animals”, these are not our animals, they are not Mutagamba’s animals, they are not animals of UWA but they are animals of Uganda. They are animals of the world. They are common goods they are natural assets, we all have got a responsibility to make sure that we protect them. So it is our responsibility to teach people how – (Interruption)

MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister is concluding before she comments on the right of Ugandans to harvest herbal medicine from protected areas and to perform their cultural rights in those protected areas.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, it is because of interest of time that I was trying to rush through but the right for the communities to harvest herbal medicine and some products like firewood, mushrooms, is guaranteed in the law or the UWA Act but it must be organised. It is not everybody walking in and out to collect that. They must be communities, they must be registered, with UWA and are given time frames as and when they move in. 

So that one is guaranteed, but we can interact more so that I can show you and connect you with UWA such that you know which community will be going in and at what time. 

Finally, I want to give just a few highlights of what we get from our animals: our foreign exchange earnings last year was US$1 billion and this amounted to 38 percent of the total exports of this country; it contributed 9 percent of the GDP and created 8 percent of direct national employment. This is what our animals are doing and I want us to support this sector and be there for us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, how much do we invest in that area?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Parliament knows that at the moment as a ministry this financial year our budget is Shs 10 billion out of US$1 billion. So, we always come back to you and I am saying these words just to make sure that come budget time, please be with us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thanks a lot, hon. Minister. Honourable members, it is time to process the decisions in the report and also the recommendations from the committee. We will start with item no. 6 and as I said, we will process the decisions separately. 

We will start with item No.6 which is Nwoya; I will put a question for the decision. I put a question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of residents of three sub counties in Nwoya County that is Purong, Anaka, and Kwochgoma on human wildlife conflict be adopted.

We will now process the specific provisions of the recommendations. We will start with recommendation 1 which the minister also agrees with. Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation for loss of lives, people injured and property destroyed by stray wild animals from the game park.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to the Wildlife Act section 3, it is provided that the ownership of every wild animal and wild plant existing in its wild habitat in Uganda is vested in Government on behalf of and for the benefit of the people of Uganda. 

Basing on that I want to move that we amend resolution 1 to read that Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation for loss of lives, people injured and property destroyed by wild animals without including the word “stray” and then from game parks because there are those people who are injured by wild animals around lakes by crocodiles, hippos, in our villages who are attacked by wild animals. 

All these animals belong to Government by law and they are supposed to compensate any person who is attacked by a wild animal even those who are not neighbours of a national game park. I beg to move. 
This is in accordance with the law because the ownership of every wild animal in this country is in the hands of Government. If you will allow me to add that this is not – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleague for giving way. I am seeking to benefit from your interpretation of section 3 of the said law and whether you are bothered to know what constitutes wildlife. Are you suggesting and I would be glad to support that we increase liability for Government that the snakes in Mukono Municipality, the wild cats, the dogs would still fall into this? That if somebody got a snake bite, God forbid, in Mukono Municipality where I reside I can come for compensation from Government? Could this have been the intention of the law makers that time? Let me benefit from your clarification.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker under section 57 of the Wildlife Act, the board is supposed to declare any animal which it doesn’t consider to be useful and that it should be preserved as a vermin. So, if Government is no longer interested in these animals, those snakes in Mukono, the monkeys in our villages, the crocodiles, the hippos in the lakes, just declare them unwanted and allow our people to hunt them down. It is within the law that once you declare that these animals are not yours, you should declare them as vermin. If you don’t declare them as vermin and allow us to hunt them down then you are liable for their actions. They are your animals by law and you should be liable for all the destruction they do to both the crops and human beings in our country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Including the snakes in Mukono Municipality?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I really don’t buy the amendment in that we have got more animals out there than what we have inside. The best that we can do is to rescue if it has been brought to our attention. To rescue those animals from being killed rather than killing, call UWA and we rescue them from the community otherwise if you find a snake in your garden and it bites you or a mosquito, will you want government to pay? So Government will not take responsibility on that one and I don’t think any one of us would subscribe to paying that kind of money for anything. So I would like to request the honourable member –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, wildlife should be preserved; we should make it so easy for our people to value wildlife. In Kenya here, even if a snake bites someone in his home, once it is proved that this person was bitten by a snake, that person will be assisted by Government even in the simplest terms like making sure that this person is treated. It is because of that that Kenya has been able for example now to have a game park in each and every major town. So if you want the people of Mukono to value the monkeys and not hunt them down, you should be able to say if your crops are destroyed, we can liaise with the Ministry of Agriculture and give you seeds –(Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) ALI: I just want to inform the honourable Member, through you, Mr Speaker that under decentralisation, vermin control has also been decentralised. It is in the law. If you do not read it, the law will not read itself. Please read some of these things. 

In decentralisation, it is the district which is responsible for controlling vermin and not UWA. So, better go and read your decentralisation policy and you will be helped. Government is aware. Even regarding snakes in your homestead, how can wildlife control that snake? The monkeys in Mukono - your district must control them. It is there in the law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us process this. If you are proposing an amendment - yes, at this stage the proposal is - because we are not amending the law right now. This is not a Bill for amending the Wildlife Act. What we are saying is that Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation for loss of lives, people injured and properties destroyed by stray wild animals from the game parks. That responsibility is contained within the Wildlife Act. Amendments strictly; I will start from Oyam North, then Agago and Busongora.

5.53
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to insert immediately after the words “people injured” the word “crops” to read, “Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation for loss of life, people injured, crops and property destroyed.”
This is because in most cases when these animals destroy, the word “property” is limiting in that the Oxford dictionary and other definitions of property deal with buildings and the land where the building belongs. So, crops that have been destroyed in the circumstance where I share a border with Nwoya-they have destroyed lots of crops from the gardens of people. That is the justification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That amendment is okay. Can we approve it? It is approved.

5.55
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to propose an amendment on this by inserting a timeframe so that we do not leave it open.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you giving Parliament a timeframe?

MR AMOS OKOT: No, of course I know that if we are to amend the Wildlife law and since the time the animals started destroying people’s properties no action could take place because of lack of the compensation clause in the law which is in place now. I am trying to propose that we put “within two months” since the minister said they are working on it. If they cannot come out with that amendment within the two months’ period then we will take it up as a Private Members’ Bill to amend. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the proposal is that Parliament should amend the law.

5.56
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The amendment that I would like to make is in respect to the issue, which I raised regarding the words “compassion” and “compensation.” 
In my proposal and considering the two words, I would propose that Parliament should amend the wildlife law to include compassion for injuries and loss of lives and compensation for crops and property destroyed. That is the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you proposing that they use both words?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, to include the words “compassion” and “compensation.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, is that okay? I think that should be okay as long as it is arranged to capture what amounts to compensation and compassion.

5.56
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the minister’s submission, she referred to protected areas. I am just wondering whether we should limit ourselves to the words “game park” or we could make it broader and talk about protected areas.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that might be something to think about. Chairperson, what do you say – “protected areas” instead of just “game parks?”

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, we have national parks and game parks and I would not mind taking protected areas to cater for game parks and national parks and any other game reserve. (Mr WafulaOguttu rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, on what point do you rise?

MR OGUTTU: Clarification. Hon. Betty Nambooze talked about the snakes in Mukono but there is the issue of crocodiles and hippos in Lake Victoria in Mayuge, Busia South, which is my constituency. There is no park or protected area but the crocodiles are owned by the government or by the people of Uganda. So, I would like the minister to clarify on how we can classify that. There is no park along the lake but the crocodiles there are protected. They eat people but we cannot kill them. This amendment must include that aspect. 

Also, I do not think we are saying that Parliament should be the one to amend. The minister should cause the amendment of the law and not Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you may need to assist the House and explain. Where does the jurisdiction of the wildlife law end? Territorially, where does it capture?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Uganda Wildlife Authority is responsible for the management of all protected areas and is also responsible for rescuing any wild animal that is in danger of being killed but it is not responsible for wherever they are because the hippos in Lake Victoria are not the mandate of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. The crocodiles in Mayuge are also not the mandate of the Uganda Wildlife Authority but if they are found and the local authorities impose on UWA, we lift them out. That is what I know.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Members, that is the provision of the law as of now. So if you want to propose an amendment that would enlarge the scope of the control territory of the Wildlife Authority then you are going to have to deal with issues of this thing they are talking about; land conflicts, extending the boundaries of UWA and things like that because it has to do with land also. So you might want to handle it properly rather than extend its territory in terms of land mass to cover areas that they should not be operating in so that it is a matter of only responsibility for those animals.

The question is, if a crocodile in the lake attacks a person, is there somebody responsible for it? That is what the minister should answer. And if not, is it a good provision of the law? If a crocodile in Lake Victoria attacked somebody who is at the shore, does that have recourse to anybody? If not, what solution can be provided?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker and colleagues, that is why these gaps have been identified and that is why we are going to make amendments. These amendments are going to come to Parliament and Parliament will make its contributions to them. I believe that when they come here, Parliament will be able to seal all these gaps and make amendments and make a law that will save Ugandans. 
But as of now, the law does not cover that; if you are attacked by a hippo in Lake Victoria, definitely the Uganda Wildlife Authority has nothing to do with that. And I do not think the Ministry of Agriculture or Water has the mandate to take pains on that. So there are gaps which we are trying to address. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, the proper decision on what extent will be debated when an amendment is brought to this House. We will examine all the situations to fill in those gaps. Just a mere recommendation would not become a law. So now that the minister has followed the discussion, the Bill that is coming to amend the Act should take care of this concern since it is not yet published so that we do not spend too much time on things that we cannot take a decision about now. 

6.04
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister should also be available as we are singing about the amendments in the law so that the crocodiles can be catered for under the Fisheries Act. I propose that we amend the Fisheries Act to make it the Fisheries and Crocodiles Act –(Interjections)– that is what it was before and they removed the crocodiles because as she said yesterday, the crocodiles actually do fishing more than the people. They consume more fish than we, the owners of the lake. 

But we are aware that the crocodiles are being eaten. So we can encourage our people to eat the crocodiles instead of the crocodiles feasting on them. So, as you prepare the amendment, let your sister be informed that we should put in a consideration in the Fisheries Act and make it the Fisheries and Crocodiles Act to reduce on their numbers in the lake. Otherwise you shall find all our fish eaten and our people will have nothing to eat in form of fish. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal as it is now is in this form; that Parliament should amend the Wildlife law to include compensation and compassion for loss of life, people injured, crops and properties destroyed by stray wild animals from the protected areas. Can we adopt it so that when the details come in the amendment Bill, then we can deal with the actual details?

6.06
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whereas I do not have a problem with that amendment, pushing wildlife Authority to compensate yet in certain situations they cannot have absolute control over the animals even within their park, I want to give an example. There is this phenomenon of excavation of trenches. It is happening in many protected areas as alluded to in the report. 

Sometimes, there are limitations especially where the trenches cannot cross a road. Just yesterday, I was in Queen Elizabeth National Park and we saw a trench that had been dug – it was very big and it was not possible for an Elephant to cross; but there was the exception of the road, which is really the responsibility of the Ministry of Works. So, whereas they could dig trenches all around the park, an elephant is an intelligent animal. It will look for its way out and the obvious means is to go through the road. So, we need to bring in the other ministries. 

We mentioned the Ministry of Agriculture. I would like to mention the Ministry of Works as well because we have roads running around those parks. How can the Uganda Wildlife Authority stop animals from crossing from one side of the road to another? I wonder if the Uganda Wildlife Authority or the ministry in charge of Wildlife has got the mandate to cross roads. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the text as I read it. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The 36km of trenches that were excavated by the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be maintained within the required standards to deter animals from crossing from the park to the Community. 

6.08
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Mr Speaker, I would like to amend that to read: “The 36km, trenches that were excavated by the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be maintained within the required standards by the Uganda Wildlife Authority”. The community were meant to use their revenue to share in the costs – (Interjections) – yes, I come from that area and that is what has been happening until we raised the issue here that is when the Uganda Wildlife Authority started using its money. So it should not be the community maintaining trenches; it should be the Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, it reads, “The 36km, stenches that were excavated by the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be maintained within the required standards by the Uganda Wildlife Authority to deter animals from crossing from the park to the community”. Is that okay? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government should consider installation of electric fencing to create an effective barrier between Kwokigoma Community Land and Murchison Falls National Park. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Uganda Wildlife Authority should support growing of alternative crops that help to deter elephants such as chilli. I put that question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The park land should be restored to its original boundaries by reclaiming land which was encroached upon by the communities. 

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement should read: “The park land should be restored to its original boundaries” only because the community are saying the park is claiming their land and there are disputes. If we put it in this form, that means we are already condemning the community. 

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, if we are to talk about the originality, then we should add, “Vice Versa”, so that whatever was taken from the community goes back to the community and whatever was taken from the park goes back to the park.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This one summarises; “The park land should be restored to its original boundaries.”That captures all the concerns. [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] So should we adopt that one? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”]I put the question to that as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The number of park rangers should be increased and during recruitment, priority should be given to community members.

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Mr Speaker, I would wish to amend this by inserting the word “local” between “to” and “community”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To read, “…to local community members”?

GEN. (RTD) ALI: This is a bit risky – to arm local community within the park will amount to conflict of interest; this same person – (Interjection) - Yes, they are learned but they are to protect animals. So the conflict of interest should be avoided – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is about priority.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Yes, even if it is priority - these people are going to do the same. If you brought people without a conflict of interest, then they would serve better. But I see a very serious conflict of interest here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to this amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR AMOS OKOT: Mr Speaker, I have an additional amendment. I wanted to introduce, between (i) and (ii), in the absence of the law on compensation that the Parliament gives a recommendation to the line ministry, especially that of Disaster Preparedness, to take up the matter regarding the loss of people’s property to the animals so that they support the affected families with relief food. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wouldn’t that be a separate matter?

MR OKOT: Yes, but between (i) and (ii) as another recommendation. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, that was taken care of in No.1, unless the honourable member wants to bring out something different.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, because there is a framework for handling disasters; if it is considered a disaster occurrence, then there is a framework for handling it. Do we have to put it here?

MR OKOT: Mr Speaker, remember that people have lost their property and are going hungry or are unable to pay back the loans they borrowed from banks – that is here in the report. And people have been suffering since 2007 and all that time nobody could come to their rescue. Whenever they request for help, the response would be, “We do not have a law in place to help you.” 

Now as Parliament, since we have seen the problem, we should recommend that the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness should take interest since matters always come through official channels rather than leaving it hanging as though we were not caring for the affected people.

MS KAHABENDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the fact that compensation and compassion is risk and disaster management and UWA is part of Government. So when we say that this person is going to be compensated by UWA and at the same time we ask the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness to also give compensation, it will be double compensation. So No.1 is taking care of that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the truth. I thought it would be administrative if it is in the opinion of the district and UWA that this thing is beyond the ordinary and qualifies as a disaster then they will know how to administratively deal with it. 

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern raised by the honourable member has already been taken care of in recommendation No.1. but when it comes to implementation, we shall have guidelines to be shared with other stakeholders. So if it requires the Ministry of Agriculture to come in, we shall contact them. So we cannot make recommendations for all of them; read the guidelines and then we shall see who does what in this exercise. But recommendation No.1 takes care of the compassionate aspect of the people who have been affected.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give another recommendation to read as: “UWA should be directed to produce dead bodies of suspected poachers and the offending officers made to account.” This is because if you read on page 11, there is a widow who is constantly asking – and even if I step out right now she will ask whether we have got a solution of when she will get her dead son’s body.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When did he die?

MS ADONG: It was in 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 2011 and you are still asking for the body?

MS ADONG: Yes, because the boy was killed by UWA but the body was never retrieved. And that is what the minister was elaborating on; the minister provided the number plate of the vehicle and to make matters worse, some of the rangers were collaborating with the deceased by giving him the gun until when the deal went sour and they killed him. And the community know their history.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a specific recommendation for Nwoya. Hon. Minister, what is you take on this? (Hon. Olanya rose_) Let us handle this first – is it the same? 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, in addition to what hon. Adong raised, you clearly said that it will be a separate recommendation and specifically for Nwoya. I want to propose that the recommendation for the other report – the recommendation that: “Bodies of poachers shot by the UWA officials in the park should be handed over to the Police and then relatives for proper and decent burial.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you are saying is that a similar recommendation is in the other report and so it should be brought into this one as well.

MR OLANYA: Exactly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So let us shorten the time because it is a fairly obvious matter. So the issue is that the same committee has recommended in the next report that these matters be handled. The proposal now is that the same recommendation should come to this report as well. Is there any problem with that? I will put a question to that.
(Question put and agreed to.)

I will now put the question for adoption of the report and recommendations as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go to item No.7 which is on Katungulu and there are some recommendations made; we shall adopt those ones that are similar and the different ones we shall go through them.

The first one is: “Government should amend the Wildlife Law to include compensation -” I think the text should now be just the same. “…to include compensation and compassion for loss of lives, people injured, crops and property destroyed by stray animals from the protected areas.” I put the question to that because they are the same.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next is Uganda Wildlife Authority should maintain the trenches in the national parks within the required standards to deter animals from crossing from the game parks – the Uganda Wildlife Authority should maintain all trenches –This is different wording but it is okay. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The third recommendation, Government should consider installation of electric fencing to create an effective barrier between communities and national parks. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: TheUganda Wildlife Authority should support growing of alternative crops that help to deter elephants such as tea, red pepper etcetera. There is an element of tea now and we just harmonise this question and I put the question to this - amendment to tea? That is where we are.

6.22
MR BIHANDE BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): I was proposing that before the word, “extra”, we add the word, “apiary” to read that, “Uganda Wildlife Authority should support growing of alternative crops that help deter elephants such as tea, red pepper and support apiary….” which is bee keeping “….as one of the biological methods of deterring elephants from encroaching on peoples’ crops.” When elephants hear that noise made by bees flying, they run away very fast because the fear them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay. The Uganda Wildlife Authority should support the growing of alternative crops that help to deter elephants such as tea, red pepper and other alternative control measures such as bee keeping. 

MR BIHANDE: Bee keeping or apiary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will that be okay? - and other alternatives like bee keeping. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government through the Ministry of Lands should survey and demarcate the park boundaries to resolve the issue once and for all. Yes, I will start with the member for Lyantonde.

6.24
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde):  Thank you. When we leave No. 5 the way it is; Government through the Ministry of Lands should survey and demarcate sounds like it is going to draw new boundaries but if we can say revisit or review –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Re-open.

MS NAMARA: Re-open, exactly. We reopen the existing boundaries that would sound better.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proper word would be “re-opening.” Is that okay? Government through the Ministry of Lands should survey and re-open the park boundaries to resolve the issue once and for all. Is that okay? Can we take the member for Busongora North?  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you. The guidance which I want to seek from you –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it guidance or can we first finish and then you seek your guidance?

MR NZOGHU: It is related to this recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Then that is an amendment.

MR NZOGHU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, proceed.

MR NZOGHU: It is to do with other areas in Kasese which are not necessarily included in this report that have similar challenges that have been highlighted here. I wanted to -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What we want to do is to adopt this because there is a petition which brought this up but the ministry’s application of this thing will now take care of the whole country because we are going to have Mt. Elgon area, Kapchorwa area and all these areas. Now, this framework should guide the ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority in terms of structuring these things to cater for the whole country. Is that okay? So, I put the question to No. 5.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uganda Wildlife Authority should recruit more game rangers and priority should be given to local community members. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seven, remittances to the district local governments be conditioned so that a certain percentage is used for compassion and compensation, I suppose. Is that okay?

MR BIHANDE: Mr Speaker, this one is not very okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It is not relevant?

MR BIHANDE: Because earlier, we had said UWA compensates. Now here we are passing the responsibility to local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So we delete this? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is deleted so that the responsibility is the other side. Whatever they have given to the communities, they do not go back again and say, “use it for compensation.” Okay, the next. Yes?

MR AMURIAT: On this as far as I know, this money actually comes from UWA. So, the money going to the local governments for this purpose comes from the Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes.

MR AMURIAT: So, for us to say Uganda Wildlife Authority as if the money to DLGs is coming from elsewhere, then I see a problem with that.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No. That one, we have deleted.

MR AMURIAT: How will it then read? I seek for your guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We have deleted the whole paragraph and it should be treated as if the space it occupied was empty.

MS KABAHENDA: Guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes.

MS KABAHENDA:  Thank you. I would like to go back to what we have just deleted. Allow me to give the justification as to why we came up with seven. There is already money going to the district local governments as remittance and this money at times is just used by the CAO and the Chairperson LC5 for their fuel.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That is abuse and it does not mean that you should stop it. Please do not take us back. This matter is clear. You want to propose that the money that has been given to the districts as their percentage for community development arising from the corporate responsibility of UWA is the one that they should use for compensation? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That one is deleted. The next; UWA should facilitate and encourage community tourism so that people know how to protect wildlife. UWA should also carry out strategic tourism related business. I put the question to this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Bodies of suspected poachers shot by UWA officials in the parks should be handed over to Police and then to the relatives for proper burial. Is that okay? I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was a background laid to this.  

MR SSEMUJJU: If we pass that recommendation in the way it is, we will be encouraging UWA to go and kill people and then hand over the body to the Police. Actually, we should never have passed that recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you had a specific plea and maybe it is does not apply to this. You had a specific plea that members are going to step out of this House and they will be called on whether the people who were shot and the bodies buried in the park are going to be given to them because it has already happened.  So, it takes care of a specific kind of situation.  Honourable minister?

6.30
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mrs Maria Mutagamba): Mr Speaker, I really want to buy the concern because when you put it like this, it is as if UWA is killing people and burying them. But as far I am concerned, the act of killing is criminal and definitely if someone is killed, the Police must come in and if there are people who have been buried in the park and there is evidence, definitely Police should come out. We even have to find out but otherwise passing it like this in blanket form is like saying UWA can kill then when they kill, they - (Interjections) - I am still not convinced but let me take the information.

MR BIHANDE: Thank you, Madam Minister for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to inform the honourable minister that there are several cases in Queen Elizabeth National Park whereby rangers kill suspected poachers and they keep guard over the bodies to supervise the hyenas to eat those bodies.
Secondly, they also ensure that relatives don’t come to retrieve the bodies. If they see any other person coming towards the body who is not a park ranger, they shoot to kill this person. I have evidence and examples to this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the UPDF in this matter now.

GEN. KATIRIMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.The recommendation on paragraph 9 should be directed at the Wildlife officials in the conduct of their business. They must obey and follow the law. We should not be talking about handing over bodies of poachers they have shot but rather asking the game rangers to follow the law. 

Killing somebody and you supervise the hyenas to eat the body is not the law. So, we should be directing No. 9 on the game rangers and the park officials to follow the law but not to take the law into their own hands. And we are only talking about handing over bodies of people they have killed. They should follow the law.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there is a background to this; there are people who have died in the park and whose bodies have not been retrieved. How do you capture it here?

MR TWODONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was me who read the petition from the people of Nwoya and if I can recall quite well, we even gave the date, the name of the driver of the truck with the vehicle of the Uganda Wildlife Authority that was used to ferry this dead person, the number plate of the vehicle and I would like to repeat for the record. 

In my petition then I stated that on the 30 August 2011, at Purongo Lagagi, a one Opio Justine was murdered by game rangers using a motor vehicle number UG 0220T, driven by Suleiman Mohamad under the command of Bero Chan Thomas. This is a clear record. 

On 27 December 2011 at Tamiget area, a one Okot Jacob was shot dead at the boundary of the park and his body had never been recovered. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is how do you capture that particular issue that arose?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: In that case, I am proposing that we change the amendment and say that cases of killings of both poachers and rangers should be investigated by the Police and bodies handed over to the relatives for decent burial.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that better? Can you state it again for the record please?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: I am proposing that in cases of killings of both poachers and rangers, cases should be investigated by the Police and the bodies handed over to relatives for decent burial.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker the problem with the recommendation of the minister, it can only take care of fresh cases. You have heard testimonies that in some cases, there has been supervision by UWA officials of eating of those bodies by hyenas. The recommendation should be, where possible, bodies handed back and then we leave the whole process of investigation and punishing to the Police. Because you are going to ask people to hand over bodies that you have just confessed have been eaten. And in this case, the people who are complaining about the disappearance of the bodies are not the rangers but the suspected poachers. 

So, I don’t know if you also have cases of rangers whose bodies have disappeared for them to be included in this resolution that bodies should be handed to them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Amendment to what the minister has proposed or to the original text?

GEN. KATIRIMA: Any death occurring in any of the national parks should be investigated and the victims should be accorded a decent burial.

MR BIHANDE: Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to my OB is that some of these UWA officials are so callous and so crude that you can’t believe what they do. There is a case of someone from Nyakiyungu sub-county who was shot in the legs in the national park, these rangers dug a whole, buried him half way and then sat aside to wait for lions and hyenas to come and finish him when he couldn’t struggle on his own. They did it. I can provide the names, the date and the area. So, I wanted to give that information to amend well knowing what these people do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those horrifying things already happened but how do we capture it to stop and take care of these situations? I hope the leadership of UWA, the minister, I hope they are listening. I want an amendment that can capture this situation not general debate.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our problem is putting everything together. I am suggesting an amendment to separate the two issues. 

1) The bodies of poachers who are shot at by UWA official should be investigated by the Police and bodies handed over to relatives.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, suppose we give an administrative responsibility to the minister to issue a guideline that has the effect of an enforceable thing to contain all these things we are concerned about instead of trying to capture everything in one and yet there are specific cases and extremes of these cases. Can we pass on this responsibility to the minister to issue guidelines on how to handle this kind of situation so that it is clearer and more comprehensive rather than just having it in one paragraph? Then we can just highlight the issue that that guideline should deal with.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of killing and retaining the body has been there and the ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority have not been doing anything. I think that is why Members are now concerned to have it there. 

I propose that we have it in the recommendations that the Uganda Wildlife Authority must ensure that suspected poachers are arrested and not killed. In case of death, this must be reported to the Police, investigated and the bodies given to relatives. That is what I propose because the whole issue of killing must not be there. Some poachers move with fire arms and then there is exchange of fire. The whole case must be reported to Police, investigations done and the bodies kept safe and handed over to relatives. At least that would be more accommodative. Thank you.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to concur with the amendment made by the honourable minister but I want to add just one word. We are told that some people were killed in 2011 and others in 2012 and we are talking of bodies. I do not know whether they are in some fridge somewhere. So I suggest that we talk about remains and then maybe for fresh incidences, in case that is to happen, we can talk about bodies to be brought and handed over to the relatives. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the remains that have gone into the hyenas and things like that?

MS ADONG: Mr Speaker, I propose that we put it like this: the conduct of UWA officials should be investigated especially game rangers with regards to extra judicial killings. This is because I have been reading in the papers that in Kiryandongo, about seven people disappeared in Murchison Falls National Park but from the southern side. I do not know if it is true. So it is not only confined to Nwoya. 

I propose that we should state that the conduct of UWA officials should be investigated especially game rangers with regards to extra judicial killings in the park.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that capture the situation?

MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wanted an issue to be included in this. We did not discuss but we realised that some of these poachers are ordinary people who are well armed. It is the game rangers who sometimes connive with them and give them guns. So if we are to amend this, I do not know whether the minister is aware that there is connivance between the game rangers and even the poachers. There are some who do this for their self-interest and we must take note of that. 

So I feel that the conduct of the game rangers who get involved in extra judicial killings and who are suspected to have connived and given guns to the local community should be investigated by the Police and then the rest as it is stated. Thank you.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much. I want to support your proposal of a minister taking responsibility to come up with guidelines. Of course in the process I will carry out investigations to find out exactly what has happened in the past and I should be able to come back here within four weeks. I believe by that time the law will be in Parliament here so that we can see how to contain this situation. Definitely it will require investigations and the involvement of Police but I want to assure you that we cannot condone killing in our sector. So,  I will take responsibility as a minister to come back here with guidelines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So what do we put in the recommendation? Because there is No.10 which is about suspected poachers shot by UWA and that is what we are discussing. What do you propose in its place?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, you had recommended that the minister brings guidelines on how to contain the situation and I thought we would buy that as a recommendation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issues are more involving; issues of rangers hiring out guns, rangers trading in game meat and they cannot do it themselves; so, they hire local people. When the deal goes sour, they kill the people because they think they are going to talk. There are situations of people found loitering around so the issue is much bigger and also the issue of leaving the bodies for animals to eat. But there are people who have lost their relatives so the issue is much bigger than just once sentence. That is why it would have been better if guidelines were provided by the minister, which would be verified by the committee and this House could be briefed about how to handle situations like this. That is comprehensive.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, you guided us at the beginning and I took your guidance by saying that we recommend that the honourable minister investigates all these issues surrounding what we have discussed; the killings and the involvement of poachers in poaching and the issue involving guns and reports back to Parliament with guidelines that will eventually be followed.

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I concur with what he is saying. I do not know how you expect the minister who is overseeing the UWA sector to be the one to investigate. I was thinking that we should be able to put it to the rightful organs. So, I do agree that the investigation takes place but where hon. Ssempijja is saying that we give it to the minister,  it is not the right housing. Okay, she will report the investigation - I do not think she is even the one to report on the investigation. Maybe we give it- you know where the housing is, so you should be able to give it to us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we split this into two? That the issue of investigations be housed separately and then the issue of preparing guidelines on how to handle this, which will be issued to the people operating in these areas should also be captured separately. Would that help? If that can help then we can deal with the text.

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to agree with what you are saying but I just wanted to put a foot note on this because picking a leaf from what Uganda Peoples Defence Forces do, we very well know that the UPDF for a long time engaged the LRA and they were fighting children who were forcefully recruited into rebel activities. These children were armed and they were shooting at the UPDF but the rules of engagement then restrained the UPDF from shooting to kill. They were rescuing lives and these lives were rehabilitated and reintegrated into the community and now they have a good life. 

So, when we lament, we are not saying it is bad for UWA to control the gazetted area but we are saying, these people can be reformed but when you kill them, we do not have that opportunity to reform them and when we get their bodies, we the leaders can have the opportunity during the burial to help even the UWA to talk more to the community to stop going to the parks for poaching and that is why we are saying all this.
So, your suggestion is good that the criminal aspect of this should be investigated by the relevant organ of the State and then the administrative directives and control of activities the Uganda Wildlife Authority officials should be issued by the line ministry. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is somebody proposing a wording?

MS ADONG: Mr Speaker, I still go back to the proposal I made earlier that the conduct of the Uganda Wildlife Authority officials should be investigated especially with regard to extra-judicial killings in the park. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Especially in regard to “alleged extra-judicial killings.” “Alleged” is very critical for Parliament. When they investigate, a decision will be taken about how the remains will be handled; is that okay?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, I am not very confident with the phrasing, “Uganda Wildlife Authority officials should be investigated.” I would be more comfortable with something like, “Investigations into the killings in National parks should be carried out by the Police.” Otherwise, you would be directly accusing the Uganda Wildlife Authority official by saying, “Uganda Wildlife Authority officials be investigated.” So, let us say, “Killings in the national parks should be investigated by the Police”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, it still does not change the spirit because some of these people could have been eaten by the animals. 

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I concede that we do not restrict it to Uganda Wildlife Authority killings given the fact that – I am sorry to refer to the paper. But there was a case where an accountant was killed in the park and investigations found out that there was a deal that went wrong in their office so he was trailed and killed in the park. So, it should not be limited to the killings by the Uganda Wildlife Authority. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we stop at that or are you going to give guidelines? 

MS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, I propose that the minister be directed to bring guidelines on how to contain the situations. But now that we have passed one part of it, I do not know how to bring in the administrative guidelines. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, proceed with the draft.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Speaker, the minister responsible for tourism should issue operative guidelines in regard to Uganda Wildlife Authority officials and the community and circulate them to the public. That the minister responsible provides guidance on how to handle issues of poaching and counter pouching – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is counter-pouching? 

COL. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We should request the minister responsible for tourism and wildlife to give guidance on how to handle the highly involving issue of poaching and counter-poaching – (Interruption)

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Can I be guided on whether these guidelines will not appear in the amendments? The guidelines that the minister is drawing – I want to be guided whether we cannot have them in the amendments of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue is that when the Act comes, the committee might take a year to pass the amendments just like it happened with the Public Finance Bill in but the meantime, what happens - we have an opportunity to propose how it should be handled. Why not use it?

MR NZOGHU: The guidelines that we are talking about are in regard to the operations of the Uganda Wildlife Authority staff especially in protected areas. In that respect, the line minister should issue operational guidelines for Uganda Wildlife Authority staff in protected areas. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They have a code of conduct. 

MS KIIZA: Are they are aware that the officials have a code of conduct, and I am sure the code of conduct does not allow them to kill? There are laws that prohibit Ugandans from killing citizens. The guidelines we are asking the minister for are going to help us people operating with these officials as we wait to have the law amended. 

So, Madam Minister, the provisions the guidelines that the Members are asking for should be in relation to the occurrence of extra-judicial killings that are happening in the national parks. Maybe even the suspected poachers may have guns and could be killing; they should also be cautioned – they should be told that it is illegal to kill and the laws are in place to deter that. 


But in a situation where we realise that killings are taking place, let guidelines be made to prepare us for the amendment of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act. I thought that is what we are thinking of and that these guidelines should target specific areas which we think should be amended so that when the amendment comes out, it does not seem like it is conflicting with the guidelines you have issued. The guidelines should prepare us towards the targeted amendment of the Act. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you now speak as the Leader of Government Business or the Member for Moyo East?

GEN. (RTD) ALI: No, I will now speak as the Deputy Leader of Government Business. I wanted to express fear that it seems we are pressing for guidelines in isolation of the law. As we speak, there is a Wildlife Act, which Act the minister says is already before Cabinet for amendment. What we can ask for as we wait for that law is for the Minister to produce what is available; what does the existing law provide as it is so that it is related to the law? But if we just say that because of the extrajudicial killing we need to have guidelines, where can we get these from? Based on which law? A jungle law or what? We should not deviate from the law. We need to link it with the current law that we have. –(Interjections)- No, I have proposed – I said there is an existing law and it has guidelines; in fact UWA should produce them. If what they are using is not in conformity with what we want, then we can amend them. This is because they have something and not that they completely lack them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, and this applies to the Leader of Government Business; the minister has just stated that they have identified gaps in the law, which they are now proposing amendments to cure. We have also heard testimonies from the report that these killings have been taking place; that the incidents stated on the Floor here have been taking place. Now, as an interim measure, can an operational guideline be issued so that there is a connection between the minister and the UWA beyond the code of conduct which has been grossly violated according to the testimonies we have been hearing? That is the proposal here – so that we have a comprehensive situation while we wait for the proposed law.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform the House that already we had embarked on the guidelines based on Cap 200 – that is the UWA Act. And already we have a draft which we have submitted to the Solicitor-General to go through so that we can get a no-objection. So we are working hand-in-hand; while we are making the amendment, we are also working on the guidelines. So coming here to give you what we have is not a big job because we have already started on it and we are basing it on the law but mindful that we are amending this law. And so whatever amendments we are taking care of are also being reflected in these regulations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So should we adopt the recommendations proposed by the member for Kalungu East? I put the question to that.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I now put the question to the text of the motion that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of the residents of Katungulu be adopted with those amendments and recommendations that have been made.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. We have been able to finish this- the petitions have been on our file for a long time but at least we have been able to finish them today. The House should be happy and we look forward to this kind of engagement so that the public continues to have confidence that we handle matters that come before us expeditiously and deal with issues that press them as our people. This House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 February 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
