Tuesday, 25 February 2014

Parliament met at 3.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I begin by amending the Order Paper item no. 5 is Laying of Papers. So, it will move forward and become item no. 3.

In the public gallery, we have the guild students of Multitech School in Kampala. They are here to observe the proceedings. We also have in the gallery the students of Writing a Word Lubowa represented by hon. Kikungwe and hon. Sseninde of Wakiso. We also have the students’ guild of the East African School of Aviation in Soroti in their pilot uniform. They are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

Hon. Members, we had communicated last week that all the outstanding which had not been completed will be reflected automatically on the Order Paper. So, I am giving notice to the Chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture that tomorrow, the Plant Protection Bill, 2010, will be on the Order Paper. I am also giving notice to the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that the Bill on Government Assurances 2008 will be on the Order Paper tomorrow.

I also want to bring to the attention of the House and the country that the issues of human trafficking, which we discussed in the last sitting are extremely serious. There are Ugandans who are actively engaged in the trafficking of our citizens for sexual slavery under the guise of finding them employment, and this involves both men and women and it is done for profit. I have received a number of Ugandans who came to me - survivors of this trafficking - who came to see me last week and they explained to me how they were trafficked by fellow Ugandans.

There is also apparent complicity involving state organs in these activities. Some state organs also facilitate this trafficking. So, I want to urge Government to delve deeply into these issues to ensure that our people are not subjected to a second wave of slave trade especially now that we are educated and we know what we are doing. Many of our young people, desperate for employment and education, have been duped into these situations! They end up as slaves and many times they have been killed. So, I want the government to take an interest in that one.

I want to express grave concern at the rate at which girl students in different institutions of learning have been killed either on their way to or from classroom. It is ironical that as a country, we provide quite substantial accommodation for boy students. For instance, at Makerere University, we have six halls of residence for boys and two-and-a half for girls. Even the third one, which should be for the girls, is shared with boys and that is CCE Hall. This leaves the girls vulnerable. This leaves them at risk in the hostel and other places which are insecure. I want to ask the government to take an interest in this.

There is an imbalance in planning for provision of infrastructure. Recently, the government agreed to construct a vocational school in my constituency but surprisingly the design came with no hostel for girls but there was one for boys. So, I wrote to the Minister for Education protesting vehemently against the absence of facilities for the girls. I want to be taken seriously so that the Ugandans girls are safe. Our failure to provide safety measures for the girls is a breach of our commitment under the Beijing Platform of Action and that is why many of the students are killed.

I also want to express concern about our police personnel who have been killed, many of them in the last few weeks. I want to ask the government to take an interest so that the people who give us security are also secure as they work.

I have also received a letter from the Attorney-General dated 24 February 2014 in which he forwarded to my Office a sealed decree from the Constitutional Court touching on the following Members of Parliament: hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Winfred Niwagaba, hon. Mohamed Nsereko and hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire.

In the said decree, I was restrained from allowing the above mentioned to continue sitting in Parliament or take part in any parliamentary activity either in committees or elsewhere and also stop payments to them of any salaries or allowances or other emoluments and entitlements save for those that may have accrued to them immediately before the issuance of a court order. This is to inform you, Members, about the orders of the court which I am bound to comply in the absence of a stay of execution. I have notified the four Members about the decree and instructed the Clerk to Parliament about those instructions. Thank you very much.

There are some Members who had matters for national concern.

3.13
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. On 21 February 2014 at 1.00 a.m., fire gutted the Masindi Central Market and destroyed properties of vendors.
Most of the markets around the country are constituted by women. This Masindi Central Market has 60 percent vendors comprised of women and 80 percent of the same women lost property.

As we speak, these women do not have food, they do not have shelter where they can sit and try to reorganise themselves. They do not have money to pay school fees for their children since they lost all that they had. The banks and money lenders are chasing them for the money that they have picked, which they expected to pay on a weekly basis.

We are requesting and asking the government to come in and resettle these people of the markets. I know we have had so many outbreaks of fire and very soon, you will hear another notice for an issue of nation importance. The sugarcane growers of Masindi District have suffered to a great extent that 1,500 hectares have been lost in fire.

Madam Speaker, as we experience these fire outbreaks, we want to ask Government to come up with a fire policy in which the communities and country can be taken through on how to manage and prepare for the fires and how to put the safety measure especially in trying to mitigate the fire outbreak. 

And two, the market which was gutted by fire was actually constructed out of makeshift shelters - the papyrus mats, polythene bags and so in the event of any outbreak of course, there is nothing that would remain. We are asking the government to put into place a mechanism of putting up permanent structures especially in central markets all over the country starting with Masindi Market.

Thirdly, we are asking the government, because the people who lost properties in this market are the bread winners of their families – the women - we are asking the government to come in and put into place a rescue fund in form of money and pay these people also so that they can resettle and can be able to fend for their families.

This central market has a SACCO. So, I also want to ask Government that as they reorganise, these SACCOs should be reactivated and Government puts in money so that they can be able to borrow money and to be able to sustain themselves. 

Madam Speaker, this is my humble prayer to the government. Half of the market got burnt and we visited the market on Saturday and it is a sad scene. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Chairperson of UWOPA.

3.17
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter related to the recently passed Anti-Pornography Act because already the public is taking the law into their hands. In Iganga and downtown Kampala, women are being stripped naked by the public as a result of the Anti-Pornography Act. The Act which we passed does not mention miniskirts. The law that we passed defines pornography as follows: “Pornography is defined as any representation through publication, exhibition, cinematography, indecent show, information technology -” - (Interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. 

MS AMONGI: “Indecent show or by whatever means _” (Interjections)- 

THE SPEAKER: Order. Hon. Members, the matter is quite serious.

MS AMONGI: “…of a person engaged in real or stimulated explicit sexual activity or any representation of the sexual part of a person for primarily sexual excitement.” That is the definition of the Act.

The Act states clearly what organ is supposed to implement this law and what should be done to implement this law among which a committee is supposed to be put into place and a regulation by the minister. And, therefore, if anybody has an issue, the Police are the main implementer of the law. The regulation is not yet out and, therefore, assaulting women on the street is a criminal act punishable under the Penal Code Act. (Applause)

I want the Prime Minister and the ministry in charge of this to assure the women of this country – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please complete. Conclude your statement. 

MS AMONGI: I want assurance from Government and the Executive what measure will be put in place to ensure that if anybody commits a crime, the law will be followed through the right institution and that they will not be attacked on the streets and that if anybody is attacked on the street, the perpetrators should be arrested and punished under the Penal Code Act. I beg to state.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the Minister for Gender to say something about this very briefly. 

3.20
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Mary Karoro Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable member, for bringing up that issue. I did hold a press conference in my constituency yesterday because that is where I was. When I got these reports, I said, “What!” This is a prying scandal. Madam Speaker, it is a tragedy! 

As my honourable colleague has said, nowhere in this Bill is the word “miniskirt” mentioned. But to get hooligans and goons undressing women – (Interjections) - no, no this is a tragedy and really hon. Members, we have to work together to impart information. I have been in touch –

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members, please.

MRS OKURUT: Please, when we are talking about issues of emergency – (Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much, hon. Minister, for giving way. The clarification that I am seeking is – I think the public that is undressing women are not undressing them because they are putting on miniskirts but are looking at that particular area of - (Laughter) - the Act talking about indecent dressing. So, I think – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ochola, are you suggesting which part has been exposed?

MR OCHOLA: I mean the area in the Act which talks about the indecent dressing. I think that in the eyes of the public; if they see a lady whom they feel or believe is indecently dressed they react like that. Maybe –

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.  

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We are discussing a matter of national importance, a matter that is raising the concerns of the safety of women in this country, a human rights issue and we are all very contrite and sad. Is it in order for the honourable member of the Front Bench of the Opposition to stand up and insinuate that there are circumstances that call for such acts of criminality? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. (Laughter and Applause) You are out of order.

MRS OKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Now the information that I wanted to give is that we are in touch with the law enforcement officers, the Police. They should turn their ‘guns’ - and not the real shooting – to those hooligans who are undressing women because it is nowhere in the law.

I am imploring my honourable colleagues that let us fight together and also let us give the right information because the women who are being undressed are your mothers, sisters and daughters. It is a problem for humanity. We are not just talking about women - (Interruption)

(Allegations by hon. Beatrice Anywar against hon. Ronald Kibuule expunged from the records)

THE SPEAKER: As the Prime Minister comes, I want to welcome some visitors from Vihiga County in Kenya. They are up here. Welcome. (Applause)

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I think this is a very serious matter and it is a matter that Cabinet has in fact taken up. We are in the process of looking at this law again precisely to avoid this kind of thing. 

Madam Speaker, when we talked about this when it was still a Bill, the question of miniskirts did not arise at all. That Bill does not talk about the length of a dress or the shortness of a dress and, therefore, anyone who purports to be acting to enforce this law to fight miniskirts is absolutely out of order because there is no such thing.

Secondly, even if it was so, it is not the duty of the public to enforce the law in that manner. Therefore, we will give out strict instructions to the Police to take action against anyone who takes the law in his or her hands.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek clarification. First, I am a son of a woman and I have children who are also girls. Therefore, I respect women and I love them. There are two issues: the original problem of indecency in as far as dressing is concerned and the new problem of taking the law into one’s hands. Which one are you addressing? Both, and we should stick to this. 

There is a problem of indecency in our country in terms of dressing. Is there any woman Member of Parliament who is indecently dressed? No. Why don’t you want the girls to be dressed very well like you? As for me, my daughter will never dress indecently.

Finally, what are you going to do to the people who take the law into their hands when the Police fail to do its part and what are we going to do with the Police when they fail to do their part? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we have an assurance from the Prime Minister but I would like to ask the Attorney-General to go on air and explain the contents of that Bill because no one has explained it to the population. 

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, to my understanding, the Prime Minister has not yet finished concluding his submission on this matter and one of the areas he touched on is that this matter has come to Cabinet and that Cabinet is in the process of looking at this law again. 

Without prejudice to that, the way the Executive works is that the sector ministry in charge of the law administers and implements it. The sector ministry is the Ministry in charge of Ethics and if they call upon us to give assistance in implementing it, we shall be at their service.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are not assisting this country by pushing the matter to another minister when you are the legal adviser of the state.

3.36
MS BRENDA NABUKENYA (DP, Woman Representative, Luweero):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. On Sunday, 23rd February, we had a storm in Luweero District and this storm destroyed a lot of things. We had the roof of our district headquarters blown away; we had eight schools almost razed to the ground and several houses and plantations destroyed. Yesterday, I travelled to Luweero to talk to the people and also establish the extent of the damage. The district has done a study and a report is out showing the effect of the storm but by the time I was there, they had not yet received any help from the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness.

Madam Speaker, there is a problem because part of the district offices were destroyed. Majority of the documents are wet and even machines like computers could no longer work. This has affected district activities and so, the population cannot access any services during this time. It might not be a very big disaster given that no lives were lost but it is going to limit service delivery and I feel that if this House prevails on the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to go and look into this issue, some relief could immediately be provided to the district because majority of the affected are women. And those who are business people, their property has been damaged and so cannot carry out their business anymore.

Madam Speaker, in other countries, the meteorological department can warn the population about an imminent storm and people get prepared for such disasters. I think my people would have been prepared and possibly moved to some other areas where they would not have been affected. Or they would have relocated their property but this was not done. It is important that we try to help because Luweero is one of the original districts; if you look at the structure of the district headquarters, it is not at the required standard and for the last 25 years, the district leadership has been demanding that the central government should help by constructing a new structure. 

So temporarily, I ask you, Madam Speaker, that you order the minister to move to Luweero to do something. This is because it looks like he has forgotten our people and by the time I came to your Office, nothing had been done. The disaster team had not reached Luweero. That means as we speak, they might not even have reached there. So, I politely ask for temporary help until the district can again stand on its own and be able to serve its people.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. The Minister of Disaster Preparedness is directed to visit Luweero to see how they can be assisted.

3.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President for the historic thing he did yesterday; the people of Kasilo are very happy for the bold decision he took. I think we are saving Uganda; thank you, hon. Bahati and the rest of Members of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, due to public demand, on behalf of the people of Kasilo and Uganda, we are grateful for the work you did to ensure that the Bill is passed by this House. And we must also thank the Almighty God who touched the heart of hon. Amama Mbabazi and those who had intended to oppose the Bill, and made them soften their positions. May God bless you and keep you strong.

Madam Speaker, I stand on a matter of public importance; this regards the East African School of Aviation – that is Soroti Flying School. For the last two weeks, if you have been reading the newspapers, there has been a strike by the instructors of Soroti Flying School and the students have not been studying. It is a very unfortunate situation.

The reasons why the instructors are on strike is that they have not received their salary for the last three or four months from the government. Madam Speaker, you introduced the guild president and his team in the gallery here; for the last two weeks, they have been meeting the Minister – Dr Chebrot; they have met three times but nothing has happened. They have met the PS and he has told them the money can only be paid to them in the next financial year. You cannot imagine that. How do they expect these instructors to continue performing?

Madam Speaker, we want to bring this to the attention of the Government of Uganda that a number of students that are there are mainly from the air force – they are about 80 to 90 percent. We are trying to build our capacity but if the students are going to take more than the recommended timeframe for their studies – because some have ended up spending four to five years instead of two years because of these problems that have continually hampered their studies. We do not want a situation where the students are also going to join the strike and cause more damage.

Three years ago, I think Government had bought six aircrafts for training; two of them got problems - one crashed and the other had a problem with the propeller. But the one which crashed was insured by Goldstar Insurance Company but up to today they have not compensated; they had given a commitment that they would pay but two years down the road, no payment has been made.

There is the issue of the money for students for training – those who are studying engineering are supposed to be going each academic year to Nairobi for training but because the money is not provided, the students do not go. So, Madam Speaker, we demand from Government that this money be paid to the instructors and money be found for that institution.

During the EALA sitting here, the matter was raised by the EALA members of the Uganda Chapter to the effect that the instructors be paid and their salaries be increased. And the President gave a directive to that effect but it is surprising that up to today nothing has happened. (Interjection) I will take information from the chairperson of the Committee on East African Community Affairs then come to the ambassador.

MS SARAH MWEBAZA: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Okupa is pertinent. But I want to give him information that the President did not give a directive on the very day he addressed EALA on the issue of raising the salaries of the tutors of the East African Civil Aviation Academy; he had communicated it much earlier. On that day, he was just informing EALA that he has already directed the ministers responsible to increase the salaries of the tutors of the Civil Aviation School. 

THE SPEAKER: But I thought you were just raising a – 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much colleague for giving way. The clarification I am seeking is that Soroti Flying School used to train pilots from East African countries and all the countries of East Africa used to pay the instructors. Now I hear about Uganda only. Have the other countries pulled out of Soroti Flying School? 

Secondly, all along, I thought Soroti Flying School was training civilian pilots. Is it now training military pilots? Can they clarify on this issue for us?

THE SPEAKER: Training is training; they are all pilots. What is the problem?

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE (Mr David Wakikoona): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was the director there for nine years and we trained Rwandese Air Force pilots; we trained Ugandan Air force pilots – since all that time, we trained Kenyans, we trained Congoles. What happens there is that, you do not train them in air force manoeuvres; you train them in the basic commercial pilot license/ instrument rating and the acrobatics of air force are done with the air force institutions. So it is open to all. Thank you. 

CAPT. MUKULA: I rise on a point of further information. One, as a Member of Parliament for Soroti Municipality and two, as a professional pilot and three, as a former instructor and student of Soroti Flying School. 

Madam Speaker, Soroti Flying School, the East African Civil Flying Academy, is one of the centres of excellence in East Africa. We have lost the foundation and credentials to host that institution as a credible institution now. Now cadet pilots take as long as eight years to train; some have been there for eight years and have not even got the basic licence, which is the private pilot’s licence. The basic licence is the private pilot’s licence; commercial pilot’s licence and the twin rating, which is the double engine instrument rating and then the airline transport pilot’s licence. For eight years, they have not even got the basic licence. This is a very serious matter. 

In actual fact, in professional flying, those who have taken longer than necessary time, which is 18 months, have become time x; they can no longer be useful or credible pilots if you are to take them into commercial flying because their proficiency is lost along the way. 

What has happened now is that Soroti Flying School has lost the financing from Government of Uganda. We do not have adequate funding. That is why you find that we do not have enough fuel to fly these air crafts and even the new ones that have been procured. About two months ago, they also lost the licencing that is given by the Civil Aviation Authority for the school to be licenced to train pilots. 

I would like to therefore move and urge the Rt hon. Prime Minister that this House urges the Leader of Government Business to make Soroti Flying School as a matter of urgency. 

Secondly, if we cannot run the school as Government of Uganda, we try as much as possible to urge the five governments to take over the East African Flying School Academy so that we can have a credible institution. Right now, we have invested a lot of money and that money is going down the drain. I would like to urge Members of Parliament to come to the help of the plight of the East African Flying Academy. These students who have come all the way from Soroti – you can see them up stairs – have travelled because their future is at stake. If we do not find a way of supporting this civil flying academy, we might as well close it. But right now, it is important that the Prime Minister takes it up and ensures that there is additional – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the point has been made. Please conclude because I want to go to the Order Paper.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the prayer of the students and the people of Soroti are that the Prime Minister makes good and provides for the salaries of the instructors as a matter of urgency; and provides for the other funding that is needed for the training of the engineers and provides for the money needed for the repair of one other plane that insurers used to provide. If that could be reported to this House before this week ends, we would appreciate. 

3.52
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. The medical workers in Kisoro District have not been paid their salaries for four months. Those who were paid were either paid half or a quarter of salary of a month and that has raised serious concern to the extent that they are likely to lay down their tools. 

When you go to the Ministry of Public Service, they blame the Ministry of Finance. When you go to Finance, they blame Public Service. So, we would like Government to come up and tell us who is responsible for paying these health workers. We do not know if there is any coordination in Government. I thank you. 

3.53
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I stand to raise a matter of national importance. First, I want to thank the Government for granting the Mpigi -Butambala – Gomba Road, it is on course. We welcome the tarmacking of Mpigi – Butambala – Gomba Road but it has come with a lot of challenges which I would like to bring to the attention of the Minister of Works. 

This project started in 2010; that is when they did the demarcation and the survey for compensation. Since 2010, the contract was granted last year to Energo and Energo contracted a company to do the compensation to our people; a company called Uga-serve. Since 2010, our people have not been able to utilise the space that was demarcated to be used for road construction. On 29 December, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and other leaders from Butambala and Gomba held a consultative meeting with the contractor and the company in charge of compensating our people and we agreed as it is in the Compensation Act that they will embark on the construction after paying at least 50 percent to the people who are affected by this work. 

Unfortunately, this has not been honoured. Right now, Energo, has embarked on work. They are demolishing our people’s homes, gardens and everything. Our people have not been told yet how much they are going to be compensated but the company is already demolishing homes.

I think this is not acceptable to us and to our people. UNRA had intervened a few days ago stopping Energo from doing the road works until they have paid off at least 60 percent. But they have now gone behind the curtains to negotiate because UNRA fears the heavy penalty if at all the company stopped working. Now the company has again started doing the road works. Our fear is, if our people’s buildings are demolished and one does not even declare to them how much they are to be paid, they will end up being cheated.

We are here asking the minister and the Government that yes, we like this programme, we want this road badly but our people should not get a tarmacked road at a loss.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Mr James Mutende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We just got a statement from hon. Jalia Bintu on the fires in Masindi. I would like to give an update on that situation. It is true that last week starting Sunday 16th February, there were fires in some plantations in Masindi in the Kinyara area. It affected both the Kinyara Sugar Works Nucleus Farm and outgrowers of sugarcane. The outgrowers lost over 1,000 hectares of sugarcane plantation while the Kinyara Sugar Works Nucleus Farm lost about 350 hectares.

On Friday 21st February, the Masindi Market also caught fire. I want to thank the Police of Masindi because they acted very swiftly in both instances. I visited it on that same day, Friday 21st and found when the fire had just been put out and it is true about a half of the market was burnt down but they were able to rescue the rest of the market.

We had meetings with the district leadership, the Kinyara Sugarcane Outgrowers Association and Kinyara Sugar Works. At this meeting, it was agreed that certain measures be put in place as a matter of urgency.
It was important to establish the cause of the fires. Any one of these could have caused the fires in the plantation: one, during a dry season there is a tendency by most farmers to set up fires to clear their farms in preparation for the hunting season, and quite often this leads to fires that run out of control and can burn wide areas.

The second is charcoal burning; if it is not well regulated it can lead to fires and from the investigations, these are fires that have occurred in more than one place so Police are still investigating. The third is obviously malicious arson which cannot be ruled out.

In all cases, the UPDF and Police responded and by the time of the meeting we had not heard any new incidences of fires. They had literally been put out but the damage had been caused. In the meantime, to minimise loss to the farmers particularly Kinyara Sugar Works has made a quick assessment and the sugarcane, which was mature has been harvested as much as possible to minimise the loss.

There were also some fire victims; yes, the plantations got burnt but even some homes were burnt taking with them even some livestock and indeed my colleague in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness will go and make a further assessment. 

The district disaster committee held a meeting and we are soon getting a report to guide us on how to handle the situation. But there were two men who were burnt in the fire. One was trying to put out fire then a log fell on him and then the second one was trying to rescue him. So, they both got burnt but they were taken to Kinyara Hospital and I visited and they had received emergency treatment and they were out of danger.

We shall be able to give a full report on the situation as soon as the investigations are over.

THE SPEAKER: Is anyone going to say something about the Luweero disaster?

4.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, we have heard with a lot of concern the issues that were raised by my colleague from Luweero and I beg to respond as follows:

The ministry has picked particularly the issue on the storms that have been characterised by the return of rain, and we are also working with the Department of Metrology requesting them to advise us on what is likely to happen in the next few weeks and months.

The information that has been given to my office as of yesterday is that, it is indeed true that with the onset of the rains and given the deforestation that has happened in the country, many parts are likely to experience very strong storms. These storms are likely to have very devastating effects. Already by the time I left office this afternoon, we had captured the extent of the storm in Luweero and then in Iganga District.

There are other parts of the country where our technical officers are working with chief administrative officers who are disaster management officers to establish the damage that has been caused just in the last one week alone so that we can see how to prescribe a response.

But what is going to happen is that we are going to respond in phases. The ministry will handle the relief phase of the challenge but in our report we are going to indicate to other sectors what should be done in the recovery phase of the intervention. But we are going to step up mobilisation on radio particularly in the recovery phase of the intervention.

We are also to step up mobilisation particularly through the media houses to let the community know the categories of emergencies that we will be handling. Situations where people face displacement, children are exposed to situations where they may not have shelter for themselves and food to eat, there we will be coming with emergency relief. But in other situations we will only be doing rehabilitation.

4.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to make some comments on two or three items. I had already talked about the miniskirts raised by hon. Betty Amongi and I want to repeat that in Cabinet, we have decided to call back the Act in order to take a close look at it because when you look at the word “indecent” which is used in that Act, indecent means non conformity to or with generally accepted standards. 

Now, that is broad because when you say “general”, the standards of hon. Katuntu obviously –(Laughter) - may be the same as the Mbabazi standards. But when you go to hon. Ssewungu –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order. (Laughter) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is also intimidated by my presence and I do not know whether when he looks at me he thinks of the minority report I wrote against him –(Laughter)– that he has to continue looking at me. You know, we are tribesmen. Is the Prime Minister in order to continue mentioning my name when I am seated here quietly without even looking at him because of the intimidation he has against me? Is he in order? He thinks I am thinking post for him. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it seems you are constantly on his mind and I think that is the problem; apparently you are constantly on his mind. Please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If I may complete my sentence, his standards may be higher. So, it is very important that the law is clear, specific and not subjected to different interpretations by different people including enforcement agencies. So, we will look at it but in the meantime, I would like to request the public, please do not take the law in your hands as that in itself is a criminal offence and especially against the women of this country. They are fully protected and we shall use all the means possible and available to us to protect them.

Now, if I can come to Soroti Flying School as mentioned by hon. Elijah Okupa, I am sorry that this matter has not been finally sorted out but I would like to inform this House that it is a matter that we are constantly looking at. As you heard, the President has given two directives: the first is that, we must look into the administration with a view to making sure that Soroti Flying School has an administration that conforms to the standards expected of an international flying school.

Secondly, the President has given a directive that the staff of that flying school must be remunerated at the level professional staff with their qualifications are remunerated worldwide. These directives were written to me and I passed them on to the minister in charge of handling remuneration, and I was informed that the ministry has now completed its work. I am afraid that they are not here to inform us but I will find out when this will be officially communicated to us but the work has been completed and my expectation is that the new salary scale will be announced soon. 

Hon. Mike Mukula talked about losing a licence – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I think that the issue of the review and what else will come later but the salary arrears of the instructors because they have not been paid for the last three months – the salaries but you are talking about the review of the structure but I think they want to hear about the payment of their salary arrears for the last three months. If we could have that cleared because even when I look at the supplementary budget that I have here I do not see the ministry that the flying school falls under. It is not there. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay. I do not have the answers to the finer details now because as I said, I did not have notice of this and the minister responsible is not here. But I think that once the payment scale is sorted out, obviously the payments are going to be done including the arrears but we will wait to hear from the minister and I will make sure that we have an answer to that.

This question on the licence –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, what we are dealing with is a situation where the school has reached a stalemate. The students are not learning and they are in the dormitories and streets of Soroti Town. They are idle. The instructors are not teaching, the parents are anxious, the Government is not yet very sure. So what do we tell the students now? The guild president sitting up there in the gallery has to go back to Soroti and tell the students a concrete message from the Government of Uganda. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, should he go and tell the students to continue sitting there? Should he go and tell - you know, some of these students are privately sponsored. What do we tell the parents tonight? Is the school reopening tomorrow? What is the concrete message?

The other clarification and the thing that really bothers me that I want the Prime Minister help me understand is this continued reference to that school as a “centre of excellence.” You went there, Madam Speaker, but did you see anything like a centre of excellence in that school? Students who should be flying in the air spending three quarters of their time in simulator rooms! Students who should be flying spending eight years – are our children that daft? Do we want to send a message to the world that our children are so daft and cannot excel? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you will answer this; we have information that you as Government then made a decision to remove the flying school from the list of centres of excellence in the East African Community. It is no longer there and that you substituted it with Mbarara University. I love Mbarara University so much and we have students in Mbarara University –

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I am one of the outputs of Mbarara University of Science and Technology and represent Mbarara Municipality in this honourable Parliament. It takes me a lot of time to visit this institution to make sure it does not die but for hon. Alaso to start saying that we replace the five schools in Mbarara University - does she want Mbarara University to be transferred? Is she in order to think of closing Mbarara University and put in Soroti? She wants Mbarara University to be closed? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should listen without excitement. Her complaint was that originally, Soroti Flying School was listed as a centre of excellence by the Government of Uganda. She has now heard that it has been substituted by Mbarara University. That is her complaint so you are out of order. Please conclude.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and just to assure my colleague, I love Mbarara University so much. We have students there and it is a national institution. The argument is that when the government came here listing centres of excellence for the East African Community, it was stated that those that were listed would get funding over and above what we would ordinarily provide. This is because the crisis is partly a funding one to that institution. 

That is why I am stating that if it was replaced, that is in order, no problem. But when you replaced it, what alternative sources of funding did you give this institution because it is terrible to call it a “centre of excellence” when there is no excellence. You better stop duping the world. So, I need concrete answers. Is it still a centre of excellence, hon. Prime Minister? Two, is it opening tomorrow? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before the Prime Minister comes up, when I visited the flying school I was very disturbed. I came back during the night and wrote to the President and I even telephoned him about that issue; that it is really in bad shape. So, Prime Minister, you can conclude.

MR MBABAZI: Well, as I said before, the state of Soroti Flying School has been and continues to be a matter of concern to Government. We have discussed it and we have already agreed on steps that are being taken for instance in relation to the administration and to remuneration. I have just told you that steps are being taken.

The President had actually ordered that because one of the problems we had was not having equipment; flying planes and so on and this had been handled. There are obviously many issues to handle to put that school at the level we would wish to see it. As I said, the minister who is handling the question of remuneration is not here. We will definitely come out with a statement even tomorrow. I will come out with a statement tomorrow on this matter.

I would like to say that the question of licence will - (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please conclude your answers.

MR MBABAZI: Blackmail. 

THE SPEAKER: You can chat after the meeting in the canteen.

MR MBABAZI: The question of licence - (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable Prime Minister, without giving an answer, continues to lament. The point of order I am raising is, is he in order to continue lamenting when we have very wealthy people like hon. Sam Kutesa from whom we can borrow money under PTA arrangement?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, hon. Kutesa is sitting quietly and he has not said anything. Please apologise to him. Hon. Member, stand up and apologise to hon. Kutesa.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to hurt hon. Kutesa and I did not know that it hurts him to be described as a wealthy person -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, please apologise.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I am very sorry to hon. Kutesa.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude.

MR MBABAZI: You see honourable colleagues, it is a question of upbringing. So tomorrow we will come back here – (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has used a statement, which in my opinion sounds unparliamentary and demeaning to hon. Ssemujju, by saying it is a question of upbringing. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Prime Minister to make such a sensitive statement as if he himself was not involved in Temangalo, which is not related to upbringing? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Prime Minister was talking about the upbringing of the Soroti Flying School. Please conclude. (Laughter)

MR MBABAZI: So, tomorrow we will come here with a statement on the question of remuneration and all the steps that have been taken concerning the flying school. We will also come up with a report on the salaries of the staff. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Next item. Oh, Energo Project and taking over the site without compensating the people in Butambala.

MR MBABAZI: I will come with an answer on that tomorrow as well. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY (Mr John Bagoole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Information and Communication Technology on study visits to benchmark the ICT sectors in Ghana, Tanzania and Kenya and related minutes where we came up with the report. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report will be made available and a date for debate will be appointed. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON FINANCIAL IMPROPRIETY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the report was presented last week and taking into account the time taken, many events may have changed; so I invite the Prime Minister to give us an update before we debate.

4.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, you will recall that financial impropriety was unearthed within the Office of the Prime Minister and other government entities stretching from financial year 2010/2011 to 2011/2012. The Office of the Auditor-General – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence. The Auditor-General’s report was laid before the House and was referred to our Committee on Public Accounts. Now the committee has presented the report to Parliament and Members are just waiting to debate it. And after debating, the Government side can come and give their response. This is because there are issues which we, as Members of Parliament, want to raise. So, is it procedurally right to change our rules so that the report is first responded to by the government side before Members deal with it?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, sometimes we might speak about issues which have already been handled and in order to save time, I have asked the Prime Minister to tell us what they have done and if the gaps still exist, we shall continue with the debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am not objecting to your wise ruling but what we want to do now – since you say they have answered, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to give us what they have done in writing so that we go and compare with our reports so that we come and say, “This was answered but this one was not.” I think this would be the best for us. This report touches us and we have come to demonstrate how money was stolen. And if everybody proves that money can be stolen without the Prime Minister then I will go and hang myself. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I think hon. Nandala is right; we were supposed to debate this report last week – unfortunately you were away – but we were allowed to go and read it so as to prepare for the debate. In the report, the Prime Minister is actually one of the suspects - as stated in the minority report. So it would be unfair and improper for hon. Amama Mbabazi to begin debating and biasing our minds when we need a free – actually he should wait until we finish with the debate because he appeared before the committee and it is in the report. So, there is nothing else he can say and it is not possible like you say, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister should tell us what the government has done about the report. I am sure they have done nothing as yet because we have not yet pronounced ourselves on this report.

THE SPEAKER: No. But, hon. Members, for instance, if in the report you said, “Prosecute so and so” and he says, “We have completed with that prosecution.” Is that not okay? Hon. Members, I am not stopping you from debating; I am trying to rationalise the use of time. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the reason we are raising this is because – I will give an example; Shs 1 billion in cash was brought to the Prime Minister’s Office. If the money was in Shs 50,000 notes, those are 20 bundles. And if you packed those bundles in the office, anybody who would enter that office would see that money and I am sure that the Prime Minister has guards and they would have told him that a truck of cash came by. 

So, Madam Speaker, for this report, we beg your indulgence so that we deal with it and after that the Prime Minister can come back. My interest – which I must declare now – is for the Prime Minister to confirm to us that he never saw the safe. That is all. But if you allow him now to speak, he is not going to say that he will imprison himself; he will say that he is “Mr Clean.” So that is why you should allow us to debate this report and thereafter he can come and clean himself. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I also want to associate myself with the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. It is under your chairmanship that this special audit was referred to the public accounts committee and the committee dealt with this work from November the previous year up to April of last year, and thereafter submitted its report to Parliament in May last year. This report has been appearing time and time again on the Order Paper but going to the last position until when it completely disappeared. It re-emerged last week and it is a very big and detailed report, which was exhaustively presented. And we were given the assurance that Members should go and read it before debate could ensue today.

I now see ourselves in a very difficult situation; a situation where we are asking the Prime Minister to respond to this report without giving an opportunity to Members to give their views – which I feel is like putting the cart before the horse.

I appeal to you, Madam Speaker, please allow the Members present here to give their opinions as regards this report. The Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business will come and wind up by responding to issues that have been raised in our recommendations for the Executive to implement. I feel that is how we should progress; otherwise are we going to set this precedent so that in future when a committee presents a report, we do not debate it but instead come to a conclusion, without seeking Members’ opinions. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Wadri, I did not say that you are not going to debate it; I was informed that there are areas where action has been taken and so they wanted to inform you before you debate - Okay, let the debate commence.

4.34
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. However, having read the report, I am saddened. I come from Northern Uganda and what has happened has reminded me about the objectives for which this money was sourced for. It reminded me about the time we took, as Northern Uganda, to plan for the activities but only to be told that diversions, forgeries, placing money in personal accounts took the lead. It is a disappointment and therefore, there is a lot of mockery about our suffering. 

The committee reflected that there are institutional weaknesses but to me, it is about the mind-set; it is not about the computers you buy, it is about the staff that you recruit and the mind-set of the people who are supposed to manage our resources. Release of cash takes a procedure; there is initiation made, there is clearance or verification before cashing. Right from Bank of Uganda, the account and cashiers have procedures to follow. Where is the integrity of the people? We are serving ourselves but not the people. It is not for God and my country, but for “Me”. 

It beats my understanding to think that we still do supervision. When I was at district level as a secretary, I would know where the money is going and from which code. So, I want the minister to help us understand the operations under his docket. 

Madam Speaker, if we do not break the rackets which are built to steal, then the focus we have for service delivery is doomed because there is no way monies can come to accounts –(Member timed out_)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the report we are discussing is about money for the people of Northern Uganda which was lost. And that is just a small portion of it. So if you give us three minutes, we shall not be able to deliver the points. I plead with you, Madam Speaker, that we start with over 10 minutes because some people are going to come with computation. To explain computation to a person who did history would take at least five minutes. So, I would rather you limit the number and we hold a real constructive debate on the Office of the Prime Minister and we are ready to deliver the last pin in the Office of the Prime Minister. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, everybody wants to contribute; so Members will chose what is most important for them to speak on. 

4.38
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. when I heard the first alarm that money was being stolen in the Office of the Prime Minister, I fired the first bullet specifically stating that the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, had removed Shs 600 million from the PRDP funds to buy a Mercedes Benz and removed Shs 800 million from the PRDP funds to armour his land cruiser, to make it bullet proof. The reaction from the public was unbelievable. The Prime Minister employs the PS of that Ministry to issue a press statement in the newspaper condemning me and stating that I was out of my mind. What were they talking about?

Today, we have a very big report which shows how funds meant for people in Northern Uganda have been abused. I come from Northern Uganda; I can talk until Jesus comes back; we are very bitter! And for some people who keep talking around the country that they want to become presidents, if you ever step in the North without proper protection –(Laughter) –we shall take the law in our hands. It seems useless to be a good person; those who do wrong things everyday: Temangalo, PRDP and CHOGM are shamelessly saying they want to be president of this country. Yet if I declare that I want to be the president and I have not stolen even one shilling, people will say I am not serious – (Laughter) – even when I am serious. 

So, Madam Speaker, the Government made a good initiative, they posted good ministers like hon. Wakikona in the North to try and alleviate the North from the hole and bring it to the same level as the rest of Uganda. But we are now worse off than before the fund was given. 

I appeal to this House to place funds for Northern Uganda because the other funds were stolen and the people who stole it are at large. They even drive with escorts and people protecting them as if they are not the common thieves in this country. 

Having said that, I want to appeal to the President on behalf of the people from Northern Uganda; now that the President has started doing some good things like signing the Anti-Homosexual law – (Laughter) – I want to appeal to the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni that the person of hon. Amama Mbabazi should not be the Prime Minister of Uganda even for one more week. They have been implicated in this report on page 83 – (Member timed out_) 

THE SPEAKER: One more minute to conclude. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In conclusion, when they came out in the media, the Prime Minister himself was on TV saying that he is not responsible for the procurement of his vehicle and armouring it. It is like finding the feathers of a stolen hen in your dustbin and yet people know that you have not had a white hen –(Laughter)– by implications, it means you are the one who –(Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The roles of the Prime Minister are well stated under Article 108A of the Constitution and the roles of the accounting officer are well stated under Article 164 of the Constitution. The roles of the Prime Minister do not deal with anything called accountability; that is the role of the accounting officer. 

Madam Speaker, is hon. Odonga Otto in order to mislead this House that the Prime Minister was engaged in accountability issues and the procurement issues of the Office of the Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Since the Prime Minister is here, he will be able to answer for himself. Please conclude. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: You see, the moment you do specific procurements like armouring a vehicle, this is not ordinary procurement like buying a photocopying machines or reams of paper. These are specific procurements and you need to get the right company to armour your vehicle and to find that the weight of the armoury does not destabilise the actual engineering of the vehicle. The Prime Minister knew about this and he must take personal responsibility about this. 

So, I rest my case by appealing to the appointing authority on behalf of the people from Northern Uganda that hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi ceases to be the Prime Minister on his own volition or the volition of the appointing authority. 

4.44
MRS NABILA SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We thank you for allowing us to debate this very pertinent report. We know very well that there has been a lot of talk on corruption and Ugandans have been waiting eagerly for us to talk about this and they have given us their views accordingly. 

First of all, I want to talk about the issues that were raised in the report on the internal control weaknesses of the Treasury and that is page 19(a) (2) where the internal control weaknesses at the Treasury contributed to the issues of loss of funds. The use of generic passwords instead of specific passwords contributed; minimal supervision of bank reconciliation, lack of involvement of initial audit in review of the treasury system and lack of CCTV cameras in the Uganda computer services. I support the recommendations therein the report where the Accountant-General should be held responsible. 

The internal audit should be strengthened by providing an independent internal auditor to report directly to Parliament as the Auditor-General does. This issue has arisen because the internal auditor was harassed in the ministry and consequently forced to be transferred to another docket. Another issue I would want to raise is the irregular allocation of responsibilities in (a)(3); Mr Lubega irregularly assigned Mr Kazinda the responsibility of invoice approval. This points to collusion as raised in the report because this irregular access was clearly meant to defraud Government and Ugandans of these much needed funds in Northern Uganda.
 
The PS himself was incompetent and the report clearly recommends that Mr Lubega should be held responsible for the mess that eventually ensued. Mr Bigirimana be held responsible for negligence of duty in his responsibility under the management systems. We – (Member timed out_)

4.48
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the Public Accounts Committee for a job well done. I think this is a mother of all reports with very good revelations and salute them for the great work well done. 

Some people were not even very worried about the name and status of Uganda in the international community but I want to assure this House that Uganda was embarrassed in the face of the international community and Ugandans paid for the theft that occurred according to this report. The people of Uganda also suffered from deprivation in terms of health, education facilitation, infrastructure, and so on. We very well remember that about Shs40 billion had to be returned to the donors namely; Ireland, Norway, Sweden and so on. 

This was a very big embarrassment and this money came from the taxpayers of Uganda. The taxpayers had to pay for the theft that occurred. We are yet to learn about how much money has been recouped to the coffers of Government and we do not know how people of Uganda who paid in terms of taxes to cover this loss are going to benefit out of it. 

Madam Speaker, this report uncovers the fraud and the diversion that took place organised by the civil servants within the Office of the Prime Minister going away from well laid out agreements to prevent diversion of funds - funds which were supposed to go to the Treasury had to be diverted to accounts from which these officers could retrieve this money and use it for personal use. 

This report shows you that money was got from the Treasury and was deposited on personal accounts replacing local governments, which were supposed to be the implementing agencies in some cases and many of these officers are remaining in office as if nothing has happened. 

Why should Ugandans pay for the theft? That was the biggest question we had to ask. If you remember, Madam Speaker, you were not here. Part of this money went through a supplementary which we opposed and was passed without quorum in this Parliament - Shs 40 billion which Ugandans must pay at this moment. 

I want to concur entirely with PAC on the recommendation ranging from returning these people to the appointing authority for prosecution for the diversion of funds –(Member timed out_)

4.52
MR BENSON OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I feel so scandalised. This report is so shocking and our people are really not happy. I was very reluctant to discuss this report because I feel obliged to let my people know what is happening. This report is going to help us the people who come from the north to make them know who really loves them. How on earth can somebody in the name of a permanent secretary swindle all that money that he has been caught red-handed stealing and then nothing is done to him? 

I am going to take this report and it is going to be a very useful tool for me come 2016; that is where I feel I should go and show the people what their government is responsible for and see whom they want to vote again. Otherwise, I see that we are going to debate, which is okay, but what are we going to see happen? Everybody who has been named in this report will probably be exonerated again as has always been the case. So, I rose to say that I am hesitant to debate this report but I know where I will use it for good purpose come 2016. This is a very good tool for me. I thank you.

4.52
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, when we talk about the amount of money committed to this cause by donors, we are talking about Shs 75 billion. Just on the opening page of the report, we talk about diversion. Out of the 75 billion, 38 billion was diverted which is more than half of the money.
 
And when you talk about the individuals involved, they range from the Office of the Prime Minister to the Ministry of Karamoja. I have had the occasion to look at the detailed analysis of this report and the PS you are talking about –

THE SPEAKER: Clarification, hon. Byarugaba.

MR BYARUGABA: I thank you my very good friend for allowing me to give you some information. I am one of the authors of this report –(Interjections)– yes, I am giving information for purposes of clarity that the First Lady you tried to bring into this report is nowhere mentioned –(Interjections)– as having been culpable. The Minister for Karamoja is the First Lady and she is not mentioned as being culpable in any of these reports. I thank you.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: If only you could wait a little, you would have known where I am going. Madam Speaker, I have said that more than half of the money was diverted. The individuals involved range from the Prime Minister to the Office of the Minister for Karamoja and when you talk about vehicles that were bought, we only mention one vehicle for the Prime Minister but eight vehicles were bought including a pick up that clears the way – a lead car - for the Prime Minister and six other vehicles were procured from the money meant to go to the poorest of Ugandans.

When you talk about diversion, I have read the report. Money that was meant to go to Northern Uganda under political influence was diverted to go to Karamoja and that is in the report. The Permanent Secretary complains in the report that it was under political influence and that is why I brought in the name of the First Lady –(Interjections)– she is the Minister in charge of Karamoja. I am hesitant; I said that it was mentioned in the report. 

When you go into detail, look at the way the money was withdrawn. In Uganda, we are allowed to withdraw Shs 20 million. Authority was sought to withdraw Shs 100 million every day. What did these fellows do in the Prime Minister’s Office? They would withdraw Shs 96 million every other single day for pocket money. 

You then go to Caltex Petrol Station Ntinda or whatever the name is but it is in Ntinda – (Interjections) – I have read the report and it is Caltex. All they talk about on Caltex is that a petrol station that has capacity to carry 22,500 litres on a single day carried 57 litres and Shs 144 million was spent. This was utter theft. I do not envisage that there is any member of this august House that is honest to goodness that can stand up on this very day and be against this report. We are all under moral obligation to fight corruption, to stand strong and tall and for once say let us – no matter who is involved whether mighty or small must be brought to book.

Also another trend is emerging in this country and it is so hurting – the hurried arrest of individuals before the due process of Parliament by the Auditor-General is completed. It complicates matters of corruption. When you read this report, there are so many conclusions we could reach because Kazinda was hurriedly arrested. The arrest of Kazinda –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: The arrest of Kazinda by all accounts was meant to cover up and frustrate the due process of bringing so many culprits to book. Let this be the day and occasion when we all stand in unison and say enough is enough and no more corruption to this country. The President has no option but to take action and firm action against anybody. I do not care whether he wants to be a President, Prime Minister or a prefect in a school as long as your name for long – a few individuals about five to seven every other day, the same individuals come up and are mentioned and they find their way onto the Front Bench. We are hesitant to conclude that if not well tackled, Ugandans will draw a conclusion that the President okays this kind of action. I know that he does not and I know that the NRM is not a party for corruption but a party to liberate this country and so, this is the occasion to stand firm and strong and to be heard. I thank you. (Applause)

5.00
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryadongo): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this long-awaited report. 

I will go straight away to the report on page 80 to make my observations on the settlement of Bududa landslide victims. Madam Speaker, it is very sad that today we are debating this report and as I talk now, out of the 603 households that were relocated or settled in that place, only 20 houses are fully complete and those houses were not built by the Office of the Prime Minister but by Habitat for Humanity. The houses that were built by the Office of the Prime Minister are incomplete without doors, windows and they are about 100 –(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: Shame.

MS KAHUNDE: So, the rest of the 500 households sleep outside with termites, rats and snakes –(Interjections)– and their tarpaulins are actually even worn out.

Madam Speaker, I wonder whether in this country we have a national M&E system. Do we have a national monitoring and evaluation framework and policy? Are they there? What are they doing? I want to support the committee’s recommendation that an engineering audit be carried out to establish – 

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Member for Mbale Municipality.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. When I had just come to Parliament during the Eighth Parliament, the landslides struck Bududa District and the people of Bududa were relocated to Kiryadongo where my colleague comes from. But it is very unfortunate that I speak with a lot of humility because the African Union gave in US$500,000 to the people of Bududa to be resettled in Kiryadongo but to the surprise of the people of Bududa, nobody even got a single cent. 

I beg to lay a press release that was issued in Addis Ababa concerning the US$500,000 which had been given to the people of Bududa and they never received anything. Madam Speaker, I also want to lay a Memorandum of Understanding where the African Union, after realising that the people of Bududa had suffered –

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Wamanga-Wamai, you have taken over hon. Kahunde’s time.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I am just laying the information on Table concerning a grant agreement between special emergency assistance fund for draught and famine in Africa and the Government of Uganda. I beg to lay. There is a press release that was issued in March 2010 announcing the US$500,000 which was meant for the people of Bududa and signed by our Ambassador in Addis Ababa. I beg to lay on Table.

THE SEPAKER: But hon. Wamanga-Wamai, was that a programme for Africa or for Bududa?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Bududa.

THE SPEAKER: It is for Bududa.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: It was specifically for the people of Bududa –

THE SPEAKER: Can you speak the date and the signatory so that they are on record.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, this press release was issued by the Ambassador of Uganda to Ethiopia, Ambassador Mull Katende and it was signed on 17 May 2010. Madam Speaker, the Office of the Prime minister sent signatories to Addis Ababa indicating which people would draw this money from the Central Bank and these names are mentioned here. The Permanent Secretary, Pius Bigirimana and Godfrey Kazinda, are the people who signed and withdrew this money. It is here.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you very much for that information. That is the status of the land slide victims relocated in Bududa. The situation is very alarming and they are sleeping outside because their tarpaulins are worn out. As the rains come, I do not know what will happen.

Madam Speaker, I think the people of Uganda are tired. People have lamented and talked a lot about corruption but what is now left is recovering these funds because if we talk and talk and just leave the matter like that - let their property be confiscated and we recover this money. It will also be a lesson to other people. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude because you are hosting the refugees.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was saying that it has become a habit where people steal money, they are mentioned and they go and enjoy VIP treatment in prison, read newspapers in courts and come out. This time round, I want to request the government to act and we recover these monies.

Madam Speaker, it is only in the Office of the Prime Minister that I have heard of huge sums of money exchanging hands without any kind of acknowledgement. If even a primary five pupil from a UPE school is able to tell you that some acknowledgement must be given, what is all this happening in the Office of the Prime Minister? I rest my case.

5.08
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee on Public Accounts for this detailed report. It is very clear from this report that the people of the North have never developed because of this corruption. If this money was all invested as planned for Northern Uganda, by now we would be very close to Kampala city but the money has all been eaten.

I thank the committee for the recommendations. They are very important and I think we should adopt all those recommendations and implement them. One is investigating those who are identified. From the report, the drivers and sweepers were getting billions. So, I recommend that all the people in the Prime Minister’s Office should be investigated. I am sure more culprits will be obtained.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank Bigirimana, the Permanent Secretary, for blowing the whistle but I would like to say he blew the whistle too late. What happened from 2010 up to 2013? He was the accounting officer but he did not know how much money was withdrawn from his account. So, he is responsible and he must be investigated. He might be among the people who might have taken that money. So, he cannot escape. He must be investigated. If he had blown the whistle earlier, I would excuse him but it was too late and a lot has gone down the road.

Madam Speaker, another recommendation is to restructure the Prime Minister’s Office. This office is supposed to monitor and evaluate but it has got 14 state ministers. What are they doing there? A lot of money is going there for Northern Uganda and for refugees. I think it is high time that the Office of the Prime Minister is restructured so that those ministers of state go to their respective ministries and we empower the Office of the Prime Minister to do its work of evaluation. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.11
MR MAJEGERE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I had the chance of reading this report last night and I almost collapsed in my sitting room. Even when you were a stranger and you visited Kazinda’s office, you would go away with Shs 100 million because the cashier would just come, drop it there and go away. This was the situation, which was pertaining in the OPM.

Madam Speaker, it is a very big challenge and those who are still saying that Bigirimana was a whistleblower should drop that because when you look at the first page, the background, the report is saying that the Auditor-General first requested for information because he wanted to do a value-for-money audit and Bigirimana refused. The Auditor-General had to write and that was after the media insisted on the mismanagement of funds in the Prime Minister’s Office. So it was not Bigirimana but the media that was a whistleblower. So, whoever is moving around saying that Bigirimana was a whistleblower should drop that.

You will even realise that when we got this internal auditor - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is some information.

MR WAIRA: Is it friendly? Okay. (Laughter)

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you so much, hon. Majegere for giving way and Madam Speaker, for giving hon. Majegere the time. I want to comment on what we are debating; the report and misuse of funds in Northern Uganda where Teso, a place I represent in this House, belongs. Out of over Shs 70 billion that this country has lost - even if I were not an accounting officer in the ministry, I think that when Government signs a memorandum of understanding with a donor, it is very specific on how monies are supposed to be spent.

Madam Speaker, since I came to this Parliament -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amongin, is that information or you are debating? I will give you your own time. You are now debating. I have seen you and I will give you your own time. Please conclude.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that protection. You realise in this report that we had got a messiah in the names of Wejula, the internal auditor but the PS wanted a guided audit saying, “Do not audit here, audit there.” For those who did not study accounts, I am trying to guide you that the PS wanted a guided audit. That is what he was telling this internal auditor; to audit here not there and when the man insisted on being professional, he was sent away.

Madam Speaker, in this report we have about 20 service providers but it is like one man was masquerading as all those service providers and this is very dangerous.

On the first page, Shs 39 billion was supposed to be transferred from Bank of Uganda to the Consolidated Fund but only Shs 10 billion was transferred; the rest was just diverted. And then somebody claims that he was just a whistleblower! And Article 164, as you are aware, confers all the responsibility on the accounting officer; you cannot say that you are a Permanent Secretary and yet you did not know while all this money was being taken. Activities are taking place and yet you have taken four weeks without signing any document and you cannot ask where people are getting money from - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can use just one more minute.

MR WAIRA: I am very grateful for that public outcry. Madam Speaker, if you are really in charge of your office – because the Prime Minister’s Office has got several activities; the justification they are giving is that he was not signing. But if you are a PS seated in office, activities are taking place and yet you signed for money two weeks back, won’t you ask where the money is coming from? So, the PS must be held accountable and indeed the committee was very lenient with their recommendations about the PS; they should have recommended for his interdiction and arrest. We can amend! I am told we have a provision to amend. I will be available to amend that recommendation. Thank you.

5.17
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this comprehensive report. I am looking forward to actions by Government and among them should be a reform in financial system, where the local governments are given only 15 percent of the National Budget and the bulk of the money remains at the central government. And when this money remains at the central government, we experience these types of things; that they cannot be managed – they are divided and stolen. I would like to see a reform in the amount of money that goes to the local governments.

The second reform that I would like to see is the reorganisation of the civil service; it looks like the civil servants are now more interested in accumulating wealth than in implementing government programmes, than serving the people as it were. Where are the values and ethics of civil service these days? I would like to see a reform in the way the civil service is organised.

The other action I would like to see is that Government finds funds to continue with the uncompleted projects. In Zombo, one of the projects was to construct staff quarters for the health staff and teachers and only two out of the 10 identified projects were completed – albeit with a lot of shoddy work. But I would like to see that even the eight projects that were identified are completed. This is because that is how the programme was planned and, therefore, I would not like to support the committee’s recommendation which says that the hydraform machine - that is Zombo now - should be taken to Gulu at the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre. I would rather suggest that that hydraform machine should be retained in Zombo District where six youths were specifically trained on how to use it so that it implements the projects based there. This will enable these youths to get income because the district can be able to complete those projects.

I suggest that the OPM sticks to its role of coordinating, monitoring and evaluation rather than implementation. Let it delegate the implementation to the local governments because that is their main role. Why are we depriving them of that role and yet from the centre we cannot do implementation? A lot of projects have not been implemented to the tune of what has been planned. 

5.20
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in appreciating the committee for this report. I also thank the Auditor-General’s O4nffice for doing the technical work.

I will base my contribution on page 27, particularly in regard to the role of Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance and the Office of the Prime Minister as far as the transfers of these stolen monies are concerned. This report is talking about monies meant for the people of Northern Uganda to recover from the effects of the LRA war and whoever dipped his fingers into the monies which were meant for our people to recover, may God strike this person to follow those who have died. (Laughter) I remember very well that time I was still a student; I spent two nights at Pakwach when we could not cross from Karuma to Pakwach. 

Madam Speaker, I speak with pain because here, it is stated that Bank of Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the Government represented by the Ministry of Finance. The two parties agree to the terms and conditions of banking relationship under the provisions of Bank of Uganda Act. Under this arrangement, money amounting to between Shs 15-20 million, if it were to be paid in cash, was to be confirmed first. But in the report, we are told that 61 non-cash payments, totalling to about Shs 10.9 billion were not confirmed with any of the signatories. What does this mean? That some individuals within Bank of Uganda connived with some individuals in the Ministry of Finance and some individuals in the Office of the Prime Minister to swindle money. And, therefore, I concur with the committee in saying that those individuals be held culpable and responsible for those losses we incurred, as people from Northern Uganda in this regard.

We are told, according to the MoU, that somebody was supposed to verify signatures for any transactions that were to be made. But when you look at the observations made under this item, it was noted that there was gross negligence of duty of the officers in charge of signature verification in Bank of Uganda and high suspicion of collusion with OPM - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can use just one more minute to conclude.

MR ATIKU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, when you compare these, you will find that 80 percent of these instruments were approved by the substantive deputy director banking – that is Mr Milton Opio – and 20 percent by others. And it is within this racket that Kazinda’s role comes on board, where the PS actually delegated his powers and Kazinda was daily withdrawing over Shs 100 million. And when you calculate this, it comes to over Shs 3 billion per month yet the imprest that was supposed to be withdrawn has a limit of about Shs 20 million. So, you can see that the PS of the OPM had a direct hand in this and there is no doubt that they hurriedly arrested Kazinda and took him to Luzira so that he can parade himself around as a whistleblower. 

I want to dismiss this tone that has been attached to the PS as a whistleblower. As somebody who comes from Northern Uganda and particularly West Nile, who had started feeling the fruits of PRDP, I want that Pius Bigirimana be withdrawn from wherever he has been transferred and be prosecuted and be brought to book to recover these losses because PRDP was a good initiative and we all believed in it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.26
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for a very comprehensive report but also hon. Ssewungu for a very conclusive minority report. I believe this is the time that Parliament should be seen as being more serious against corruption. How long should we sit here talking about the same suspect: oil, the same suspect, Temangalo, the same suspect, CHOGM we had the same suspect – Madam Speaker, do we have people as experts in their positions so that if they are removed, the nation will suffer even when they are suspected to be swindling taxpayers’ money? 

Madam Speaker, I am making my case in reference to page 46 of the report. On that page, Shs 3 billion that was transferred to some account called the post-conflict account and processed as office imprest in the Karamoja Department – actually in the end it was paid to a company called LR Group. It sounds like an abbreviation but that is how it was put - the LR Group, a private company that was contracted for cattle theft prevention. The report falls short of telling us how this company was doing that work. 

The Permanent Secretary admitted authorising that money but he is quoted on the same page saying that he was under pressure. I do not think LR Group, a private company, could put a senior civil servant on pressure to pay them Shs 3 billion. This money was originally put as office imprest and eventually went to a company called LR Group that prevents theft of cattle in the country. 

The Permanent Secretary fell short of telling us who was putting him on pressure. But it is evident enough that this was political pressure. The political head of the OPM is Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi. Initially, he came here to make a personal statement. He was invited by the committee –(Member timed out_)

5.30
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this indepth report. I stand before this august House to make a special appeal to fellow countrymen that as a country, we are headed to doom. We need to stand together as a country. This is a moment of sorrow. I tell you, fellow countrymen and women that the theft of PRDP funds is worse than Kony. 

What we went through was so painful. I remember that we made appeals across the country, and abroad saying that the people of Northern Uganda are in pathetic conditions. We cried out that a whole generation was going to be wiped out – that the culture had been distorted and the healing had not been done; but now salt is being added to the wound. 

Madam Speaker, I remember I raised the issue of the Achwa Bridge, found in the constituency of my colleague hon. Franca. I was ridiculed here by colleagues calling it politics until you intervened and said you had seen it yourself; hence, the bridge was made. Now, unless you have been in that part of the country, fellow countrymen and women, you may not appreciate the pain that our people go through. Yet the truth is that as we are suffering, another part of the country is suffering from another disease due to mishandling of public funds. Therefore, this is the unifying factor. Cry with us today, we shall cry with you when the time comes. 

It is sad to note that the funds which were meant to create peace and security and give development have turned out to be prey to looters. On page 9 of the report, the report said that the money was sent to a dormant account and the OPM went on a spending spree spending; too much money for the wrong people. They went to the extent of asking their staff: “Do you need some money? Get some advance, we shall account for it later -” –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, finish your point.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for you motherly intervention. The money was supposed to cater for health and education; the children under PRDP have stopped on the way. The children of Northern Uganda are nodding and there is nothing in hospitals; the mothers are dying. Can we have a conscience for the people of Northern Uganda? 

My good friend the Prime Minister, I am looking at you with a motherly eye; couldn’t you have taken political responsibility over this? Couldn’t you have compelled Bigirimana to take responsibility; couldn’t you have compelled Kazinda to come and give information to this country? What are you doing as a Government to re-instate the funds? The buildings are standing incomplete; the children are still nodding and the mothers are dying. What plan do you have to give back this money so that the planned activities of this part of the country can continue? God bless you as you think about it. 

5.38
MR STEVEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a good work they have done. This report is another eye opener to the people of Uganda. 

Madam speaker, also permit me in a special way to join the people of Serere who this morning called me and said they were happy that this time round the President penned down his signature on the anti-homosexuality bill. It came because during recess I received a copy of that 8-paged letter which the president had written, I shared with the people of Serere and they were so disturbed. So this time round they saw he had changed his mind and had signed they were happy. 

Today I want the President to again give the people of Teso, the people of Northern Uganda another gift by at least this time turning around and abandoning Mr Bigirimana and he is brought to book, that will be a very big gift to the people of Northern Uganda. I want the President to look into it, revisit his mind because it is now very clear that Mr Bigirimana is not a whistleblower, he was a thief and is still a thief because here he admits each and everything he had refused at first. 

On page 44 to 45 you look at how Mr Bigirimana accepted to release Shs 1.8 billion for the purchase of cars, and my question is; when these things were happening, it would have been good to buy cars for the Prime minister, the ministers, the lead car and the rest, but how many times does this Mercedes Benz step in Northern Uganda? It has never stepped in Northern Uganda. So for what use was it for us to purchase a Mercedes Benz with PRDP money which was meant to help the people of Northern Uganda and that Mercedes Benz is staying here, for what use? 

This is blood money. Our people lost lives and we thought PRDP as master plan was going to help our people. I participated in PRDP formation. I was there when I was still in the district. What we agreed on is not what has happened. 

If you look at how the monies were passing through Bigirimana; Shs 3 Billion on page 46, Shs 6.2 billion, a lot of billions of money were going out and the PS was watching, the prime minister was there, he has ministers and we should have avoided this.  When you look at what happened in Bududa, the beneficiaries who were supposed to have benefited –(Member timed out_)

5.40
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (IND, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much Rt Hon. Speaker, and also I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have quite gone through the report and I have found incredible figures of money which were placed in wrong places. It is written on page 7 that out of the Shs 39 billion, only 10 billion was transferred to the Consolidated Fund against the joint agreement which was made. On page 8 out of the Shs 36 billion, only Shs 11 billion was transferred to dormant accounts and so on.
 
It makes me ask a question whether ministers have powers in their respective ministries, whether politicians really have power in their respective ministries or their different sections. When I read the constitution, Article 111 the first sub article, it says, “There shall be a cabinet which shall consist of the President, the vice president, the prime minister, and such number of ministers as may appear to the president to be reasonably necessary for the efficient running of the state.” 

And the words “efficient running of the state” to me sound very important here. I want to ask the cabinet headed by the Prime Minister here whether according to this report you think you were efficiently in charge of the state resources. 

We cannot talk about efficiency unless we talk about the way we use our resources as a state. I am wondering whether you are convinced that actually you are performing your duties as you are supposed to do. Many times corruption has happened and politicians have always tended to hide behind the civil servants. It also happens at districts actually that when you are trying to trace the money, the politicians will say it was the CAO, it was the PS and so on. I want to take this opportunity to request you because we have the anti-corruption amendment bill, in this bill there was an effort to try to bring in a way that can capture politicians who try to hide behind the people when they are stealing money and actually we know who exerts the pressure, we know where it comes from and I think the earlier this Bill came, the better for this country. (Member timed out_)

5.42
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, this is a very famous topic in this House. Surprisingly, we always talk about the commonest people in this House on these matters. 
I tend to ask myself, we have seen so many people turn to Jesus I do not know if it is not the right time for some people to turn to Jesus because He is about to come back anyway. I want to support the report because they have promised us Jesus is coming back very soon, why don’t you really be fast and go to Him because that is all that you’ve remained to have. This is because for us we have lost confidence in you, we have talked about these things but you do not seem to listen. 

I want to agree with the committee in the report, but I want to look at page 6, recommendation 36 where they are trying to say that Bank of Uganda should be held responsible. BOU is an institution. I would want the committee to point out the particular individual who is responsible for this transaction. 

We are aware that in the committee and why the name of the Prime Minister is coming up over and over again, that he pressed the PS Mr Bigirimana to buy for him the hot car. It is on Hansard and on the minutes of the committee that you pressed this man to buy for you that car as though there were no other cars and as though you did not have a heart for the people of Bududa to have homes which are decent.
 
Recently in the UK there is a minister who was housing an illegal immigrant as his house girl, and when the law caught up with him, he did not know, that he had an illegal immigrant in his home as a maid. This senator resigned. I want to ask my friend hon. Amama Mbabazi consistently your name has been coming on this floor. It is a topic everywhere, even in bars, even in health clubs, on streets, your name is sounding badly, isn’t it time for you? Do you not sympathise with yourself really on this matter, and say “Enough is enough. My name should be clean once and for all.” Can’t we really feel for Ugandans who have lost so much? There is a song I like about the late Lucky Dube, it says “What type of a rich man you are, who doesn’t care about the helpless people?” The northern people are crying, the Bududa people are unsettled; they have all sorts of problems. What type of rich men are you? What type of rich Ugandans are you, who do not care about this country? Enough is enough. (Member timed out_)

5.45
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): I thank you very much Rt Hon. Speaker. First of all, I want to commend the committee that came up with this work and also add my voice to what the colleagues have said in regards to the corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister.

As I stand to speak here today, Teso - Ngora – a district that I represent in this House lost billions having signed contracts under the BUDS programme to support communities. That programme that was going to support the very vulnerable and needy – actually, as I speak, I feel like shedding tears because to me, I believe that if Government got this money for a particular programme - and the lawyers who are in this House know that diversion is an offence. However, I want us to sober up. 

From the time that I came into this House, there have been so many corruption allegations in the different sectors of Government and not necessarily OPM alone. Even when we do our oversight role as Members of Parliament, I have never been told that this and this has been resolved. We sing a song in this House and yes, I want to respect the recommendations that this committee has come up with and it is my prayer that these recommendations are implicated.

To me, I think that in this particular case of OPM, I have heard people really debating around the name of John Amama Mbabazi so much. Of course as the political head of the Office of the Prime Minster, he could in one way or another messed – I do not want to be the one to talk on his behalf but I want us to go deep into this matter. In the Office of the Prime Minister, who has touched what? In this report of course names have been put here; the like of Kazinda, Bigirimana, Bwoch. We want to know that all those people whose names have been mentioned in this report- to what extent has a relevant body gone in handling and the recovery because going to jail alone is not enough. We need to know that – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute to conclude.

MS AMONGIN: We need to know that Kazinda was taken to Luzira and he left a lot of money in his house like I heard, has that money been recovered? Where has it been taken? The Prime Minister is not alone in this ministry. He works with technical people and so, when we are debating this, we have to be very genuine as so many events have taken place.

As I conclude, I think that it is very imperative that a clear investigation – (Interjections) - yes, because if we just go by this, you will find that there is a lot of dirt that could not have been mentioned here. We need a very clear investigation and a report back mechanism - (Member timed out_)

5.50
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleague to thank the committee for the good report.

It hurts and it is too painful to see a criminal, corrupt official moving freely in public and being embraced as a hero although he is in another ministry and that is PS Pius Bigirimana. 

Let us just leave the Prime Minister alone but the real thug is Pius Bigirimana, the accounting officer. Leave alone the Kazinda issue but Pius Bigirimana as the accounting officer and the person who is holding the key to the safe is the thug.

Madam Speaker, if you look at Page 54 of the report showing imprest withdrawals. According to IFMIS, authorised withdrawals for the month is just Shs 96.3 million but Bigirimana as a permanent secretary went on – in fact, look at the withdrawals of October 2001, it is above the imprest withdrawal limit and Bigirimana calls himself a whistleblower in this issue. It is high time that Pius Bigirimana should come to the public and apologise to the people of Northern Uganda.

Article 164 (2) of the Constitution makes Bigirimana as the PS liable for these funds and it reads, “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” 

Under Article 164 (1) - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much. I have seen the observation and recommendation of the committee. Mr Bigirimana should not be only liable for the losses but also should be legally sanctioned.

Bigirimana should be interdicted immediately after passing these recommendations here. Otherwise, it really hurts – I take the information.

THE SPEAKER: Information from a neighbour.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kafuda for allowing me to give this information. 

I still vividly remember when the names of the accounting officers were laid before this House on the request by Parliament. Parliament advised that Bigirimana should not be allowed to continue touching money as an accounting officer. Actually, Parliament requested that Bigirimana be interdicted but I am still surprised that Bigirimana continues to touch the money and that Bigirimana has now been named star performer by the President. So, the information is that actually, the recommendation you are giving - Parliament had expressed fears by not allowing him to touch money.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, hon. Kiiza for the information. Madam Speaker, I think it is time for Parliament to act and these recommendations should be implemented. We cannot see criminals moving freely in public when other people are suffering.

Again on page 54, after Bigirimana had seen that Kazinda was becoming a problem, he ordered for his transfer. How can you transfer a criminal? A criminal is supposed to be interdicted. How can you transfer a criminal from one ministry to another? In fact, the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi helped by blocking that transfer. Otherwise, we would not have got the information. They were going to -

Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi made a good suggestion in keeping Kazinda –(Member timed out_)

5.57
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to begin by thanking the committee for accomplishing a very difficult job and for doing it very zealously and coming up with reports. I want to go to the specifics and say that this fraud was initiated by people who were extremely clever. It was run by a racket, which is highly seasoned in respect to stealing and covering up. They duped almost everybody including security by not submitting what was required to the committee.

I want us to look at page 12; recommendations where we begin with 21 and Ms Mariam Kiggundu as the person in the first line. The whole racket is from the Office of the Prime Minister, the Treasury and Bank of Uganda. The actors were so clever that after acting, they put some people in the firing line then they came behind. That is why on this page, the committee begins in the middle by identifying Mariam Kiggundu as the initiator of the deal but I want to lay a document on Table. 

I did not find, attached in the main report, how the whole deal was initiated. The deal was initiated by a one Arthur Mumanyire generating an email and sending it to a one Mubarak who then requested Mariam Kiggundu to author a requisition. So, you can now see that the committee began from the middle and actually, left the prominent causers of the problem.

I say they were so clever to the extent that they hid their faces and put others in the firing line. The initiator of this email signed it by putting the name of Geoffrey Kazinda purporting that it was Kazinda while forgetting that when you retrieve an email, it actually shows the author and where it comes from. To that effect, the conclusions made on page 12 are not only haphazard but I think they are also misleading as a conclusion.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this on Table for our consumption. Like I said, this was the beginning of the thuggery.

I also want to refer you to page 19 and to documents marked 7, 8 and 10. Seven is the one allegedly initiated by Pius Bigirimana requesting for the payment. Unfortunately, that very document is one of those, which were categorised by the handwriting experts as being a forgery. When you move to documents (8) and (10), this is now the certification or approval for payment in Bank of Uganda. Who were the persons who were approving? There is one Opio and another, the Accountant General Mr Bwoch.

Like I said, in Bank of Uganda, the Director of Banking is Mr Chemonges who was there but the planners made sure they skipped him because earlier on when they requested, Mr Chemonges wrote back requesting verification –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Two more minutes.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I have very important information, thank you very much. If you look at document (7), which was allegedly written by Pius Bigirimana, it is requesting for funds to be put on an account ending with 0038 but get interested and look at documents (8) and (10) apparently approved by the Accountant General and the Deputy Director, Banking. Where did they put these funds? They put these funds on different accounts from those allegedly requested by Pius Bigirimana and only those, which were actually created by the original email, which I have spoken about by Arthur Mumanyire. You can now see that the racket of thugs is out of the plane and they are now leaving other people who were actually implementing.

Madam Speaker, after generating these requests, it only took three days to pay the Shs 14 billion and also the Shs 26.9 billion and the deal was done in the first place. But in this report, that is not captured.

What I would like to ask is, are we really addressing the cause of the matter - because my interest in the whole of this scam is not to come here and make statements. My interest would be physical recovery and it depends on how we tread. If we do not tread very carefully, then we lose the whole trend. If we tread very carefully, we will achieve.

Madam Speaker, I want to draw your attention to the earlier case, which you had here; the case involving a one Severino when he took this Parliament to court. I remember one of the issues where court directed that Parliament acted as prosecutor, judge and jury. That depended upon the language, which was used by some Members of Parliament and I wanted to caution my colleagues to restrain ourselves from calling people thieves – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you lay the document?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I have here an email downloaded from gmail accounts of one Arthur Mumanyire apparently sent to a one Mubarak and the content is, “Dear Mr Mubarak, refer to our discussion this afternoon. Sorry my email kept bouncing. Please, credit grant proceeds to the account details as shown below. Account title: National Policy for Disaster Management, Bank of Uganda; Account No. 00000300880000013.” And this is the account.  It is dated Wednesday, 15 June 2011 at 5.06 p.m. I beg to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: No, how is that connected to this matter?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, the account referred to here is where the clearances by Mr Bwoch, the Accountant-General and Mr Opio cleared and sent the money to, whereas the request by Mr Pius Bigirimana was to send this money to another account; instead, it went to this account.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know you are one of the advocates for transparency and I am looking forward to a day when Parliament will have its own radio and TV so that the people of Uganda will be watching our debates. In the current circumstances, we are depending on UBC, NTV and others; it is now 6.00 O’clock and these stations have been switched off. And yet, the debate we have now is about transparency and the people of Northern Uganda are watching us. Now that they have switched us off, they cannot see what we are doing and so they may assume we are not talking for them.

So, the point of procedure I am raising is, won’t it be procedurally right to suspend this to tomorrow so that when we start at 2.30 p.m. the people of Northern Uganda will watch us as we debate. This is because one of the easiest ways to scare a thief is to tell him so in public so that he knows that he has been seen. But now under these circumstances, we have a lot of stuff to discuss and the people of Northern Uganda will not see. I am begging your indulgence to have debate suspended up to tomorrow. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have the Hansard. Let us hear from hon. Nakabaale.

6.08
MR PATRICK NAKABAALE (NRM, Youth Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for its work. Having read the report and heard from Members, I wish to bring to the attention of the House and the public too that we need to furthermore analyse the amount of time it takes to produce consolidated figures; time it takes to report; time of whistle blowing, investigations, prosecution, jailing and also parliamentary debates.

I am raising the issue of time because, indeed, the number of issues that would have benefited us, including the valuable data, the victims – even when we talk of our anxiety to have refunds – the more we delay on these issues, the more we expose our people to more suffering. So, as we address this vice of corruption, we need to address the amount of time we spend on this process.

Furthermore, I would like to interest Members in cross-departmental and bank transactions. The cardinal question I would ask here is: Who informs spending decisions? This is where we breed corruption. And basing on this, I would wish to urge the Treasury to immediately take stock of accounting standards and normal accounting rules that Government uses, especially, the MDAs because this will go a long way in the management of public finances. I would wish to see the Treasury coming up to tell us what action it is taking in improving performances as far as areas of financial discipline are concerned; financial management function in order to minimise losses, fraud and errors.

I wish to agree with Members that as we address the issue of embezzlement and corruption, we need not only to look at accounting remedies, legal addresses but also economic approaches. The approaches we are talking about here – it sounds weird that just in a couple of months, you find somebody is loaded with money. When we are going to address this - that is why I highly recommend and agree with the mover who says we should confiscate people’s property in circumstances that they are proved to be guilty. 

I wish to agree with the Member who mentioned it before here, especially the mover of the Anti-Corruption (Amendment) Bill, hon. Ssimbwa that as we are talking about this, we do not have to show fear or favour when it comes to misuse of public funds –(Member timed out_)

6.12
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join you, Members, in thanking the committee for its thorough work. And indeed, if this work was done before we had lost this money, we would not have lost anything because we are now enlightened. But since the nasty activities started in 2009; the report indicates from 2009 to 2012. That means the stealing of the funds started even before the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi was appointed. It looks like Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi joined a rotten office and he became almost – (Interjections) - he is not rotten but almost. (Laughter) I am sorry but he is almost there.

The person called Bigirimana was charged with the duty of purchasing vehicles. And when he was given this duty, according to the report, he consulted the Secretary to the Treasury to identify where the money would come from. And the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Kassami, advised that they could spend from anywhere as long as they would refund the money. But this report is not implicating Mr Kassami who instructed the diversion of funds, which caused a big hole in the PRDP project. I do not know why this anomaly was not indicated.

Then the other one is on page 83; I wonder why the law is not clear – there are many people in this report who have swindled money but have died. The money was stolen but these people have decided to die. (Laughter) If you looked at page 83, where money was meant to be given to the First Lady, who is the Minister for Karamoja, to travel nine times to Israel but she denied the allegation. But the money was released to a Boniface Obbo. But now, it is indicated that this man died although there are some rumours that he is still alive. How can you decide to die when you are alive? (Laughter) We must cause further investigations.  (Member timed out.)

6.15
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a few comments from the report. This Government servant called Bigirimana at one time made a press release saying that the money used to buy vehicles for the Prime Minister was not got from PRDP. But report today indicates that the money was got from there. This is a civil servant who was in the Prime Minister’s Office and already suspected; then he was transferred to another minister and today, he is exciting the Executive and our youth that he is going to run a new youth venture programme. 

He is diverting the minds of Ugandans to start looking at him as a hero. He took three years before being a whistleblower. I suspect that he does this intentionally to divert the Executive so we can take him as a hero. 

In the same way, there was collusion of OPM, Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. One gentleman, by that time, a Deputy Secretary to Treasury is mentioned here. Very few days later, he was promoted to a Permanent Secretary and Bigirimana was transferred. Kazinda was taken to prison and then the other one died. Three people are involved in this syndicate. Any reasonable person would conclude that there was something wrong and there was no reason to hold this gentleman Bigirimana and taking him for a hero. 

It has been mentioned here that Parliament advised the Executive to set Bigirimana aside but the executive continued to re-appoint him and transferred him. I request the Executive in good faith and for the good of Uganda – this gentleman called Bigirimana, it is not depicting well –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, finish that point.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is an excuse in Central Government that local Government have no capacity to execute certain programmes and they have always kept about 70 per cent of the monies. I do not see the expertise in them that is beyond the local governments. 

Therefore, I recommend that they send that money to the local government because they have failed to show their expertise in managing it. Secondly, we blacklist these companies that were responsible for procurement. There are companies read in here that were involved; they should be blacklisted and sent out of business. 

Lastly, let us recover the money as a matter of urgency and I hope the Prime Minister will explain how far they have gone in recovery of the money. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.19
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. After reading the committee report, I want to thank them. But I realise this was a well-coordinated and executed theft by staff from the OPM, Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. As NRM, I think this is the last wakeup call for us to act against the hyenas. If we do not do it, people will continue to steal money as if there is no Government. 

When you look at page no.1: “Attempts for the Auditor-General to audit some accounts in the OPM was rejected in 2011”. It was not until the Auditor-General evoked Article 41 that the Permanent Secretary OPM allowed the Auditor-General to audit them. This pins the PS, Mr Bigirimana, as the first suspect because he knew the rot that was going on and he was trying to protect it. 

These people decided to transfer funds to dormant accounts to use them the way they wanted, yet they knew the regulations on the use of the funds. The OPM, instead of coordinating and monitoring turned itself into an implementing agency. In Lango, for example, almost all districts had a budget cut of over Shs 1 billion each and yet, money was being used by these staff the way they wanted with a lot of forgery. Even donor funds were transferred and used recklessly, like hon. Okot said. 

My concern is and I put this to the Prime Minister. There are staff who have been mentioned and even acknowledged, like Vincent Wagoya who received over Shs 74 million, over Shs 45 million, over Shs 50 million and he was the one coordinating the activities of Geoffrey Kazinda. He is still there up to now, in the OPM, in the disaster section. And he is still continuing to plan and coordinate thefts.
 
My question is, there are some in prison; there are those who have been mentioned and those at large like – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude hon. Ayo. 

MR AYOO: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why can’t you act and clean up the ministry? Get these people who participated in this thuggery, even before you were there, out, have them interdicted and bring in new people and we see how to move forward. Don’t you have the powers to clean up the ministry? If you do not have the powers, we can give it to you as Parliament so that you can clean that ministry. 

If they continue there, I tell you, these people should be planning to dupe Government to buy land from Bulambuli at a cost of over Shs 8 billion. But this land was rejected by Odwedo’s report. They are even intending to buy land, which is over 90 per cent wetland or waterlogged to settle people from Bududa there. So, we should act on such people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.24
COL PHINEHAS KATIRIMA (UPDF REPRESENTATIVE): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue, which I think needs all our effort in order to resolve. When you read this report, you see a lot of collusion not only in one ministry but several departments of Government and this is only one here, we have heard it also in other ministries like Health, Public Service and so on. 

Madam Speaker, when we had a problem with the Army in Uganda, we did something about it and it is known; when the Tanzanians had a problem with their Army, they sent the whole Army home and remained with one captain and it was a basis for building the strong PPDF. Why can’t we start a war against the Civil Service – the Civil Service; this big army of the civil service and overhaul it. Why can’t we give amnesty for every senior civil servant who may or may not have stolen to voluntarily retire and go home, and if you insist, we investigate you, and put you to strict to prove about the wealth you have. Why can’t we clean the civil service? 

When we had a problem in the Uganda Revenue Authority, we did something about it. When we heard something about the intelligence organisations, we did something about it. When we were unhappy with what was happening in the police? You can see some reforms taking place. 

When we were heartbroken by the KCC you have seen some reforms taking place. Why can’t we move against the civil service? Why can’t we clean it up? Why can’t we give them money because they say they steal over Shs 500 billion? Why don’t we give them this money openly and they go home? Why don’t we use this money and hire experts to come and do public service work for some time and compare notes. Why don’t we promote the juniors and leave all these senior people who can’t control the money to go home? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.27
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman representative Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this report, but also hasten to say that as much as we now lament, I do not know whether we will be able recover this money, but as we lament I think it is important for this house to require government or for us to know from Government what has been done about this report since it came out from the Auditor General. Madam speaker, first and foremost I really want to know from Government. A lot of money of course was removed from the PRDP fund and this money was meant to help those people in northern including my district who are recovering from the wars that have been in northern Uganda. 

So I want to know whether this money has been restored, that Government has put back this money to the PRDP account as we sort out the mess that we got ourselves into. Secondly, I also want to know since this report was released what measures government has taken especially on the culprits mentioned in this report. 

Thirdly, I would like to know what control, because we need to stop this carnage has been put in place to ensure that we don’t see this kind of loss again coming up with our meagre resources that we have as government trying to utilise this money for the development of this country and for the benefit of all. 

I also want to look at this report, I am looking at the recommendation by the committee on page 35, recommendation 70 on Bank of Uganda, and here the committee is saying that Bank of Uganda be held responsible for causing financial loss by failing to execute terms of the MoU. 

Who is Bank of Uganda? How do you hold a whole institution responsible? I believe there are some individuals who were given responsibilities. So we need to get down, the committee needs to advise us as to who – 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, it is indeed frustrating when you simply say Bank of Uganda yet in BOU we know there are some people who tried to do due diligence. I want to give an example. Document 26 an attachment to this report when there was a request for multiple withdraws of cash, director banking Mr John Chemonges wrote to secretary to treasury seeking clarification, But when there was a request for cash withdraw, on the other hand originated by Kazinda, one Opio simply acknowledged all the very requests and said; I have consulted with Kazinda (fifty), so when you say BOU you are really leaving it raw. You are not going down to the bottom of the matter. Thank you.

MS AKOL: Thank you for the information. So, Madam Speaker, I need the committee to clear who in BOU because I do not think BOU as an institution is responsible.

MR AKORA: Thank you, hon. Member, for giving way. I thought I should give clarification or information on our position with regard to BOU. The starting point is that there was an MoU between BOU and the Ministry of Finance to provide banking services to government. Under that MoU, BOU made certain undertakings. One of the undertakings was that for any cash payments above 15 million and any non-cash payments like paying suppliers above 20 million, they should confirm the payment.

 In a number of respects there was no confirmation made. There is an amount that is cited of Shs 10.9 billion which BOU did not confirm. These were huge sums of money they were actually transferred from one account to another in the Office of the Prime minister initiated by Kazinda. The bank indicated explaining to the committee that the reason why they did not seek confirmation was that there were low risk inter-count transfers, that it enabled these people to transfer money from the holding account which was not an OPM account, it was a treasury account into dormant OPM account. Then the funds left the treasury they were now under the control of the PS and Mr Kazinda and in a number of respects Mr Kazinda uttered false forged documents to make payments against those funds that were released. Secondly, the biggest diversion-

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Chair, I think the question the honourable member asked, yes she accepts that it’s a legal entity but through whom were they acting? There must have been somebody acting for the Bank of Uganda. That is what hon. Bako wants to know.

MR AKORA: The institution is saying, “We didn’t consider that this merited confirmation” so we find they were negligent – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Maxwell Akora, the Bank of Uganda cannot lift itself and go to a meeting; there must have been somebody who was supposed to execute the agreement, who signed it, that is what she is asking. Who in the Bank of Uganda acted or didn’t act? That is what she is asking.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I just want to add something on what hon. Maxwell Akora is saying. In BOU there is one of the directors, director governor a gentleman called Milton Opio, whose responsibility among others was to do the confirmation. I will want to engage honourable colleagues as to why we came up with this type of recommendation. We were conscious of the amount of the figures involved that even if we went for these individuals we will be hitting a rock. Since BOU is body corporate, it can sue and be sued we decided that in order for PRDP money to be recovered, we task BOU because they were the ones who signed the memorandum of understanding as to how they were going to assist government in ensuring that their money is safe. They undertook it as a body.

THE SPEAKER: Who signed the MoU on behalf of the BOU? Was it just there? Who signed it?
 
MR WADRI: I have the document. I can once again tender it to show who exactly signed on behalf of BOU. But otherwise the person charged with the responsibility of confirming statements is Opio Milton.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am happy the chairman PAC was trying to explain the BOU; an institution cannot commit a crime.

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, an institution cannot commit a crime; Parliament cannot commit a crime but it is staff or Members of Parliament who commit a crime. In this case of Bank of Uganda, even if you are raising an institutional issue, there are individuals who committed a crime and these are the people who should be held liable. In fact, if you do not remove them now, they can commit more crimes tomorrow. You may not recover but they must be removed in advance.

So, Madam Speaker, my Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee should really tell the people not an institution. Bank of Uganda cannot commit a crime.

MR AKORA: Madam Speaker, can I give further clarification? I should give further clarification on two issues.
 
THE SPEAKER: There is some information on this side. Information.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Akora. In October last year, I came into the possession of a list of individuals that were submitted to the Prime Minister’s Office for interdiction – a list of officers from the Ministry of Finance, Bank of Uganda and Office of the Prime Minister and I did, at that time, ask the Prime Minister what actions he had taken because it was written to the Prime Minister by the Director of CIID, Ms Grace Akullo. Today, it does not do injustice to any and I will lay that list here. 

Before I lay again for the second time, the list of 72 officials, let me read the three officials from Bank of Uganda mentioned by the Director CIID in her report and asking the Prime Minister to take action and interdict as investigations continue. As we speak today, the files have been sent to the DPP but these people are still seated in the office and these are Mr Milton Opio, the Deputy Director for Banking, Mrs Bahena who was before Mr Opio a Deputy Director for Banking and then, there was Ms Rita Byabazaire who was also the Deputy Director for Banking. So, these are the three people who should have been mentioned other than just lumping because CIID is investigating and did submit these names to the Prime Minister’s Office for the interdiction.  

So, Madam Speaker, here is a list of 72 people; from the Prime Minister’s Office, Ministry of Finance and then Bank of Uganda. This is what was submitted. We would also want to know what action or why they have not interdicted these people here apart from Kazinda who is in Luzira. Mr Bigirimana is number four on the list here. I will lay this list; the list of officials from the Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance and Bank of Uganda. I beg to lay this on Table, again.      

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I thank you. I want to –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Akora, you will answer later. Let her finish her point.

MS AKOL: I would like to thank Members for those clarifications. The question that I am putting to the committee is; why do you chose to name others and not name some especially when these names came before the committee as evidence by that report laid by hon. Okupa? We need to know that one.

Then, Madam Speaker, the responsibilities –

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Akol. Madam Speaker, I just want to make a correction. The information that I laid here, I got through my own sources. I do not know whether it came to the hands of the committee or not but I got it through my sources and that is why I laid it last time here. But of course that time, I laid it on the Table here in October. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Okupa, when you laid it, it became property of this House and was accessible to the committee. It was accessible to them because it was our property. 

MS AKOL: Thank you for those clarifications. I also want to know from the committee; this is a report that is based on the investigations of the Auditor-General but there is nowhere in this report where there is any reference or any statement from the Auditor-General’s report and yet the basis for this report is the investigative report of the Auditor-General. Why? We need to know because ordinarily, the basis for your report is that report –(Interjections)– can I give you later?

Then, Madam Speaker, some members or some of the officers, I think, are just being incriminated for the work they are supposed to do. When there is a racket or collusion in the system, even the controls you put into place may not discover any error because there is collusion.

Now, the national authorising officer - here there is a recommendation for causing financial loss and that is for the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury just because he wrote a letter authorising 100 million to be withdrawn. Assume he gave it to Institution “B” and also to the Office of the Prime Minister and Institution “B” does the right thing, would you blame the national authorising officer? I do not think so because he has done it because it is part of his duties.

So, I think that we get to the depth of the matter other than blaming someone who is just doing part of his work. That is what I really wanted to say here. And, there is a clarification here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, hon. Ssemujju, hon. Maganda – is that information?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I want to clarify on some of the issues that have been raised. If you remember when I presented this report on Wednesday, I laid on Table a number of documents including the Auditor-General’s report and I have my own working copy here. If you want me to go and again photocopy this and lay it, I will be more than willing. Otherwise, I laid every document including the transcribed copies of the Hansard. They were all brought here. 

So, that is the information my sister.

6.43
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you. I am glad that today we are debating this report because for most members of this House who do not come from Northern Uganda and have been participating in allocating money since 2005 to Northern Uganda had been wondering why the money was being given to Northern Uganda but they were not seeing transformation. Why should we keep giving money to Northern Uganda when we are not seeing the outcome of the money? This, people have been asking.  

I want to implore that let this debate be bipartisan because this racket is not only in the Office of the Prime Minister. We have seen the racket of Shs 63 billion on the pension scam –(Interjections)– Shs 160 billion? Shs 50 billion in the Office of the Prime Minister. It is a racket and a racket that we must deal with as a Parliament and I hope that nobody will stand here to start defending somebody because we are debating this particular one because tomorrow, we are going to debate the one in local government and pension.

Madam Speaker, it disheartens that the money meant to rehabilitate Northern Uganda and for some of us leaders who have been standing firm and begging donors – some of us have travelled to beg donors to give this money and you do this without even shame!  

I want to say that we must ensure that those who should take responsibility should all take. Bigirimana is not only mentioned in the report of the Auditor-General. You must recall that after the donors’ money was stolen, they brought in their experts and did their investigations and Mr Bigirimana was mentioned. Actually, that is why donors decided to suspend money to the Government of Uganda. This is the reason donors decided to say that if Mr Bigirimana was still in the Office of the Prime Minister, they were not giving Uganda more money. 

Instead of interdicting him with all the evidence, they decided to transfer him. Where is the political will? Why are you protecting Mr Bigirimana, one person? Who is he? It is not only the Prime Minister who knows very well that he had access to the donor audit report and as I talk now, in Northern Uganda, there are many programmes that donors were funding through other sources. 

If I can give an example, the Bud project was one meant for small-scale businesses and funded by DFID because donors gave conditions to the Government of Uganda that they should first refund all their money. They have not yet refunded all the money for the donors and the project is at a standstill. People have signed contracts but money cannot be released to those who are already committed to the project.

Madam Speaker, I want this House to come out firmly and make sure that Mr Bigirimana is not protected. It is the role of this House to say to the appointing authority that as a House, we cannot stand by this. We are standing by the Auditor-General and all other investigations like the CID and we must be firm on this matter. All the names that have appeared must be dealt with.

Lastly, on the hon. Prime Minister, this is not the first vehicle being bought in that office - (Member timed out.)

6.47
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The safety of this money was reported by the Auditor-General. Of course, that office sometimes receives less praise than it deserves. This is confirmed by the committee and I want to thank the Committee on Public Accounts. We are here to certify that safety as Parliament.

That safety is symbolised by the Mercedes Benz the hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi is riding in. Let me tell you that if we only had a sense of shame and I was told that the Mercedes Benz I was riding in was bought using money meant for people starving in Northern Uganda, I would walk for the rest of my life. This was money meant for construction of roads for people coming out of a war, money meant to build schools in Northern Uganda, money meant for shelter of victims of war and you feel very sweet riding in a Mercedes Benz. This is the highest impunity that can be expressed by a leader.

Just imagine each one of us here. They tell you this money was meant for these victims but some people abuse their offices and use it to buy you a vehicle. Would you go home happy? I think it is a shame and those of you who speak to the President need to emphasise this point; that this kind of theft is taking place in a department superintended by the Secretary General of your party where your wife is a minister and you do not take action.

I will tell you that when I was still a journalist, one time I spoke to Gen. Salim Saleh and he told me, “I am going to resign from Ministry of Finance because civil servants fear me. When I find them talking, they keep quiet. If I call them to my office, they look over their shoulders and run away. I can no longer serve.” 

People must understand. If you are a supervisor, how dare you appoint your wife to go and head a department and you are supposed to take action against her? How dare you appoint a powerful man like Amama Mbabazi to go and superintend someone who can summon these government officials and even prevent transfer? It is this foundation that this Parliament must shake; the impunity. People do not feel ashamed that money meant for all these activities to help poor people – (Member timed out_)

6.50
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am here to support the report and I want to applaud the members of the Committee of Public Accounts for all the findings and for the time they took to compile this report.

The theft in the Prime Minister’s Office was something that was planned and Mr Bigirimana right now has metamorphosed into a whistleblower. However, he already had problems with one Internal Auditor Shaban Wejula who had started unearthing issues of corruption, which were already seen within the office. The same Bigirimana even wrote a letter, which was really annoying to a professional accountant trying to discredit the efforts of Shaban and causing a transfer. 

This is where the whole thing begins from because this is a gentleman who was digging deeper and who would have been able to stop if he had the mandate of the PS. But the PS went ahead to deny this man a chance and even documents from within departments of the OPM. Now, we are seeing the same Bigirimana coming out to say he is a whistleblower when somebody had already started digging out information, which information he was denied. 

I really feel that we should come out and condemn the act and even bring Bigirimana to book on the basis that he is not a whistleblower. He is somebody who only came out to mention this issue after realising that the issues had already been tackled by the Office of the Auditor-General and it was already in the media. You know this is very annoying. Even when you check on the conduct of Kazinda at the time Bigirimana mentioned Kazinda as being the responsible person in the whole scandal, it is as if Kazinda had become so stubborn and big because he had already created a network, which he was using to transfer the money. He felt he was now being left out because Kazinda had already opened up a network with Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance and now he comes out to say that it is now Kazinda who is responsible.

Madam Speaker, I want us to come with the issues here. The fact remains that we cannot leave out the name Bigirimana. (Member timed out.)

6.54
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know this House has done its part through this committee, at least to the best of what they could do and I also know that this House will debate this report and it will come to pass like any other committee report that has been going through this Parliament. It will go and it will one day be forgotten but for some of us who bear scars of bullets on our bodies because of the result of the war, we will not forget it. Even if we are in our graves, we will not forget it. We will not forget the people who built houses with monies from the OPM because one day those houses will fall down. They will collapse.

Madam Speaker, I also know that my people were sent to go back to their respective homes after the peace process ended; they were told to go back home empty-handed. It was only through the donor sympathy that this PRDP come into place; it was through Parliament’s intervention that programmes like NUSAF were established with the intention of trying to help the orphans who were left as a result of the conflict. But today, we are here just playing around. 

Parliament is playing its part but I want to assure the House that as much as we do our part, Government must bear in mind that history will judge them. Unless Government commits itself to refunding all the monies that were stolen by the people named in this report; unless it commits itself to pay back all the monies which were lost through the projects that were supposed to be implemented in Northern Uganda, we will never forget and we will judge this government for that. Thank you.

6.57
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, this theft was not by accident; it was a planned activity; in fact, a programme for the thieves. As you are aware, I was the chairman of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum. Madam Speaker, on the Floor of this House, Members from the Greater North cried that something must be done to develop the war-ravaged area; we appealed to the President and Government gave Northern Uganda Shs 100 billion. We appealed to donors and they started supporting us.

We used to go for meetings with people from the Office of the Prime Minister and as Members from the Greater North, we made our position very clear – that this money must be ring-fenced. We even said that the donor funds must be transparently managed and we should be given this information. These people did not give us the money they received from Bank of Uganda; this thing was concealed. 

That is why I want to say that the PS is not innocent at all. This is because we appealed to the Prime Minister for transparency – that they should give us clear information. But now I hear that Shs 50 billion – Madam Speaker, I have transfers here, which I got from Bank of Uganda; one activity would have three or four releases and money would be sent to personal accounts and withdrawn as cash from Bank of Uganda. That can only happen in a government like this. And I think we need to act – as NRM, this is our Government and we need to act now by interdicting those who are involved. We need to arrest those who occasioned this loss to us.

Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that we are aware that these people have built big home – palaces; we are aware that they have built hotels and have investments outside this country and yet, most of them are still working in Government; most of them have not been arrested. Their cases are pending with the DPP’s office. But Madam Speaker, I can assure you those people will never be arrested, interdicted or prosecuted; as sure as night follows day, they will continue working without anything being done to them.

Madam Speaker, I want to appeal – because I am an NRM member – I know the NRM party listens because President Museveni listened to us about the Anti-Homosexuality Bill and signed it into law. I assure you today that and I pray that God in Heaven is also listening and He will answer and act. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, please, use one minute to conclude.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I appeal to my Government to take action. In law, when you lie – I am told it is called “perjury” and it is a crime, called “misdemeanour” and you can go to prison for it.

I personally went to the PS OPM and he denied ever diverting PRDP funds for buying motor vehicles. But it has become clear that actually, PRDP funds were diverted for buying vehicles. That means the PS has lied to us – and we are aware that he has lied; he is not innocent. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what do we do with liars – with a person who has committed perjury? I think those people must resign. And Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I know that you are a very good Prime Minister; a workaholic and an honest person. And whatever other people will say, do not mind, just act.

7.03
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I thank the Public Accounts Committee for the good job they did. Actually, this report is testimony that some Ugandans are terrible people. Before I go any further, I appeal to this House to be serious and scientific in its approach. 

When you are solving a mathematical problem, you start with several figures. When you want to get the unknown letter k or x, you will keep narrowing until you come to get the unknown. In this case, I appeal that we start narrowing down on some of these thieves. This is because if we continue moving wholesale, we shall never arrive there. 

The second thing is about –(Interjections)– I am saying that we must develop a formula that will narrow down to catch the real thieves. Secondly, in military terms, when the hon. Phinehas Katirimas are doing operations, there is what is called “closing in on an enemy”. We should also close in on an enemy and avoid going so much wide. 

What am I trying to say? In this report, we have some people and there are some names we are hungry to get. But that may not be scientific. But when you read the report, there are some people who have caused contradictions, for example, PS Bigirimana. At one point, he says money was not diverted but in the next step he accepts it was.
 
I usually share some experiences which I have in my community and elsewhere in Uganda. Currently, there is a habit of stealing in villages and communities have formed groups to get police sniffer dogs. But the trick these petty thieves have developed is to go to somebody’s compound and sit at the door. When the sniffer dog comes, it stops at that door and yet, the thieves left and the owner of that house becomes the suspect. What am I trying to say, “Mr Pius Bigirimana and his company Ltd, having stolen a lot of money, bought cars and donated them to the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi. Now, when you went sniffing, you found Amama Mbabazi with the things – the sniffer dogs sat at this door –(Laughter)

Mr Speaker, we have to get very serious; a thief steals a chicken, passes by my brother’s house, and sits there, he even leaves the feathers there and he goes with the meat. That makes my brother the suspect, automatically –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude with the meat.

MR BIRARO: Mr Speaker, we must narrow down to get the real thieves in Bank of Uganda; we must get those in Prime Minister’s Office and the thieves in Ministry of Finance so that we can clear our people who are very clean. 

The deputy secretary of the treasury wrote giving out instructions that for anyone to get more money, they must first give accountability. Now, how do we convict him? When you read page 8 of the report, paragraph 15, line no.8, they started stealing in 2009/10 and the Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi was not in that office. So we must be very clear to get the real thieves. 

7.07
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth): First of all, I want to thank the committee for the report. I talked long time ago on the Issues of OPM and I finished my part. Today, I only have a few observations. One, when you look at page 49, I want to thank those who diverted funds to help our people get a ferry; I really thank them. As I talk today, our people of Kumi, though there is still a problem, at least they have a ferry. So I thank them for that work. But I have some questions I want to ask. First I want to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang, I want to know whether the money for the ferry was the one of Bukungu, Kagwara, Kasiro Ferry, because it is not there –(Laughter) 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I think the right person to answer that question would be the chairperson. Wherever they diverted money from, as far as I am concerned, I am happy to read in this report on page 49 –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Thank you hon. Ogwang. I have been in the Committee of Works where I have been almost all my life in Parliament. The funding was supposed to come from the Prime Minister’s Office. In the initial stages, they provided for the initial funding, Shs 2.9 billion. That was during hon. Nsibambi’s time. It was for the feasibility study and the design. They were completed and hon. Nasasira – I wish he would come up on this – I have the documentation including those which come from H.E the President; they were five of them. He wrote to the Prime Minister asking him to provide money for the ferry. At that time it was 12 billion. It was not provided in Financial Year 2009/10. The following year, due to inflation, the money rose. They wrote again to the Prime Minister asking him to provide the money; again they said, they did not have the money. The last attempt was in 2010/11, where they again said there was no money. 

So, I was surprised that money was available for stealing. The money which was meant to purchase that ferry is partly the money which was stolen. But they kept telling us that they had no money. The feasibility studies were done, and the designs were done and they were supposed to be purchased together with the one hon. Ogwang is talking about. So it was part of the money which was stolen and if I am to hang any person, I hang them based on that. Up to now, the people of Busoga and the people of Serere and those of Kaberamaido who were supposed to benefit from it have lost because of that theft. 

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I was going on the issue of social services and this one goes to the Prime Minister. They have always talked of performance contracts for civil servants; why hasn’t Government implemented this programme; doesn’t Government appraise civil servants? And if Government is doing so, who appraises them? Even for the teachers, we have a five year term; if you do well, you remain, if you do badly, you go; what about the other civil servants? We are talking about fighting corruption. The war against civil servants is a serious one. Colonel here mentioned something which was very important; there will be casualties at all costs, but I think we rather have more casualties than loose the image of our country. What do we do? For instance, I am happy now that the diversion has helped me get a ferry; that is why I thank those who diverted it. But shall we go on like this; that some must cry for others to get –(Member timed out.)

7.12
MS EVELYN ANITE (NRM, Youth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to first of all remind those who are not aware of how long we Northern suffered from the war that ravaged us. We suffered for twenty years; which is two decades to make it simple for you to understand. (Laughter) 

It is so disappointing to here that our money that was meant to help us recover was eaten or stolen by human beings whom we see every day. 

I gave an ultimatum when this issue first came on the floor. At that time, I was six months pregnant; and when I talked, people thought I was just talking out of emotions and that my harmonies were not working well. But I want to repeat those words; I gave an ultimatum that by the time I give birth, I want all those who are corrupt to disappear from the earth’s surface. 

Now, my baby is one year and these guys are still here. I do not know where to start or end. My baby is going to start talking yet I gave an ultimatum and I am on the Hansard. Now, I am giving another ultimatum. Madam Speaker, we must bring to book each and every one who dare touched some money that was meant for recovery of Northern Uganda from the war we suffered for twenty years. 

I remember how we suffered due to that war and how some of our relatives lost their lives. I know how our buildings were brought down because of that war. Now, donors are helping us and you chose to just eat this money? It is very unfortunate. 

The chairman of PAC, hon. Kassiano Wadri saw me grow up and as I was growing up, I saw him doing him politics. Now I have caught up with him in Parliament to do politics with him. I know that he did not omit this deliberates; but if it was deliberate; please, hon. Kassiano Wadri, when you were watching me grow up, I was watching you do your work. I know you are a very honest man. You did omit one thing, the forged signatures. They were 670 security bank signatures which were forged. These signatures according to hand writing experts were forged by Mr Opio and Mr Kazinda. I really do not want to think that you are omitting or saving Opio because of the name “O”.

MR KASSIANO WADRI: Can I give you information so that you really get the right picture?

THE SPEAKER: No I think you will respond when you are responding to the report.

MS ANITE: Mr Opio and Mr Kazinda, Kazinda today is in prison not because of the signatures he forged. The handwriting expert gave us clear evidence and now you have decided to ignore the report given by handwriting expert? It is not there in your report, Opio and Kazinda are not mentioned anywhere. Can we bring everyone to book regardless of their colour, size, and status? Whoever has eaten our money should be brought to book. Thank you.

7.16
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you madam Speaker, allow me to add my voice to thank the committee for the work they have done. 

However, I want to begin by seeking for clarification. There was a request made by PS to the treasury seeking for withdrawal of 100 million. When you look at the 10 ministries that are under the prime minister’s office, if we took the limit of 20 million, how would other ministries operate? Would they operate on 20 million, all the 10 ministries? I just want to seek for that clarification. May be he sought for 100 million because the ministries are many. We need to get that clarification right. I want to get to attachment. There are letters that purport that funds were being returned to Kazinda as the accounting officer by varying officials from OPM.
 
It is unfortunate that Kazinda cannot come today and tell us that please this officer received 500 million but he returned 94 to me. This officer received 200 million and this was returned. There is what we call mentoring. I believe Kazinda mentored a lot of officers in OPM.

MR NANDALA MAFAABI: Thank you, my brother, for giving way and Madam Speaker, if money came in the banking system 500 million to my account, if I am supposed to return it, I must return it through the banking system. So how do you get cash and carry when you never got cash?

MR EKUMA: Thank you honourable Mafabi, I was coming to that. To my conviction, I was telling the House that Kazinda seems to have mentored so many of our civil servants in OPM. By transferring the PS alone, we did a disservice to our country because the other officers are still doing what Kazinda did. We are not able to recover funds because our emphasis should be recovering. When we see this document saying this officer, the same officer Wabaya Vincent, he refunded 75 million; the same officer refunded 95 million; the same officer refunded 71 million. We are asking, and they are still working, how much did he receive in total?

7.20
MR ACHIA REMEGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This 9th parliament was sworn in on 18th May 2011; if I can recall, the Prime Minister was appointed on the 23rd of May 2011. On the 27th of June 2011 the first letter written from the Office of the Prime Minister to the Auditor General to investigate the malpractices was initiated with the knowledge of the Prime Minister on the 27th of June - the letter is here attached to this report. 

The Prime Minister, few weeks into his work, had found some of them were going on, on the 12th June 2012 about seven or eight months later, the Auditor General produced its special audit report and I remember most of us got that report we have it in our e-mails. In August, Chris Kassami of the Ministry of Finance also wrote giving comment (the letter is attached here) about the expanded audit to OPM which brought many other people beyond the Office of the Prime Minister. Why I am mentioning all these things is that in this report, we are recommending that the Prime Minister is culpable for the corruption which he actually found when he had just been appointed. 

The sequence shows. When you look back at the attachment to this report, there is one which has just been laid by John Mulimba, indicating that it was on the 20th August 2007 when one Chris Lubega in the Treasury Department –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I never wanted to raise order to my brother from Karamoja but I have the Auditor General’s report here. On 12th Nov 2010, 10 billion was transferred to the Consolidated Fund. On 27th June 2011, the first bunch of money which was being stolen was transferred to the national policy for disaster management. The Prime Minister hon. John Amama Mbabazi had become Prime Minister in May. The money was being transferred on 27th June 2011 when he is there. Then it started going on 28th December 2011, all the money was stolen when the Prime Minister was there. The order I am raising; the laws are very clear, under Public Finance and Accountability Act section 8, says the accounting office will have to have a functioning Internal Audit department. Under our regulations, regulation 14 and 27 talk about internal audit; the internal audit was there and it had raised a red flag. Hon. Amama Mbabazi got when they had raised a red flag on Kazinda and he said “you should not transfer him”. Is my colleague in order to protect the Prime Minister who stopped a person who was stealing public funds? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the Prime Minister will be able to tell us what he did on any of those issues.

MR ACHIA: Thank you Madam Speaker. I was developing my point.

THE SPEAKER: Information from the committee.

MR BYARUGABA: Honourable colleague, it is important that as we debate this, we take care of exactly what we have written, what we found out. This is in view of what hon. Nandala has just given. When you look on page 8, that is number 15 and you read, you realise that actually it was from 2010, June 2012, look at all those sums in 2010. Just look at that page, for goodness sake, I think let’s not start apportioning blame.

MR NANDALA MAFABI:  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I don’t want somebody to confuse us. I have the Auditor-General’s report –(Interjections) – just give me time because I talk from an informed point of view.

The first one is funds received on support - this is now coming from out. It started on 21st October 2010 up to 29th June 2012. But I am talking about funds being transferred, which were supposed to go to the Consolidated Fund. On 12th November 2010, that was the first batch which went to the Consolidated Fund. That one has no problem. But the one of 27th June 2011 went to National Policy for Disaster Management.

Another one of December 2011 crisis management, Madam Speaker, I speak from facts. Is my colleague in order to say that I was raising issues when the Prime Minister was not there, when  according to records, he was there in that office. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: If the Auditor-General report says that he was there, then he was there. Please, conclude.

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I think this is an opportunity for us, if you see the sequence that on the 27th June when the Prime Minister was initiating the investigations, it was the same day that money was transferred by one group to an account, which was allegedly dormant and this report of the committee is not sufficient, it does not bring clearly –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know, when the reports are given, Members contribute according to how they see the report. So, if he says it is not adequate, that is his view. – you want to say that it is adequate? – No, no, that is his view. He says, it is not adequate.

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, to understand this report, there was three groups of people who organised themselves to steal this money for Northern Uganda. One group was in OPM, headed by Kazinda and this group of Kazinda managed to connive with another group in the Treasury and in Bank of Uganda to avoid the senior people.

Kazinda avoided Bigirimana, in  -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he is giving his view of how he understood the report. – The chairperson will be able to rebut when he comes to answer.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If the Member has a conflict of interest, he should declare. Among the documents that we have, because the Member is saying Kazinda was avoiding the PS, on the 11th October 2011, in an internal memo to the PS, from the Principal Accountant, Kazinda, and it was received on that very same day by the PS, it is here; the Principal Accountant signed and the PS wrote to the PA, “approved”. This was a request to borrow funds worth Shs 3 billion UK-Uganda Post Conflict Development Programme and then another Shs 500 million from the same account and in this last one, it says “the purpose of this memo is to seek your consent and authority to process the borrowing of this imprest; Imprest of Shs 3.5 billion? You cannot imagine, for the office running.

This was Kazinda to the PS and the PS approved.

So, is the Member in order to say Mr Kazinda was avoiding the PS when we have such information? Let me lay that information on the Table, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is that an annexure to the report? Is it already in the report? Go to another point. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is an annexure to the report. Thank you. 

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, if my brother had cared to listen and allowed me to finish the point, he would have found that I was actually saying that this group which colluded, first of all went around even the PS - that is why 80 percent of the documents scattered in the Bank of Uganda are a forgery. There is a statement in this report. In the Treasury, while the one Chris Lubega who issued these codes and gave to Kazinda the powers of the PS, this is another group in the Treasury; they avoided Mpoza who was a commissioner to Treasury. In the OPM, they have ordered Bigirimana, in the Bank of Uganda there is John Chemonges who is a director, banking. He wrote to find out - but they avoided him; they went for the deputy, Milton Opio and these three, the gang of three Chris Lubega, Milton Opio and Kazinda. They networked with the support of the Accountant-General to put money in an account which was supposed to be – and that is where they now surrounded their goods and started eating gods one by one - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let the Karimojong man close. 

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker,  that is why I find this report of our committee inefficient. They don’t mention Opio, they don’t mention Chris and the recommendations on page 12 –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to raise a point of order. The reason we give our committees information and reports to go and process for us is that they will have more time to go through them and come here and when they come here, we have either to – we don’t adopt; that is why we have not adopted the report. We come and make additions and subtractions. So, if you have information to add you then add it or if you want to subtract, you do so. So, is this brother of mine from Karamoja in order to get only one missing item of his interest because he wants to defend the Prime Minister and say the report is defeated? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, he has read the report and he has identified some gaps; that is what he is bringing to our attention. 

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, I am just referring to page 12 where in one part they mention individuals’ names. On the second point, the Commissioner Treasury Services – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, when the reports are brought here, they are meant to be debated. Let him contribute according to what he thinks. 

MR ACHIA: Actually in point no. 1, they mention Maria Kiggundu, David Mugisha and Jennifer Muwuluza. They mention all the names in the OPM but when they come to the Treasury where names are even very clear, the Commissioner Treasury, Isaac Mpoza is there, Chris Lubega but they don’t mention them, Madam Speaker. I don’t know why. The Accountant-General has a name and the people who diverted the money have names but they mention the Accountant-General and the Commissioner Treasury Services. Why don’t they mention the names? Why did these people mention some names and leave others? 

Madam Speaker, I want to implore this report of this committee to explain why in clarity of this regard especially in the OPM. In Bank of Uganda, the names are there, the attachments are there but this committee fails to mention some names and refuse to mention others. Why?

Madam Speaker, I had implored that this report be reviewed further before we discuss it and the culprits must be clearly mentioned in this report before we adopt it.

7.35
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Looking at all the departments and persons that have been mentioned in this report, obviously, you see lack of supervision, lack of monitoring, lack of due diligence and lack of compassion by the people who have been held culpable by this report.

I want to ask a question because I know that the people who were working in these offices be it in Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance and OPM are professionals. When you have somebody withdraw money, give it to another and take it back in cash and you call that a professional, where was the supervisor of this person? Now, we are saying the supervisors are innocent. How long does it take for somebody to do bank reconciliation in an office like that one? 

It is a monthly activity and it should not have taken three years for this scam to be discovered if the responsible people were doing due diligence and the right monitoring and if they were supervising where they were supposed to supervise.

Madam Speaker, many Members have said the Prime Minister’s Office has turned into an implementer and I think this was intentional because they saw weaknesses in the system and it was easy to get them there and be able to make some money. There is no way we can get them out of this because there is no way the ministry would not be aware that its officials have turned into implementers. How was accountability being done for the objectives of the expected targets that you set to achieve under this programme? Was anybody following up?

Madam Speaker, my colleagues have tried to exonerate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Up to today, he is riding in that Benz. Where is the compassion to the people of Northern Uganda? Having heard with evidence that is not doubtable that this money came from wrong hands, came from a wrong source and it is blood money, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should have done something. Probably, he should have restrained himself from using that car and said, “Because it came from this money, let it be sold and let the money be given back to the programme.” Today, the people of Northern Uganda are still suffering and we are here comfortable.

Madam Speaker, I want to ask, did Government have any budget for the people of Northern Uganda? This money that was given by donors is the same money they are diverting for Government activities. Where was the plan for the people of Northern Uganda by the Government of Uganda?

I want to conclude and say that unless Government takes action on these culprits; those that are mentioned and those that are implied by virtue of occupation of their offices, Madam Speaker, we are not going to help but conclude that the government is using the plight of the people of Northern Uganda to benefit themselves –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, we will also be right to conclude that these people who are inherently being protected by appointing authorities are working on behalf of the decision-makers in this country. Otherwise, there is no other reason they are not interdicted up to this point in time. I thank you.

7.40
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In 2012, I travelled with hon. Kyanjo to United Arab Emirates and we were told that one person being named here in this report had been to Dubai not as a government official from Uganda but as an investor.

At times, I get tempted to think that some people who pretend to be supporters of the NRM are in fact fighting the same Government they claim to support through stealing and embezzling of funds and in a way, I must thank those people. Suppose Shs 75 billion had been invested and received by beneficiaries in Northern Uganda, how would I have been able to go there and de-campaign NRM? So, in a way, some people are fighting President Museveni from within. 

I would like to request the honourable colleagues on that side to consider this matter that these are not people stealing from the rest of Uganda. They are people stealing from President Museveni and they are the people fighting him and they want to see his downfall. Maybe one time, when we take over, these people will get out and say, “Nambooze look here, we fought with you.”

Madam Speaker, I stand to support this motion –(Interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I will not restrain myself any further from putting across a point of order when I listen to the submission of the hon. Member for Mukono particularly when she alleges that people named in this report are embezzling and working to bring down President Museveni, yet, the persons who are named here are simply criminals who have committed crimes on their own volition as civil servants or other persons.

She goes ahead to allege that even those of us on this side should know that these people are working to bring down the President. When I listen to this, it amounts to -

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR MULIMBA: A campaign or propaganda. Madam Speaker, is the Member, therefore, in order to try to reduce the importance of the matter in the report, which is talking about very critical issues concerning people of Northern Uganda to a mere campaign? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you should thank hon. Nambooze for bringing out the fact that those who are working against the President’s manifesto by stealing the money are working against the NRM.

MS NAMBOOZE: I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Mr Bigirimana has been cited as a whistleblower and I want to believe that indeed, he is a whistleblower only that his whistle was intended to call thieves to steal money from the OPM.

When you read this report, which I support, you find that all the recommendations about Bigirimana are about taking responsibility but I wish to propose that we need something stronger than that. As it is being recommended for others that they should be prosecuted, indeed, Bigirimana should also be prosecuted. It should be our recommendation.

Madam Speaker, you were not in this House when this report was presented but we got very disturbing information from hon. Ssewungu that when the committee sat, they were told and this was a fact, that guards protecting hon. Amama Mbabazi went to Entebbe Airport one day, arrested the Auditor-General and he was taken before the Accountant-General and that the Accountant General was taken to appear before the Rt hon. Prime Minister who asked him why he was transferring Kazinda. 

Madam Speaker, I find this to be a very serious allegation against the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. In fact, it is not just something bad but it also borders on criminality that somebody can arrest a civil servant and question him over doing his job.

When you read the report, you will realise that after the attempts to transfer Kazinda, more money was stolen. Had the Prime Minister conceded and left Kazinda to be transferred, maybe we would have saved some money. And it is because of this that I strongly support the minority report – that the Prime Minister should take political responsibility for what took place. He did not behave well when he barred the Accountant-General from transferring Kazinda.

I also want to talk about issues raised on page 86 of the report –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, debate will continue tomorrow. I have noted the following hon. Members: Aol, Kayinza, Joy Ongom, Gilbert Olanya, Oketayot, Hamson Obua, Nauwat, Ogwal, Nandala, Wafula, Namayanja, Nyakikongoro - I called you earlier but you did not stand up. Others are hon. Bitekyerezo, Yaguma, Busia and hon. Kakooza. 

So, I have noted down those I will pick tomorrow and then we shall wind up. 

Hon. Members, I thank you very much for your contributions. This House stands adjourned until 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.46 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 February 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

