
Wednesday, 19 February 2014

Parliament met at 2.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. Yesterday, we had laid on Table supplementary schedule number one and I referred it to the Committee on National Economy; that is not the appropriate committee, it should be going to the Budget Committee. So, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget should take charge and handle it expeditiously. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.22
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE (FDC, Bukonjo County East): Mr Speaker, in compliance with rule 32 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I beg to lay on Table the report of the parliamentary delegation to the 26th ACPEU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the 34th African Caribbean and Pacific Group of States Parliamentary Assembly held in Addis Ababa Ethiopia between 20th and 27th November 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Hon. Members, we will find a time when we have to go through recommendations that are made in those reports. The Africa Caribbean, Pacific and European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly takes some regional decisions that affect our country being a partner and the rest of Africa. So, we need a moment to discuss these things so that we are also abreast by those things that go on in that Assembly. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION OF RESIDENTS OF THREE SUB-COUNTIES IN NWOYA COUNTY PURONGO, ANAKA AND KOCHGOMA ON HUMAN WILDLIFE CONFLICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION OF RESIDENTS OF KATUNGURU, KAHENDERO AND KATWE-KABATOORO TOWN COUNCIL, LULAAMA, KABASWISWI, GOGOYA KABAROLE DISTRICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. Any Member on the committee that is ready to present these reports? Hon. Member, do you want to present the report?

MS KIIZA: Sorry, it has not been delegated to me. I am trying to look for the chairperson.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I delegate you now to proceed? Do you have the report? By order of the Speaker, you can proceed if the report is there. Next item.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON FINANCIAL IMPROPRIETY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, proceed; otherwise I will begin to shop for a chairperson.

2.26
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I wish to thank honourable colleagues for giving me this opportunity to present this report. This report has been long overdue and I want to say that this would be my goodbye to the Public Accounts committee. I hope the copies are being circulated. It was submitted for production long ago. As far as I am concerned I am ready.

This is an 87-page document with a number of attachments and there will be a number of documents that I will lay on Table. 

Mr Speaker, you will recall that in November 2012, a special investigation report on the allegations of financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister was – (Interruption)  

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I did not intend to disrupt my senior colleague but the report he is reading is neither distributed to us in physical form nor sent to us by e-mail. How then shall we be able to follow noting the important things in this report when we do not have copies in either form?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am advised that they were e-mailed on the iPads but the hard copies are coming. Mr Chairman, proceed.
 
MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report was referred to the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) with instructions to expeditiously consider it and report back to this august House.

As reported by the audit, the Auditor-General attempted to carry out a value-for-money audit on special programmes in the OPM in April 2011 but was denied access to records and could not therefore complete the audit for inclusion in the audit report for the year ended 30 June 2011.

In 2012, the Auditor-General, through a letter reminded the PS of his right to access information. Shortly after, reports alleging mismanagement of funds in the OPM gained media publicity. Consequently, the Auditor-General received requests from the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Director CID and development partners to carry out a special investigation in the OPM. The allegations included embezzlement of funds, use of personal accounts for implementation of activities, diversion of funds and unaccounted for funds.

The audit investigated allegations involving mishandling of PRDP donor funds through embezzlement, diversion, use of personal accounts to receive official funds and non-accountability. In addition, the funds were utilised to implement activities outside the PRDP framework or work plan. As per your instructions, the committee has considered the audit report and now wishes to present its report.

The rest is about the methodology where we interfaced with 90 witnesses who included the Prime Minister, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury and his Deputy, the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, officials mentioned in the report as reflected in the list attached, suppliers mentioned in the report and the list is also attached.

The committee reviewed existing financial frameworks and submissions by witnesses. The following were particularly reviewed: the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and related regulations; the Joint Financing Agreement with PRDP development partners; the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 and regulations and other documents availed by witnesses with whom the committee interfaced.

The committee made field visits to the PRDP project sites for onspot assessment in the districts of Gulu, Amuru, Kitgum, Lamwo, Zombo, Kiryandongo, Pader, Napak, Nakapiripirit, Kotido and Kaabong.

Mr Speaker, the committee was not able to meet Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, the former Principal Accountant at the Office of the Prime Minister, who we consider to be a very key witness in the financial irregularities. Questions have been raised as to whether the committee can have a complete report without meeting Mr Kazinda since the audit report makes reference to him on a number of irregularities. 

Additionally, some of the submissions from witnesses could not be concluded without hearing from Mr Kazinda. We have, for example, cases where money was allegedly paid into bank accounts of companies and individuals and allegedly returned to the OPM and received by either Mr Kazinda or persons in his office.

The scope of the report

This report covers issues raised in the audit report, with specific emphasis on the fraudulent diversion of donor funds meant for PRDP activities to other accounts and utilisation of diverted funds. For instance, funds sent to personal accounts regardless of the source and all funds paid out for fuel and food supplies.

The attention of the committee was drawn to the sub judice rule with regard to related matters in court. The report therefore keeps clear of cases which are before the courts of law. In determining this, the committee made reference to the charge sheets that were brought to our attention by the Solicitor-General. These gave us a clear indication of the specific cases before the courts and these cases in this respect are:
    • Geoffrey Kazinda, Martin Owor, Beatrice Kezabu, and Hussein Katumwa for embezzlement of Shs 316,893,456.
    • Geoffrey Kazinda for forgery of the signature of Mr Pius Bigirimana and being in possession of bank security papers.

In addition to the above, in the interest of natural justice, the committee has not made any specific recommendations on Mr Geoffrey Kazinda because it did not meet him.

Background to PRDP

The Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) for the North was initiated in 2007 and implementation commenced in 2009. The PRDP framework was put in place to help monitor and coordinate implementation of interventions by Government and development partners and mobilisation of resources locally and from development partners. The funds so mobilised were meant to be additional to normal budgetary allocations as part of efforts to reconstruct Northern Uganda, taking into account the fact that the region had just come out of a decade-long civil conflict and required specific and targeted development interventions. Consequently, a number of donors opted to channel their funds as budget support under the PRDP framework.

The Joint Financing Agreement 

To channel the financial contribution made by donors, a Joint Financing Agreement (JFA) was entered into between Government of Uganda and the development partners. The Joint Financing Agreement provided details of how funds would be received from the development partners and be disbursed to implementing agencies. Key provisions of the Joint Financing Agreement included the following:
    (a) All funds from the development partners to be paid into a bank of Uganda holding account en-route to the Consolidated Fund Account.
    (b) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to immediately acknowledge receipt of shillings equivalent received in the Central Treasury Account in writing to respective development partners.
    (c) All funds from the budget support Holding Account to be transferred to the Consolidated Fund Account on the instructions of the Accountant-General and no expenditures other than transfers to the Consolidated Fund Account were to be incurred on the holding account.

Findings and recommendations

The facts that we have addressed our mind to are issues relating to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The first issue is:

Diversion of funds at the Treasury

Within the framework of the Joint Financing Agreement, three donor partners namely; Ireland, Sweden and Denmark contributed an equivalent of Shs 39.3 billion into the PRDP basket account (PRDP holding account) between October 2010 and June 2012. 

In total disregard of the Part II (8.2)(vi) of the Joint Financing Agreement that required all funds from the Budget Support Holding Account to be transferred to the Consolidated Fund Account on the instruction of the Accountant-General and that no expenditure other than transfers to the Consolidated Fund Account were to be incurred on these accounts, only Shs 10,161.7 was transferred to the Consolidated Fund Account to support PRDP activities and a sum of Shs 27.12 billion was diverted to other dormant accounts under the OPM namely; the Crisis Management and Recovery Programme to which a sum of Shs 20.1 billion was deposited and then under the National Policy for Disaster Management, a sum of Shs 6.9 billion was deposited.

Diversion of Funds from Norwegian Support to the PRDP

Similarly, within the Joint Financing Agreement Framework, the Norwegian Government contributed an equivalent of Shs 36.4 billion as their support to the PRDP between October 2010 and June 2012. In total disregard of the provisions of the Joint Financing Agreement mentioned above, Shs 11.1 billion was irregularly transferred to the PRDP North Account at OPM which account had been dormant. 

The funds were transferred on the request made to the Accountant-General by the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister on 26 January 2011 to release these funds to an account in Bank of Uganda in accordance with an agreement between the Government of Uganda and the Norwegian Government.

Observations

The irregular transfers of funds from the PRDP Basket Account and from the Norwegian support could only have been made possible through collusion by officers in Bank of Uganda, at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Accountant-General’s Office and at the OPM. Once the money had been diverted to previously dormant accounts under the Office of the Prime Minister, the Office of the Prime Minister went on a spending spree involving:
    1. depositing huge sums of money on to the personal accounts of staff and suppliers purportedly in error, and having the money allegedly returned in cash to the Principal Accountant at the Office of the Prime Minister;
    2. making cash advances to staff to carry out activities that were meant to be implemented by local governments and including depositing cash onto bank accounts of staff instead of paying the suppliers directly;
    3. spending on items outside PRDP activities, including purchase of vehicles for the 13 ministers.

Role of different persons in diversion of PRDP funds

The diversion of Shs6.9 billion from the Royal Danish Kingdom and Sweden. As observed by audit, Shs 6.9 billion was diverted and transferred by the Treasury to the Office of the Prime Minister on the account of National Policy on Disaster Management and the account number is thereby given contrary to the provision of the Joint Financing Agreement. This suspicious transfer was originated by Ms Miriam Kiggundu, an Economist from the Aid Liaison Department Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In her communication on the matter, Ms Kiggundu stated that the funds had been received from the Royal Danish Kingdom and that was 5 million Danish Kroner as well as the Government of Sweden, which also put in 15 million Swedish Kroner and these were for developing a National Policy on Disaster Management.

Ms Kiggundu, in her explanations, stated that the contents of the letter were dictated to her by Mr David Mugisha, a senior economist in the Department of Macroeconomics Policy at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Mr Mugisha, on his part, informed the committee that he got information about the funds from Bank of Uganda and was only interested in reconciling the figures he had with those of the Treasury.

The Commissioner, Aid Liaison, Madam Jennifer Muwuliza forwarded the letter to the Commissioner Treasury Services, Mr Isaac Mpoza who then originated a letter disbursing the funds to the National Policy on Disaster Management account at the Office of the Prime Minister.

Mr Mpoza submitted that the letter from Ms Kiggundu had been endorsed by the Commissioner, Aid Liaison and it was not within his mandate to question the endorsement.

Observations

The whole transaction was irregular in that:
    1. Neither Ms Kiggundu, an economist from the Aid Liaison Department nor Mr Mugisha, a senior economist had the authority to originate transfer of funds from one account to another. Their role was to give the Treasury notification of funds that had been disbursed to the holding account.

    2. The Acting Commissioner Aid Liaison Department, Madam Jennifer Muwuliza, acted irregularly in endorsing the letter originated by Madam Mariam Kiggundu for the transfer of funds.

    3. It was the role of the Commissioner Treasury Services together with the Accountant-General as signatories to the holding account to cause transfer of funds to the Consolidated Fund account. It was therefore irregular for them to transfer funds based on the request originated by Ms Kiggundu, a fact they conceded to. The committee further observes that the duo were negligent in discharging their duties in this regard.

The disbursement of the funds to the National Policy on Disaster Management was against the provision of the Joint Financial Agreement as this was an activity outside the PRDP and was therefore not within the work plan. The National Policy on Disaster Management had already been developed in 2007 using funds from UNDP and it could not have been one of the activities to be implemented under PRDP.

Lastly, in accordance with the Joint Financing Agreement, funds should not have been sent to the Office of the Prime Minister but rather to implementing agencies, which were the local government. The only part that should have gone to the OPM was Shs1.9 billion meant for monitoring implementation of the programme.

Derived from the observations, the committee makes the following recommendations:
    a) Madam Miriam Kiggundu, Mr David Mugisha and Madam Jennifer Muwuliza be held responsible for initiating fraudulent transfer of funds from the PRDP holding account to project accounts in OPM. The committee strongly recommends the trio to be prosecuted for their actions.
    b) The Commissioner Treasury Services, Mr Isaac Mpoza, be held responsible for sanctioning the transfer of the said funds based on an irregular request.
    c) The Accountant-General and Commissioner Treasury Services be held responsible for negligence in failing to detect and stop the fraudulent transfer of funds.

Fraudulent transfer of Shs 20.1 billion to Crisis Management and Recovery Programme

Shs 14.8 billion meant for support to PRDP was received on the Budget Support Account and was fraudulently transferred on 1 December 2011 to the Crisis Management and Recovery Programme account under the Office of the Prime Minister in Bank of Uganda by way of electronic transfer against the provision of the Joint Financial Agreement. 

This account had been dormant for almost two financial years. The transfer was disguised as a salary Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) file and did not have the authorisation of the Accountant-General. The fraud was originated from Treasury and was sent from a Uganda Computer Services computer using generic internet protocol account whose password was known to only two officials at the Treasury namely Mr Wilbert Okello, a Principal Systems Analyst and Mr Tonny Yawe, an Information Technology Officer.

Attempted cover-up of the fraud

The audit observed that in order to hide this fraud, an attempt was made 20 days later to prepare a security paper and get it duly authorised as below. An email was sent by Mr David Mugisha, Macroeconomics Department on 19 December 2011 to Ms Bright Atwine from Treasury Services Department. The email confirmed that Shs 14.8 billion had been sent by the Irish Government for the Crisis Management Programme in Karamoja.

On receiving the email, Ms Atwine then prepared a security paper on 28 December 2011, which was signed by the Commissioner, Treasury Services Department Mr Isaac Mpoza and the Accountant-General Mr Gustave Bwoch with the email acting as the basis of their signature authorisation.

The signed document was then taken to Bank of Uganda by the authorised Treasury agent Mr Amon Takwenda who has since died. Bank of Uganda acknowledged receipt of the document on 29 December 2011 and simply filed it instead of referring it back to the sender since the funds had already been transferred and there were no funds on the account. However, Bank of Uganda in their response denied ever receiving the initial security papers and maintained that the stamp on the copy of the security paper was not theirs.

The document was a payment instruction addressed to the Director Banking and therefore required the bank to act on it by doing all the necessary checks and then go ahead to either effect payment or refer the account back to the sender. The Treasury staff subsequently reconciled this transaction as a non-payment. It was noted that the person who prepared the security papers, Madam Atwine, was the same person who did the reconciliation.

In his explanation on the above matter, the Accountant-General informed the committee that he signed the transfer instructions because of his strong belief in the support given to the request by his staff. He agreed that he had been misled and since the fraud was unearthed, all the staff involved in this scam namely the Senior Accountant Treasury Services Madam Bright Atwine and the Treasury Bank Agent, Mr Amon Takwenda now deceased, had been interdicted.

The committee established that a forged bank statement purportedly from Bank of Uganda was used to cover up the fraudulent transfer. Madam Bright Atwine submitted that she obtained the statement from Mr Takwenda who was the bank agent. On the basis of this statement, Atwine prepared a bank reconciliation statement indicating that the said funds were on the account on 28 December 2011 and yet the funds had already been transferred on 1 December 2011.

On the basis of this reconciliation, the Accountant-General sanctioned the transfer believing that the funds were still on the account whereas not.

The committee observes that the email generated by David Mugisha to Bright Atwine on 19 December 2011 confirming that Shs14.8 billion had been sent by the Irish Government for crisis management in Karamoja was misleading and intended to cover up the fraudulent transfer.

Two other transfers were fraudulently made to the Crisis Management account at the OPM on 30 January 2012 by the same means disguised as EFT salary payments. The transfers were for Shs1.7 billion and Shs 3.5 billion. The last transfer bounced and was noted by the Commissioner Financial Services who asked Mr Wilbert Okello to investigate and explain the anomaly.

The committee notes that this matter was not conclusively resolved and indeed the fraudulent transfer was subsequently effected. However, the committee observed that this transfer was only possible through collusion between staff in the Financial Services Department - that is Mr Charles Mwasa who provided the account number to be credited and the staff of IT department who had access to the computer system to effect the transfer.

The committee further notes that this fraud could have been unearthed if regular monthly bank reconciliations were undertaken.

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations:
    1. Madam Bright Atwine, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Amon Takwenda now deceased should be held responsible for uttering false documents to cover up their fraudulent transactions-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even the deceased?

MR WADRI: Yes, his assets can be proceeded against, Mr Speaker. 

Madam Bright Atwine and Mr David Mugisha, save for Amon Takwenda now deceased, be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.

Mr Wilbert Okello, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Charles Mwasa be held responsible for the fraudulent transfer of Shs14.8 billion. The trio should be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.
Mr Wilbert Okello, Mr Tony Yawe, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Charles Mwasa be held responsible for the fraudulent transfer of Shs5.2 billion on 30 January 2012. The quartet be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.

Mr Gustavo Bwoch and Mr Isaac Mpoza be held responsible for transferring funds from the holding account to project accounts in contravention of the Joint Finance Agreement that they were privy to. The duo be referred to the appointing authority for appropriate disciplinary action.

Diversion of Shs 11.166 billion from Norwegian Support to PRDP Account
Mr Speaker, as observed by audit, Shs11.166 billion in respect of Norwegian support was diverted and transferred on 30 November 2010 to an OPM account in Bank of Uganda – PRDP North A/C No. 000030088000038, which had been dormant since 2009. This was on the basis of a letter written by the Permanent Secretary OPM, Mr Pius Bigirimana, to the Accountant-General. It should be noted that under the Joint Finance Agreement (JFA), the funds should have been sent to the Consolidated Fund and released to respective implementing agencies following appropriation by Parliament. Instead, the funds were sent to a project account whose activities had ceased in 2009. The transfer lacked the authority of the Secretary to Treasury, and was not in line with appropriations of Parliament. 

The Accountant-General, Mr Gustavo Bwoch, informed the committee that the funds in question were transferred to OPM upon request by the PS/OPM. The committee notes that the PS, Office of the Prime Minister, did not have powers to direct the Accountant-General to transfer funds against the provisions of the JFA. The PS/ST gave instructions to the Accountant-General for the opening of an account for the PRDP Budget Support as the principal signatory in Bank of Uganda. The Accountant-General acknowledged receipt of the funds and their purpose. The committee therefore wondered how the Accountant-General could sanction the release of the same funds for activities outside PRDP.

Observations

The Accountant-General diverted these funds well-knowing that the OPM was not the implementing agency and well aware that the funds should have gone to the Consolidated Fund Account. The Accountant-General, as a signatory to the account, should have known that the OPM was to receive only Shs1.9 billion to monitor PRDP and therefore erred in sending all the money to OPM contrary to the JFA provisions. The conclusion of the committee is that there was either collusion, negligence of duty or lack of due diligence by the Accountant-General. 

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations:
Mr Gustavo Bwoch and Mr Pius Bigirimana be held responsible for diversion of funds from the Norwegian Support to PRDP North Account at OPM.      

Internal Control Weaknesses at the Treasury

The audit noted a number of internal control weaknesses at the Treasury that led to lapses in the processing systems. These included:
    • use of generic passwords instead of specific passwords for sensitive roles;
    • minimal supervision of bank reconciliations; 
    • lack of involvement of internal audit in review of treasury systems; and
    • lack of CCTV cameras in the Uganda Computer Services (UCS) server room.

The committee observes that these were fundamental weaknesses in the Treasury touching on key internal controls, which are the responsibility of the Commissioner, Internal Audit under the Accountant-General. The committee finds it unbelievable that there was no internal audit function at the Treasury. The committee notes that it is the responsibility of the Accountant-General under the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003 and Regulation 27(3) to ensure that there is an effective internal audit function in each Ministry, Department or Agency of Government and he is empowered to issue instructions to accounting officers to achieve this.

The Secretary to the Treasury on his part explained that the Ministry of Finance has recognised these lapses and following these audit findings, measures to plug these gaps had been put in place. The following measures have been put in place, albeit later:
    a) Generic passwords have been replaced with specific passwords;
    b) Bank reconciliations are done promptly as a measure to detect fraud in good time;
    c) Internal Audit function has been established at the Treasury for better monitoring and review;
    d) A security audit has been undertaken and established at the Treasury;
    e) Cameras have been installed in the server room; and
    f) The security entrance is open up to 8.00 p.m.

The committee noted the above but still questions the reasons for such glaring omissions. 

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations

    a) The Accountant-General be held responsible for failing to ensure an effective internal audit function at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
    b) The internal audit function in Government be strengthened to ensure its independence by separating its mandate and reporting structure from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

Irregular Allocation of Responsibilities
 
Approval of invoices on the IFMS is the most critical stage in the payment process. Such responsibility is limited to the accounting officer only or his or her designate in case of absence from office. However, audit review into the IFMS database revealed that the responsibility of invoice approval was irregularly assigned to the Principal Accountant, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, by Mr Chris Lubega, the Database Administrator at Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 1 February 2011. Using this access privilege, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda subsequently approved and paid a total of Shs16.2 billion to various individuals and suppliers purportedly without the knowledge of the PS at the OPM. 

The committee notes that this was an irregular access privilege meant to defraud Government. This could have only been possible through collusion. The committee further observes that the PS should have known by checking his balances on IFMS that unauthorized payments were being made because this is what is supposed to be done on a regular, if not, day-to-day basis. The PS exhibited high level of incompetence in executing his responsibilities under IFMS.

Recommendations

The committee made the following recommendations;
    a) Mr Chris Lubega be held responsible for fraudulently assigning access privileges beyond what was required that enabled Mr Kazinda to authorize payments. Mr Lubega be prosecuted for this fraudulent act.
    b) Mr Pius Bigirimana be held responsible for negligence of duty in executing his responsibilities under the IFMS arrangement.
    c) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure accounting officers are fully competent in operating the IFMS.
    d) The former Principal Accountant, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, be investigated for causing financial loss through fraudulent approval of invoices on IFMS amounting to Shs16.2 billion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, I think while you drink some water, let me refer to our Rule 34: On a day like this and at a time like this – 3.00 O’clock – it is supposed to be the Prime Minister’s Question Time. But Rt Hon. Prime Minister, owing to the business that is on-going on the Floor, we will dispense that for now and allow the chairman to finish. 

MR WADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Negation of internal audit functions. The committee established that when Mr Shaban Wejula was transferred to the Office of the Prime Minister as Principal Internal Auditor, he was from the beginning isolated and treated as a stranger by the staff except for the Permanent Secretary. 

According to Mr Wejula, when he appeared before the committee, it took the intervention of the PS through an internal memo to prevent and encourage the staff of Office of the Prime Minister to give the internal auditor the required cooperation. 

Mr Wejula further stated that his working days at OPM got numbered when the only person - that is the PS - who had given him the opportunity to work turned against him. This arose from the failure by Mr Wejula to carryout guided audit as demanded by the PS. The PS specifically wanted him to assess risks in the areas of vehicle maintenance and procurement of food; and to deliver a report to him and no other internal audit function.

Contrary to the wish of the PS, Mr Wejula identified internal control weaknesses in OPM. He even went further, to the annoyance of the PS, to raise concern over attempts to circumvent regulations for opening letters of credit towards the end of the financial year. The PS embarked on a mission to fail Mr Wejula in his internal audit function. Through an internal memo dated 19 April 2010, addressed to Mr Wejula, the PS instructed all Heads of Department not to facilitate or avail documents to the auditor without his clearance. This was deliberately done to suffocate the work of the auditor and in a way to restrict his access to documents.

The Auditor-General picked up the issue of the Letters of Credit and noted in his management letter that an account was opened in an apparent effort to circumvent the requirements of returning unexpended cash balances at the closure of the financial year by transferring the funds into a different account disguised as a Letter of Credit account. 

In addition, the Internal Audit enquired into transfer of Shs3.877 billion from OPM to Centenary Bank under the “Kasiimo” project – that is a Luganda word that means “Thank you” – (Interjections) – yes, for now, I have become a Muganda. It is “Akasiimo” Project and also utilisation of Shs1.247 billion to buy foreign currency at Bank of Uganda.   

The Commissioner Internal Audit on 16 March 2010 assigned the Assistant Commissioner Internal Auditor to follow up the matter. The PS refused to release the relevant documents to the Internal Audit. He instead chose to write to the Secretary to Treasury, questioning the powers of the Commissioner Internal Audit in inquiring into the matter. The PS/ST wrote back to inform the PS in OPM that the letter that was signed by the commissioner had the same effect of him signing as PS/ST.

The next step that the PS of OPM took was to write to the PS/ST referring the Internal Auditor back to Ministry of Finance for redeployment. He accused the Internal Auditor of failure to interpret and apply the requisite regulations in a manner that could help management; failure to put in place appropriate management systems in the office; lack of the necessary personal drive and capacity to act as expected; and obsession with fault-finding instead of fault prevention. 

The PS concluded in his relatively strongly worded letter, as follows and this letter is attached: “In view of the above, Mr Shaban Wejula is hereby referred back to you for appropriate management since he has not been helpful to us as expected. I need a Principal Internal Auditor in the real sense.” In his submission to the Committee, the PS alleged that Mr Wejula had been soliciting for bribes from officers from OPM but could not substantiate the allegation. 

The letter referred to above left the PS/ST with no option but to withdraw Mr Wejula from OPM. Indeed while meeting with the PS/ST and the Accountant-General, the Committee was informed that there was intense pressure from both the political head and the PS in OPM to have Mr Wejula withdrawn from OPM as a matter of urgency. 

The Committee observes that the poor working relationship between the Accounting Officer and Mr Wejula negated the effectiveness of the internal audit function at OPM that could have detected the financial irregularities much earlier. 

The committee further notes that the nature of functional relationship and the reporting lines between the internal audit functions and the Accounting Officers does not lend itself to independence and objectivity to ensure effective controls.

Recommendations

The committee makes the following recommendations:
    1. Internal audit function in Government be restructured with a view to rationalizing its reporting responsibility without negating its functional complementarity to management.
    2. Government should urgently establish and operationalize audit committees in each ministry, department and agency to supervise the work of internal audit.

Bank of Uganda

On 1 July 2008, the Bank of Uganda signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with the Government of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in which the two parties agreed to the terms and conditions of a banking relationship under the provisions of the Bank of Uganda Act. In this regard, the Office of the Prime Minister opened and operated a number of accounts at Bank of Uganda.

Non Confirmation of Payments by Bank of Uganda

Whereas Bank of Uganda payment guidelines require that all cash payments above Shs15 million and non-cash payments in excess of Shs20 million are confirmed by calling at least one of the signatories, it was noted that in the period under review, 61 non-cash payments totaling Shs 10,928,904,340 were not confirmed with any of the signatories. Confirmations would normally be made by the Deputy Director Banking, Mr Milton Opio and in his absence, by a designated officer. 
In their response, Bank of Uganda indicated that the above payments were not confirmed because they were inter-account transfers which they regarded as low risk. This was in contravention of their own banking guidelines. 

Where confirmation was done, it was also noted that whereas the guidelines required confirmation from one of the signatories, most of the confirmations were made with the Principal Accountant yet the Accounting Officer is the principal signatory. All cash payments above Shs 15 million and non-cash payments above Shs20 million for the financial years 2010/11 and 2011/12 were analyzed. The analysis revealed that from the sample, out of the 473 security papers confirmed:
    • 74.5 percent were confirmed with the Principal Accountant 
    • 10.6 percent were confirmed by the Permanent Secretary 
    • 14.9 percent were confirmed by other OPM staff who were not party to the conditions of the memorandum of understanding.

The committee observes that the requirement to confirm with either signatory presented an opportunity that could be and was exploited to bypass the Principal Signatory that is the PS. 

The Committee further notes that the calls for confirmation of payments were not recorded by Bank of Uganda as required. As such, the calls purportedly made above could not be verified by the auditors. In their response, Bank of Uganda explained that their guidelines did not require that a payment should be confirmed with any particular signatory. In that event, they found it easier to confirm with the Principal Accountant who was always available.

Recommendations

The committee has made the following recommendations:	
Bank of Uganda must comply with their guidelines with regard to confirmation of payments. In addition, Bank of Uganda together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should set a threshold above which confirmation must be made with the Principal Signatory. 

Signature Verification

The payment guidelines require that officers at Bank of Uganda should carry out a verification of the signature on the security papers against the specimen signatures held in the bank. A review of a sample of cash payments above Shs15 million and non-cash payments above Shs20 million from all the Office of the Prime Minister’s accounts over a period of two financial years – that is 2010/2011 and 2011/2012 was carried out. The review revealed that 121 payment instruments totaling Shs 13,454,035,346 appeared to have signatures of the Permanent Secretary or Under Secretary differing from the specimen signatures held at Bank OF Uganda. 

Observations

The committee notes that there was gross negligence of duty of the officers in charge of signature verification in Bank of Uganda and high suspicion of collusion with the the Office of the Prime Minister.

Comparison of the signature verification control and the payment confirmation control revealed that all the instruments with differing signatures were confirmed by the then Principal Accountant and were honored by the Bank of Uganda. The signatures on the security papers were verified by different Bank of Uganda staff. It was also noted that 80 percent of these instruments were approved by the substantive Deputy Director Banking, Mr. Milton Opio and 20 percent by others. In some instances the difference in signature was so apparent that the staff of Bank of Uganda would have had to confirm with the signatory whose signature differed before effecting payment. However, this was not done and confirmations were made with Mr. Kazinda whose signature appeared authentic on all these payments.

The committee looked at a report from a handwriting expert commissioned by the Bank of Uganda into the alleged forgeries and found that out of 120 payments documents, 96 documents were purportedly signed by Mr Pius Bigirimana of which 70 documents had signatures that differed from the specimen; 21 had signatures that matched the specimen; and 5 could not be established. 

24 documents were purportedly signed by Ms Flavia Waduwa of which 19 were found to match the specimen and five could not be established. The Committee observes that since this report was commissioned by Bank of Uganda, we could not place complete reliance on its objectivity as there is possibility of collusion between officials at the Bank of Uganda and the Office of the Prime Minister. This arises out of the fact that the Auditor-General’s report mentioned “apparent differences” in signatures, a matter that was confirmed by the committee through cursory examination and copies of documents were submitted. On the other hand, the handwriting expert reports that the differences that occur are not obviously apparent and are in finer details of the signatures and the forged signatures would thus not be readily detected by a normal person untrained in the expert examination of documents. 

Recommendation

The committee therefore recommends that disciplinary measures be taken against the officials involved in Bank of Uganda. The CIID should investigate the possible collusion and fraud with view to prosecution. 

Cash Withdrawal Limits

Review of communications between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Office of the Prime Minister and Bank of Uganda on the cash withdrawal limits revealed that on 13 August 2010, the Accountant-General granted special permission to the Accounting Officer, Office of the Prime Minister, to withdraw monthly imprest above the cash limit of Shs 20 million. Upon request by the Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister on 8 October 2010 the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development granted the Office of the Prime Minister blanket authority to withdraw up to Shs100 million but subject to proper accountability of the previous withdrawal. The authority did not indicate the bank accounts to which this limit related and the frequency of withdrawal. This was further extended on 14 July 2011 for the new financial year.

The audit review of bank statements of various accounts in the Office of the Prime Minister revealed that on many occasions, the ministry withdrew cash over and above the warranted cash limit. Bank of Uganda sought clarification twice from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the application of the cash limit as to whether it was only for one account and the frequency. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not respond to any of these letters that Bank of Uganda has sent them.

Observations

The committee observes that the ambiguous authority granted by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development enabled the Office of the Prime Minister to withdraw funds on almost daily basis and on various accounts. The committee further notes that the Bank of Uganda’s requests for clarification went unheeded pointing to the possible negligence of duty or collusion between the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee observes that whereas there were withdrawals approved by the PS Office of the Prime Minister, there were also fraudulent withdrawals made without his approval.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury then be held responsible for causing financial loss by giving an open-ended authority to withdraw imprest above the limit set by the PS/Secretary to Treasury. The committee further recommends that CIID to investigate the extent of forgery on cash withdrawals in the Office of the Prime Minister with a view of prosecution.

Non-Confirmation of EFT Files

According to the Bank of Uganda guidelines, all non-cash payments above Shs20 million be confirmed by the Bank with the authorised signatories. EFT payment files received by the Bank should be supported by a confirmation email from the Treasury before they are processed by the Bank. Audit established that a total of Shs20,171,576,247 was fraudulently transferred from PRDP holding account at the Treasury disguised as salary EFT files. These were processed and transferred to the Crisis Management and Recovery account at the Office of the Prime Minister without confirmation from the Treasury.

The Bank of Uganda, in their response, explained that EFT files are straight-through processed and are automatically executed. 

In addition the funds were being transferred from one Government account to another. Therefore, they did not consider it risky to process the transfers without confirmation.

The committee notes that according to the Memorandum of understanding between Bank of Uganda and Ministry of Finance under which the PRDP holding account was opened, no payments were to be effected from this account using EFTs. Furthermore, no transfers were to be made from the holding account into any account other than the Consolidated Fund Account. Bank of Uganda’s failure to abide by the terms and conditions of the Memorandum of Understanding led to loss of these funds. 

Recommendations

The Bank of Uganda be held responsible for causing a financial loss by failing to execute terms of the Memorandum of Understanding meant to safeguard electronic transfers from Government accounts and failing to safeguard funds held on holding accounts. 

Failure to close dormant accounts

According to the Memorandum of Understanding between Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, an account is classified as dormant if there is no activity on that account for a continuous period of 24 months. Such an account would be closed by the bank after giving two months’ notice to the Accountant-General to that effect and the funds on the account would be transferred to the Consolidated Fid account. 

The audit established that there were five accounts opened by the Office of the Prime Minister which were dormant but had not been closed by Bank of Uganda. Such dormant accounts can be used to perpetuate fraud. Indeed the Crisis Management and Recovery Account, which was used to divert PRDP funds from Treasury to OPM, had been lying idle for a long time.

Observation

The committee observes that Bank of Uganda failed to abide by the terms and condition of the Memorandum of Understanding in regard to closure of dormant accounts. The committee further notes that two financial years is a very long period to keep a dormant account open.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should review its Memorandum of Understanding with Bank of Uganda with view to rationalising the number of accounts operated and reducing the period within which a dormant account must be closed. The Memorandum of Understanding should provide for penalties in case of breach by the Bank. 

The Bank of Uganda must adhere to the terms and condition of Memorandum of Understanding to ensure dormant accounts are closed in time to avoid risk of loss.

The Office of the Prime Minister

Utilisation of Funds on the different Accounts
The first account is the Crisis Management and Recovery Programme Account.

The Crisis Management and Recovery Programme Account was opened in July 2008 to receive funds meant for programme activities funded by UNDP. Although the programme ended in 2009, the account was not closed and remained dormant for close to two financial years. However, between 1 December 2011 and 30 January 2012, Shs20.1 billion was irregularly credited on the account from the PRDP Holding Account. Audit reveals that all these funds were paid out. The Shs20.1 billion was all forked out.

A review of the payments from the account revealed that Shs15.5 billion was paid out with the approval of the Accounting Officer, as shown below. For ease of reference, honourable colleagues, I refer you to look at the break down of how the Shs15.5 billion was paid out.

It should be noted that contracts for procurement of motor vehicles and supply of hydra form block making machines had been entered into prior to receiving these funds implying that the source of funding for these contracts had already been identified. Somebody went out and made contracts without the source of funds but deep in the back of the mind, they knew where the money was going to come from.

Purported unapproved expenditure by the Permanent Secretary

Expenditure totaling Shs4.6 billion was purportedly not approved by the Accounting Officer as confirmed by him in writing. The said payments correlate closely with financial instruments which had signatures of the Accounting Officer differing from the specimen held at Bank of Uganda. The payments were made as follows and since these are few, I want to lay emphasis and read them; Mr Isaiah Oonyu who was the official cashier at the Office of the Prime Minister - Shs1.6 billion; other OPM Staff - Shs 295.1 million; New Caltex Ntinda Service Station - Shs 526 million; procurement of ox-ploughs - Shs 285.6 million, other suppliers - Shs 1.8 billion.

Observations 

The committee notes that the funds transferred to the Crisis Management Account were fraudulently diverted from the Treasury to the Office of the Prime Minister. These funds were meant to be disbursed to the districts and other implementing agencies were PRDP was being implemented. Instead they were used to pay for other activities under the Office of the Prime Minister, some of which were fraudulent. Whereas the PS questioned the source of these funds, he went ahead and spent it. 

Recommendations

These were the recommendations that the committee made and we want to put them forward to this august House.

The committee recommends that the PS, Office of the Prime Minister, be held liable for spending funds that were not appropriated to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant at the Office of the Prime Minister, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, be investigated to establish his role in the fraudulent transfer of Shs 20.1 billion to the Office of the Prime Minister and fraudulent payments amounting to Shs4.6 billion.

Cash withdrawals

A total of Shs3.2 billion was withdrawn cash by the Cashier, Mr Isaiah Oonyu, with a frequency of Shs96 million or Shs 100 million almost daily. Of this amount, Shs 1.4 billion was explicitly approved by the Accounting Officer and Shs1.6 billion was attributed to forged signatures. 

In nine instances, cash totaling Shs787.1 million was drawn on Fridays putting into question whether activities were to be undertaken over weekends. No cash book was availed to show the recipients of this cash and how these funds were utilised, no single accountability document was presented for audit and therefore, under the circumstances, all the funds are recoverable.

Observations

The committee observes that it is the responsibility of the cashier as the Official Agent of the ministry at the Bank to ensure safe custody of the funds and properly maintained cashbooks indicating how the funds are disbursed. In his submission to the committee, the Cashier, Mr Oonyu Isaiah explained to the committee that he was not availed a cashbook and would make payments at the direction of the Principal Accountant without any formal records. That is to say, payment vouchers were not there at all. In few instances, he would note in his dairy how he disbursed the funds. (Laughter). This dairy was presented to the committee and later on handed over to the Police upon their request.

In most instances he claimed, he would hand over the funds to Mr Kazinda in his office and without any acknowledgement. The committee further observes that there were two spending points at the Office of the Prime Minister; one by the Cashier and the other by the Principal Accountant who kept a safe in his office. 

The committee further observes that these anomalies should have been brought to the attention of the Accounting Officer through the internal audit function and effective supervision of the Cashier by the Principal Accountant. The anomalies, therefore, could only occur for so long in the absence of these functions or through collusion. 

Following the appearance of Ms Annet Namuddu, the Principal Internal Auditor and Ms Alice Nangoku, the Senior Internal Auditor before the Committee, we observe that there was no effective internal audit in the Office of the Prime Minister from the time Mr Wejula was removed to the time of this investigation – there was no internal audit function at all. The Internal Audit Department did not review key areas of control with regard to payments made, cash management, maintenance of cashbooks and bank accounts.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. 

The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds. 

The committee further recommends that Ms Annet Namuddu, Principal Internal Auditor and Ms Alice Nangoku, the Senior Internal Auditor at the Office of the Prime Minister be referred to  the appointing authority for disciplinary action for negligence of duty and be investigated for possible collusion.

Building Sustainable Peace and Development in Karamoja Project 

As observed by audit, the account had been dormant for close to two financial years. Shs 980 million was transferred to this account on 12 December, 2011 from the Crisis Management Account in Bank of Uganda. The money was withdrawn within a period of one month between 5 January 2012 and 3 February 2012. The money was already utilised – withdrawn and done away with. Shs 681.7 million was withdrawn in cash by the cashier, Mr Oonyu Isaiah and allegedly delivered to the office of the Principal Accountant. There was no trace of any relevant documents namely cashbooks and vouchers relating to expenditure on these funds.

The balance of Shs 289.6 million was on 3 February, 2012 deposited on the accounts of six different food supply companies owned by two individuals, namely; Asuman Sebulondo and Dauda Kawesi without any claim from the suppliers and for no goods supplied. The money was withdrawn in cash and allegedly delivered to the office of the Principal Accountant.

Observations

As noted under paragraph 84, the committee observes that it was an anomaly for the cashier to collect and disburse funds to either the intended beneficiaries or to the Principal Accountant without any acknowledgement on the relevant payment vouchers. Surely, you cannot transact business between Government and individual companies using cash transactions.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss.

The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.

Purchase of motor vehicles

Shs1.8 billion of the PRDP funds that were fraudulently transferred from the holding account to the Crisis Management and Recovery account was used to purchase vehicles for the ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister. The committee notes that some time last year, an honourable member of this House raised concern that PRDP funds had been used to purchase vehicles for ministers, which issue was emphatically refuted by the Office of the Prime Minister. I remember this was hon. Odonga Otto. Yes, it was in the papers and we even got a cutting of the New Vision and as a committee, we looked at it. It was vehemently disputed.

The Permanent Secretary, Office of the Prime Minister, issued a press release in The Daily Monitor newspaper of 23 May 2012 among others denying using PRDP funds. He also stated in the same press release that PRDP funds are released directly to districts and implementing ministries, departments and agencies on the basis of the work plans developed and prioritised.

Observations

The committee notes that the explanation that the Permanent Secretary gave to the committee contradicted his earlier press release as to the source of funds used to procure vehicles for the Prime Minister and the ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister. This press statement confirms that the PS knew that it was against the existing framework to use PRDP funds to purchase vehicles for ministers and the press release was therefore a deliberate attempt to dupe the public.

When the PS, Office of the Prime Minister appeared before the committee, he alluded to political pressure to avail vehicles for the Prime Minister and the ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister.

Recommendation 
The committee recommends that the PS, Office of the Prime Minister, Mr Pius Bigirimana then be held responsible for diverting PRDP funds to procure vehicles for the Prime Minister and other ministers in the Office of the Prime Minister because these were donor funds.

Uganda/UK Post-Conflict account 

Shs3 billion was ostensibly borrowed to the UK/Uganda Government Post Conflict account. The transfer was initiated by the Principal Accountant and authorised by the Permanent Secretary. The money was processed as office imprest. Shs3 billion was processed as office imprest for the Karamoja department.

Mr Bigirimana accepted sanctioning the transfer of Shs3 billion. This was due to the pressure, which had been mounted on him to pay the LR Group, which had been contracted to carry out a program called Cattle Theft Prevention in Karamoja. The firm was engaged in implanting electronic chips on the cattle. This payment would have come under general supply of goods and services, which was provided for in the budget but they opted to go for imprest.

Observation

The submission of Mr Bigirimana was not however in consonance with the purpose for which the Shs3 billion was borrowed from the UK/UG Post Conflict Development Program account on behalf of the Karamoja department.

The committee observed that the loose minute originated by the Principal Accountant states that the money was being borrowed to be used as office imprest in the Karamoja department as seen in the last paragraph of the letter which reads as follows, “The purpose of this memo is to seek your consent and authority to process these volumes as imprest for office running.” This is in total contradiction of the submissions of the Permanent Secretary.

The committee further observes that the request from the Principal Accountant to the Permanent Secretary with regard to imprest for office running was misleading as there was no such imprest established because imprest is to be established by the Secretary to Treasury.

Whereas the PS approved the borrowing and instructed the Principal Accountant to refund as soon as funds were available, the requisition did not clearly indicate how these funds would be utilised. The PS acknowledged to the committee that approving the borrowing as imprest was an oversight on his part. The money was allegedly used for cattle branding in Karamoja, an activity that was not budgeted for at all.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the PS then, Office of the Prime Minister, be held responsible for diversion of PRDP funds to Karamoja for cattle branding.

PRDP North account

The PRDP North account was opened in June 2010 to receive funds meant for monitoring PRDP activities. As earlier indicated, Shs11.1 billion was irregularly credited on the account from the Norwegian Support to PRDP account on 9 February 2011. Of this amount, Shs2.5 billion was withdrawn by the cashier Mr Ewonyu of which Shs1.8 billion was approved by the Accounting Officer and Shs673.5 million relates to the forged signatures, of which no accountability was available for review.

In addition, Shs6.2 billion was transferred to the Ministry of Works in May 2011 for procurement of a ferry on Lake Bisiniya. Accountability documents from the Ministry of Works regarding the same were availed for review but the ferry is not yet operational. Shs1.3 billion was paid to Farm Engineering Limited and further Shs150 million was paid to Nakaseke District, Shs207 million was paid to Akamba Limited and Shs776.6 million was transferred to the staff personal accounts. Details of these payments could not be established as the cashbooks and vouchers were not availed.

The Accounting Officer submitted to the committee that the procurement of the ferry was a presidential pledge whereas the payments to Farm Engineering Industries Limited, Nakaseke district and Akamba Uganda Limited were unfunded commitments at the Office of the Prime Minister.
However as noted in the previous paragraphs, the Accounting Officer expended funds whose source was not clear and without respective approved work plans.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Owunyu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds. 

The committee recommends that the PS then, Office of the Prime Minister, Mr Pius Bigirimana be held responsible for diverting PRDP funds to procure a ferry on Lake Bisiniya and to pay Farm Engineering for ploughing in Karamoja.

Expenditure of the policy on disaster management

Audit notes that Shs6.9 billion was irregularly transferred to this account on 27 June 2011 from the Norwegian support to PRDP. Due to the absence of cash books and expenditure vouchers however, the audit could not isolate the details of the expenditure relating to this figure.

In his submission, the Accounting Officer stated that this money was not used for drafting the National Policy on Disaster Management but was instead fraudulently spent by the Principal Accountant and the Commissioner Disaster Management, Mr Martin Owor, by depositing money on staff personal accounts and accounts of suppliers without requisitions or demand notes being presented.

The committee obtained a list of payments from this account indicating several payments made to suppliers and staff in the Office of the Prime Minister.

Observation

The committee observes that the policy on disaster management for which Shs6.9 billion was spent was already in existence. The policy was already in place; there was no need to fork out this Shs 6.9 billion and cause it to disappear into thin air. The committee established that most of the funds were utilised for fraudulent payments to food suppliers.  

Recommendation
The committee recommends that the Principal Accountant and the Commissioner Disaster Management be investigated with a view to establishing their role in the utilization of these funds. 

Mismanagement of Funds at the OPM

Cash Withdrawals beyond Authorised Limit

Audit observed that daily cash withdrawals of Shs96 million totalling Shs 3,237,987,522 over the audit period were made but the auditors were not availed the relevant documents indicating the recipients of the funds and their utilisation. The cashier, Mr Isaiah Oonyu, informed the committee that there were no cashbooks in place and he was not maintaining any official records of the imprest and cash advances that he was withdrawing. The process would involve withdrawing money from Bank of Uganda, getting it to the safe, paying against a list provided to him or on the basis of a phone call by the Principal Accountant and taking the rest of the money to a safe in the Office of the Principal Accountant.

The only unofficial record that the cashier had was his diary in which he would note the payees. Under these circumstances, the cashier claimed to have handed over a cumulative amount of Shs3.5 billion to Mr Kennedy Lubega, the driver to the Principal Accountant and Shs1.7 billion given to a one Faisal, both of whom used to sit in the Office of the Principal Accountant. The cashier claimed not to know their titles or their schedule of duties in the OPM. It has since been established that the said Faisal was not an employee of the OPM.

In his defence, the cashier stated that he had not been given cashbooks to maintain and that he worked on the instructions of the Principal Accountant. He however stated that in his 21 years in service, he found this peculiar and strange but given his junior position, he could not question a practice that he found in place at the OPM. Mr Oonyu informed the committee that there were two safes being operated, one under him at the Cash Office and the other in the office of the Principal Accountant. There were no documents to support the expenditure upon which the imprest would be retired before raising another voucher. The cashier was not keeping accountability as required.

Shs2.16 billion was paid to the personal bank accounts of the cashiers, Isaiah Oonyu, and Gideon Obbo (now deceased) as advances, yet they were not implementing any activities and had not requisitioned for the funds. The explanation received from Mr Oonyu was that he would be informed by the Principal Accountant that money had been remitted to his personal bank account. The Principal Accountant would instruct him to withdraw the money and take it to him for safe custody and eventual payment to the individuals implementing activities.

Observations

The committee observes that there was a total breakdown in both the system and the internal controls expected in an institution. The absence of cashbooks and imprest vouchers casts doubt on the regularity and approval of expenditure. This was a failure by internal audit not to have noticed the anomalies.

The committee finds it not only strange but also ridiculous, the explanation by Mr Oonyu, the cashier, that he handed over large sums of money to persons unknown to him and without acknowledgement. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.

The committee further recommends that Ms Annet Namuddu, Principal Internal Auditor and Ms Alice Nangoku, the Senior Internal Auditor at OPM be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action for negligence of duty and be investigated for possible collusion.
The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda, be investigated for his role in mismanagement of cash withdrawn by the cashier. 

Imprest Withdrawals above authorised Limit

The OPM took advantage of the donor funds that had been fraudulently transferred to project accounts, to draw funds disguised as imprest beyond the authorised monthly limit on IFMS of Shs 96,371,916. The amounts drawn during the months under review are as follows:
    • October 2011 	Shs 289,115,748
    • November 2011 	Shs 289,115,748
    • December 2011 	Shs 867,374,244
    • January 2012	Shs 770,975,328
    • February 2012 	Shs 481,859,580
    • March 2012		Shs 867,347,244
    • April 2012 		Shs 192,743,832 
    • May 2012 		Shs 192,743,832

Observations

The committee observes that by transferring funds from the PRDP holding account to project accounts, the OPM was able to circumvent the control in place to limit the amount of cash that they could draw on a daily basis under voted resources released on IFMS. Taking the example of the Crisis Management and Recovery Programme, Shs 14.876 billion was fraudulently credited to the account, instead of transferring it to the Consolidated Fund. Shs 867,347,244 was withdrawn from this account as imprest in one month alone, March 2012. 

The committee observes that some of the imprest withdrawals were not approved by the Accounting Officer. The withdrawals were effected through forged security papers.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the PS then, Mr Bigirimana, be held liable for approving imprest withdrawals over and above authorised monthly limit.
The committee further recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda be investigated for violating imprest warrants and forging cash withdrawals. 

Fraudulent Payments made on IFMS

Entries made on IFMS 

Audit established that Senior Accountant, Yahaya Kasolo, together with Accounts Assistants, Ms Lydia Nalwanga and Ms Irene Birungi were charged with the responsibility of entering invoices on the IFMS, and reported directly to the Principal Accountant. The committee interviewed these officers with a view to understanding their role in the fraudulent entry of invoices on IFMS. The committee notes that both Mr Kasolo and Ms Nalwanga were not truthful in their submission to the committee and insisted that all the payments they entered on the IFMS were accompanied by loose minutes and LPOs approved by the Accounting Officer. However, there is clear evidence that invoices amounting to Shs 16.22 billion, which were validated and paid by the Principal Accountant to suppliers and staff of OPM were made without the approval or knowledge of the Accounting Officer.

Observations

Ms Nalwanga’s insistence that all payments to suppliers were based on LPOs, invoices from suppliers, delivery notes, accompanying loose minutes and Contracts Committee minutes contradicts the submission by the companies that received money from the OPM without supplying any goods or services and who then had to return the money to the Principal Accountant. Indeed Ms Birungi admitted to the committee that they would be instructed by the Principal Accountant to make entries on IFMS to pay suppliers without supporting documentation. 

Recommendations
The committee recommends that Mr Yahaya and Ms Nalwanga be held liable for causing financial loss of Shs 16.22 billion and be investigated with a view of prosecution.

The committee further recommends that Ms Birungi be referred to the appointing authority for caution.

The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda be investigated for his role in the fraudulent transaction amounting to Shs 16.22 billion.

Transfers to Individual Accounts

The Treasury Accounting Instructions, Sections 227, 228 and 229 state that all payments should be made by the Accounting officer directly to the beneficiaries. Where this is not convenient an imprest holder should be appointed by the Accounting Officer with the approval of the Accountant-General. However, analysis of payments made over two financial years revealed that in a number of instances huge sums were transferred to staff personal accounts totalling to Shs 34.6 billion for undertaking Ministry activities without following the regulations. 

It was noted that transfers onto the personal accounts was authorised by the Accounting officer vide an internal memo to the Principal Accountant dated 21 May 2010.

Audit request to access the original accountability documents proved futile. The current head of accounts – the Principal Accountant - confirmed that no single accountability document was passed on to him at the time of hand over. The PS of the OPM then submitted to the committee that the former Principal Accountant had an unofficial office in the basement and that on a number of occasions carried some files with him. However, the committee could not confirm that the documents were taken by the then Principal Accountant. 

The committee interfaced with a number of OPM staff who were advanced large sums of money to provide accountability as to how the funds were utilised. Audit review revealed that the payments could be categorised into four:
    • Those with evidence of submission of accountability
    • Those with no evidence of submission of accountability documents
    • Those with photos and copies of the original accountability documents
    • Those who did not respond at all.

The table below gives the summary of personal advances. Honourable colleagues, you can see that those who submitted evidence amount to Shs 14.6 billion; those who submitted without evidence amounted to Shs 10.9 billion; photocopies of accountability submitted amounted to Shs 3.1 billion; those returned to accounts department accounted to Shs 767.4 million; and those of no response from the staff at all accounted for Shs 5 billion. 

Observations

Whereas there was evidence of accountability having been submitted for Shs14.6 billion as stated above, there were no documents at the OPM to support these accountabilities. The Permanent Secretary informed the committee that the documents had been stolen by the former Principal Accountant. The Committee could not therefore access the accountabilities.

A number of the staff mentioned as having been advanced a total of Shs10.9 billion claimed to have submitted their accountabilities to the Accounts Department. However, there was no evidence of such submissions having been made; not even in the files of retirement or advances. The committee could not therefore confirm these accountabilities.

Audit obtained photocopies of accountabilities amounting to Shs 3.1 billion. However, these were not complete and could not therefore be reviewed by the Auditors. 

A number of staff claimed to have returned sums of money amounting to Shs 767,435,963 to the Accounts Department. The committee established that these sums were paid to the individual staff without being requisitioned and for no planned activities. All the staff claimed that they were informed verbally by the Principal Accountant that they had been paid in error and should return the money to him. The various staff informed the committee that they withdrew the sums in cash and returned it to the Accounts Department without official receipt to acknowledge the return. However, some of the staff produced evidence of acknowledgement of returned funds to Mr Geoffrey Kazinda and Ms Lydia Nalwanga. Two of the staff Mr Abdu Muwanika (Shs 88 million) and Mr Martin Etyang (Shs 108 million), claimed that they returned the funds to Mr Kazinda who refused to give them any acknowledgement.

The committee observed that it has been the practice for staff to return unutilised sums of money to the cashier without an official receipt in contravention of the treasury accounting instructions. The normal procedure would have been for the Cashier to bank the funds on the Treasury General Account and issue a General Receipt. For full accountability, the staff who returned the funds would then obtain their copy. That is the normal standard practice. 

The Accounts Assistant, Ms Lydia Nalwanga, who was stationed at Principal Accountant’s Office admitted to the Committee that she received Shs 95 million that had been returned by Mr Cyprian Dhikusoka, a staff at OPM. Ms Nalwanga claimed to have handed over the cash to Mr Kazinda.  Mr Dhikusoka produced to the Committee a hand written acknowledgement from Ms Nalwanga.   

A number of staff advanced a total of Shs 5,068,711,688 did not respond to the audit request to avail accountabilities. The Committee interfaced with the staff, except Ms Beatrice Kezabu who has been charged and Mr Boniface Obbo who is deceased. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Accounting Officer be held liable for failure to secure accountability documents and the circumstances under which the documents are alleged to have disappeared be investigated. 

The committee further recommends that Police investigate whether activities for which funds were advanced were implemented and Value for Money achieved. We have attached a list of these purported activities for the members to see and the committee also took trouble; went to the greater north and Karamoja sub regions to have on-the spot assessments and checks the projects where some of this money was alleged to have been used and the reports are available with photographs and video recordings.

The committee recommends that the staff who claimed to have submitted accountabilities amounting to Shs 10,995,884,316 but could not provide evidence to the committee be investigated with a view of recovering any outstanding sums; as I said, the list is attached.  

The committee recommends that the staff who received and claimed to have returned funds to the former Principal Accountant be investigated with a view of establishing the authenticity of the purported acknowledgement documents and apportion responsibility accordingly. 

The committee recommends that Mr Martin Etyang and Mr Abdu Muwanika be investigated with a view of recovering the money that they claimed to have returned to Mr Kazinda without acknowledgement. 

The committee recommends that Ms Lydia Nalwanga be investigated for loss of Shs 95 million she received from Mr Dhikusoka which she claimed to have handed over to Mr Kazinda. 

The committee recommends that the Staff who availed photocopies of accountabilities amounting to Shs 3,162,885,899 but without originals be investigated with a view of recovering any outstanding sums and again I refer you to the list attached.

The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda, be investigated for transferring money to staff personal accounts purportedly in error and allegedly receiving the same from the staff of OPM. 

Irregular Transfer of Funds to Accounts of Food Suppliers 

The Audit revealed that suppliers of the OPM were fraudulently paid over and above the amount of food supplies. The company directors/proprietors submitted to the committee that they would then be verbally alerted by the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda that OPM computers had developed technical hitches, resulting into posting more money on their company bank accounts in error. 
Actually, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the committee actually burst into laughter when the director repeatedly said, “Batugambye nti machine zayonooneka”, in Luganda, to mean the machines broke down. It was a story they relayed to every supplier and we found it very suspicious. 

The companies were allegedly informed that the problem would persist for three years to be corrected and that they should therefore cooperate by returning money posted on their accounts under such circumstances; Shs 8,575,224,934 was transferred to accounts of food suppliers without any basis as observed below:

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I refer you to the attached list of the various firms and the directors are mentioned there and the amount of money which was wired into their accounts without any request or demand notice given to the Office of the Prime Minister and being told that our machines broke down, we posted the money to our accounts in error so return it to us. One of them is called Christ Embassy and another Jesus Enterprises. You can see how sacrilegious – names that appeal to our morals are being used to hoodwink us to syphon public funds. 

Observations

The committee observes that all the suppliers were prequalified by the OPM. They had supplied food stuffs to OPM against LPOs raised and were duly paid. 

However, they were subsequently paid several times for the same supplies allegedly in error. One invoice would be paid three to four times because the computers have broken. This would be in place for three years.

In all instances the funds were claimed to have been returned to the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda. In all cases except for the companies owned by Mr Amos Mwami (Jesus Enterprises, Salgado, Malaika Enterprises, Rural Enterprises and Kapitol Hospitality), the proprietors produced handwritten acknowledgement purportedly by Mr Kazinda. In all instances where the funds were claimed to have been returned, the companies produced similar acknowledgements endorsed by Mr Kazinda. 

The committee noted that several of the companies that supplied the OPM are owned by the same individuals. The committee further notes that in all cases, the payment vouchers from the companies were written by the same person, Mr Mulindwa Mutasingwa, who also owns Katikamu General Suppliers, one of the companies supplying the OPM. Mr Mulindwa in his testimony submitted that he worked as an advisor to several of the suppliers, preparing and submitting their bids and maintaining basic financial records. He had therefore insisted that suppliers obtain acknowledgement from Mr Kazinda for funds returned and he assisted in that regard.

The committee observes the purported erroneous transfers to the companies would be effected on the same day and funds would be returned on the same day. Inspection of the bank accounts of each of the companies showed that as soon as money would be deposited on their bank accounts, it would be withdrawn in almost similar amounts, most likely to be taken back to OPM.

Recommendations

In the absence of an explanation of the whereabouts of the money purportedly returned, the committee recommends that Mr Kazinda and various suppliers be investigated with a view of recovering all the funds involved.

New Caltex Service Station Ntinda

The New Caltex Service Station Ntinda is a limited company registered in May 2000 and had three directors namely; Hussein Katumwa, Ahmed Masembe and Ibrahim Masembe. The company had been supplying fuel to OPM since 2009. During this period, there was a fuel shortage and was approached by Mr Martin Owor, the Commissioner Disaster Management, to supply fuel to the Department of Refugees and Disaster Management for purposes of delivering food items. There were no contractual dealings with the OPM but fuel would be taken with a promise to pay. 

The committee was concerned that New Caltex Ntinda had dealings with a government department without a formal contract. The proprietor responded that he took it as a business risk to supply the OPM. Mr Owor gave him the Order book and no payment terms were drawn up.

The committee noted that the OPM withdrew 57,000 litres of fuel per day for 4 days (5th -6th December, 2011; 15th -17th January, 2012) at a cost of Shs144 million per day. The committee further noted that the petrol station had a capacity of only 22,500 litres. The proprietor, Mr Katumwa, in his response informed the committee that he would receive signed vouchers from whoever came with them from OPM, make an invoice for payment at the end of every month and forward them to Mr Martin Owor, Commissioner Disaster. 

The proprietor acknowledged having received a payment of Shs 526 million and the documentation was forwarded to Mr Martin Owor, Commissioner Disaster. The committee established that the above payment was made using a forged security paper.

The proprietor could not explain the fuel payment of Shs. 576,000,000. The committee further noted that the drivers who were said to have received fuel from New Caltex, Ntinda disputed the fact. 

Observation

The committee observes that procurement of New Caltex Ntinda was irregularly executed between Mr Martin Owor and the Proprietor, Mr Katumba. The committee further noted that payments amounting to Shs 6.8 billion were not supported consumptive documents, a sign that these funds could have been put to personal use and not in trucks in form of fuel.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the officers involved be investigated, prosecuted with a view of recovering sums involved. The committee further recommends that the New Caltex Ntinda Service Station be investigated in the role it played in the fraud with a view of recovering the funds received for the fuel not supplied.

The committee recommends that in the event the company is found culpable, the company be blacklisted. 

Implementation of PRDP Projects

Background

The OPM undertook to implement the Karamoja Action Plan for food security by providing tractor hire services and ploughing in various parts of Northern Uganda and Karamoja. In implementing the project, the OPM was to: 
    a) Identify the districts where the ploughing will be done and allocate the acreage to be ploughed per district;
    b) Hire the service provider and;
    c) Settle the bills.

The districts were to: 
    a) Identify the beneficiaries of the ploughing;
    b) Supervise the ploughing through district production officers;
    c) Certify the work done.

As part of the implementation plan, contract agreements were signed with M/S Farm Engineering Industries Ltd (FEIL) as hereunder; 
    • On the 6 November 2009 for provision of Tractor hire services for Karamoja District for a period of 12 months (i.e. November 2009 to October 2010).
    • A second contract was signed on 30 June 2010 for provision of tractor hire and ploughing to Teso, Lango and Acholi sub regions. This was after the termination of a contract with National Enterprises Corporation to provide similar services in the greater North. 
    • The third contract was signed on 27 February 2012 for the provision of tractor hire and ploughing for Northern Uganda and Karamoja region for a period of 18 months effective 27th February 2012.

A close scrutiny of the operations revealed the following;
    • The OPM did not have an official understanding (in form of MoU) with the Districts to guide and bind them on their roles in the undertaking.
    • The second contract agreement signed on 30 June 2010 was open ended as it was not time bound and had no contract price, implying that the contractor could supply forever.
    • Whereas all the contracts appeared to be frame work contracts, call off orders were not issued to the contractor as a commitment for services, instead letters were written indicating the number of acres to be ploughed. 
    • A detailed review of the terms and conditions of the contracts revealed that FEIL would make a surcharge of 30 percent to the agreed upon rates when virgin land is being cultivated. The acreage which had virgin land was not identified in advance and this presented an opportunity for the contractor to declare all land virgin, even on second ploughing and this can cause financial loss.

Observations

The committee observes that the contract agreement provided for first and second ploughing, first and second harrowing, and planting. When the committee visited the sampled districts in the project area, the committee was informed that it was only the first ploughing and first harrowing that were done. The second ploughing and second harrowing and planting were not done by Farm Engineering Industries Limited.

The committee further observes that where there was first ploughing and first harrowing, it took place outside the sowing period. So money was virtually lost because you cannot go and plough during the dry season and harrow it and expect people to plant. 

The committee also observes that there was little involvement of the District Local Governments and beneficiary communities and because of this, they did not understand the cost and scope of the work. In addition, the Office of the Prime Minister had no capacity to supervise and coordinate the project on the ground without the involvement of the District Local Governments.

The committee notes that the contract providing for ploughing twice and harrowing twice together with planting was an over-specification as evidenced in Nakapiripirit where the District Production Officer changed the scope of works and instead had Farm Engineering Industries Limited to plough and harrow extra fields instead. It was an open ended cheque.

Ploughing and harrowing in Acholi sub-region

The Office of the Prime Minister contracted companies to open up land for farmers in the districts of Amuru, Gulu, Kitgum and Lamwo. That time, Nwoya was still part of Amuru and so the hon. Minister here should know that when I talk about Amuru, I am also talking about him – Nwoya. The OPM allocated 872 acres to be ploughed in Gulu District by the National Enterprises Corporation (NEC) in 2010. Out of the 872 acres, NEC ploughed only 30 acres and later Farm Engineering Industries Limited was contracted to complete the remaining acres. In total, 872 people benefitted from the project with one acre per household.

Amuru District was allocated 1,018 acres in the first phase of ploughing and harrowing in 2010. NEC was contracted to plough in Amuru District but failed. Farm Engineering Industries Limited was contracted by the Office of the Prime Minister and ploughed the 1,018 acres in the first phase and 1,527 acres in the second phase. However, the beneficiaries of the project could not be established as the list of beneficiaries provided by the Chief Administrative Officer were suspicious as the alleged beneficiaries signed in a similar manner. I remember that when we went to Amuru, I ask whether all the beneficiaries went to the same class and underwent the same signature lessons. Even one of them came up and said, “My name is written there but I have never signed and never benefitted.”

The committee could not establish how much land was ploughed and harrowed in Lamwo District as the district leadership was absent to avail the information when the committee visited the district. The beneficiaries of the ploughing and harrowing project were allegedly selected by sub-counties and lower local council levels basing on the degree of vulnerability. 

The district and sub-county officials in the respective project jurisdictions did not monitor the ploughing and harrowing activities since there was no budget line for monitoring at the districts. Although Farm Engineering Industries Limited surcharged 30 percent for ploughing virgin land, these were not certified by the District Production Officers as virgin land.

Observation

The committee observes that the list of beneficiaries for ploughing and harrowing presented by the Chief Administrative Officer in Amuru District could have been forged. Almost all the beneficiaries signed in a very similar manner as opposed to thumb print. The committee notes that use of similar signatures rather than thumb prints is suspicious. 

The ploughing project was not monitored by the district and sub-county officials. This was mainly because of no budget line to the effect. The contractor could have taken advantage of this to either plough less or not to the agreed specification as most beneficiaries were not well versed with the real measurement of an acre. 

The committee established during the field visits that the Chief Administrative Officers who certified the payments did not physically verify the work done. In the circumstances, they should have relied on reports of District Production Officers. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that a joint Police and audit investigation be undertaken to determine the scope and cost of actual work done by Farm Engineering Industries Limited with the view to recover the excess payments. 

The committee further recommends that such future projects be implemented by District Local Governments instead of a central government ministry which should be doing monitoring.

Construction of Chiefs’ houses

The Office of the Prime Minister constructed 54 houses for chiefs in Acholi sub-region. The houses are graded as follows:
    • Category I is estimated to cost Shs 80 million;
    • Category II is estimated to cost Shs 48 million;
    • Category III costs Shs 40 million 

The houses were directly constructed by the staff of the Office of the Prime Minister from the centre. The committee on inspection of the houses noted unsatisfactory, incomplete and abandoned works and equipment. There were several defects ranging from cracked walls, leaking roofs, unplastered inner walls, misfitted doors and windows. Actually some of the doors were to the extent that a python could find its way through the cracks. The records and photographs are available because we made sure we had full video coverage of the whole field visit.

The committee observed that these houses were constructed without concrete slabs and without Damp Proof Coating (DPC). This could be the major cause of deep cracks on the walls and floors. In one way or another, we have all constructed houses however simple it may be – that at least you dig a foundation, put a slab and then there after you place a damp protection cover and you begin. But these were buildings constructed on bare floor without any slab at all. The floor was made after the structure had stood.

Foundation was not dug for the internal walls. Considering the defects, the committee notes that there was no value-for-money at all. Honourable colleagues, we are dealing with taxpayers’ money, institutions that are on the ground – this report of ours is not conclusive and any investigative committee can go out in the field and establish the facts for itself.
 
Construction of houses for primary school teachers

The Office of the Prime Minister constructed houses for primary school teachers in the districts of Lamwo and Zombo. Each house is alleged to have cost Shs 68 million. The committee observed that these houses were constructed without concrete slabs. Once again as I said earlier, this could be the major cause of deep cracks on the walls and floor. However, the houses in Palabek Primary School in Lamwo District were in fairly good condition and of relatively good workmanship. The committee observed that there was shoddy work on some of the houses that we inspected.
 
Construction of staff houses for health workers

The Office of the Prime Minister constructed houses for nurses in the districts of Lamwo and Zombo. Each house was estimated to cost Shs 68 million. 

Observation

The committee observed that the staff houses in health centre IIIs were in fairly good condition and of relatively good workmanship compared to staff houses for primary school teachers, though minor defects were registered. We have given credit where it is due.

Recommendations

The committee recommends an engineering audit to be carried out to establish extent of poor workmanship and value-for-money. 

The committee further recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should restrict itself to monitoring and coordinating Government programmes and not implementing activities for which they have no technical and supervisory capacity. They are not engineers and should limit themselves to monitoring and supervision.

Settlement of Bududa landside victims 

After the catastrophic landslides in Bududa in 2010, victims and other occupants of areas perceived to be risky were relocated to Panyadoli in Kiryandongo District. The land formerly occupied by Sudanese refugees was identified by the Office of the Prime Minister in conjunction with the Kiryandongo District Local Government. 

The Government has now settled 603 households in the area, with each household occupying 2.5 acres of land. The Office of the Prime Minister constructed 101 houses for the victims on open two acres of land for each household.

Housing project for landslide victims

Out of the 103 houses constructed for the landslide victims, only 20 houses have so far been completed. The houses that are allegedly estimated to cost Shs 11 million have exhibited poor workmanship; others had incomplete doors, windows and open gables but there were families in them.

The committee recommends an engineering audit to be carried out to establish the extent of poor workmanship and value for money. 

The committee further recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should restrict itself to monitoring and coordinating Government programmes and not implementing activities for which they have no technical and supervisory capacity.



Abandoned hydra-form machines

The Office of the Prime Minister procured 90 hydra-form machines to make blocks to be used in the construction of houses in the PRDP region. During the four field visits, the committee found that some machines had been abandoned at various sites; for example, at Palabek we saw a machine abandoned, drenched by rain and vandalised. At Nyapea in Zombo, we saw another one. Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre is a very big establishment. It is not far from – It is in your constituency, Mr Speaker, or just at the border. It is actually there and it is a white elephant where a lot of machinery including vehicles have been abandoned and wasted. Even right now, the economic value of those vehicles maybe zero or negative if you do serious auditing. Some of the machines had already been vandalised and risk being stolen. 

The committee recommends that the hydra-form machines be recovered from the abandoned sites with immediate effect and transferred to the Northern Uganda Youth Development Centre where they can be utilised in training youth in hydra-form technology.

Political supervision 

The Prime Minister

The committee interfaced with the Prime Minister, Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi. Of interest to the committee, was to get an explanation on political supervision, the role the Prime Minister played in procuring vehicles for ministers including himself and his role in stopping the transfer of Mr Kazinda.

The Prime Minister clarified on the respective matters as follows. The Prime Minister said that the nature of financial mismanagement that took place in his office was a case of criminality that needed to be handled as such and he regretted that it took a while to be noticed. What happened in OPM, he  pointed to the weaknesses in the financial systems within Government? For that reason, a consultant had been engaged to review the Financial Management Systems and to look at the general performance in Government entities.

The Prime Minister’s understanding of PRDP was that up to 99 per cent of the funds would be transferred to the local governments to implement programmes and activities within the agreed work plans submitted by the districts and approved in the annual estimates. No information to the contrary had been brought to his attention until the time he requested for the special audit report.

The involvement of the Office of the Prime Minister not only in PRDP but also in other Government programmes was to monitor and evaluate the implementation of such programmes. The Office of the Prime Minister is not structured to implement Government programmes and does not, therefore, have the capacity to do so.

The Prime Minister agreed that he had a meeting with the Accountant General and the Permanent Secretary in which he directed that Mr Kazinda’s transfer be stayed to allow him prepare annual books of accounts and respond to the audit query and hand over thereafter. In the meeting, the only complaint that was brought to his attention about Mr Kazinda was that he used to mix funds of different programmes.

On the procurement of vehicles, the Prime Minister stated that he did not participate in the process and that this was purely the mandate of the Accounting Officer and not the political head. It did not occur to him that the funding for the vehicles was from PRDP. The first time he got to hear about this was when the Member of Parliament alluded to it but his fears were allayed when Mr Pius Bigirimana came out through a press release disputing what had been raised by the Member and clearly stating that the funds were not from PRDP. At that point, the Prime Minister had no reason to doubt Mr Bigirimana.

Article 108 (a) of our Constitution establishes the Office of the Prime Minister and whose main mandate is being Leader of Government Business in Parliament and the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions.

The committee observed that the many portfolios under the Office of the Prime Minister create a confusion of roles, which should ordinarily be under separate Government departments. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister be restructured and that the departments that do not fulfil the core mandate of Office of the Prime Minister be removed from it.

Such non-core mandate departments that include the Department of Special Programmes, Disaster, Refugees, Information and National Guidance should be stand-alone ministries or should be amalgamated to other similar ministries in order to streamline the role and the function of the Office of the Prime Minister.

The Minister for Karamoja Affairs trip to Israel

The Office of the Prime Minister advanced cash to the cashier’s personal bank account nine times purportedly to facilitate the minister’s trip to Israel. The Minister of Karamoja Affairs, hon. Janet Kataha Museveni, confirmed that she travelled to Israel once in September 2010.

The committee noted that there was no indication in the audit report that the minister had travelled to Israel nine times. However, the Office of the Prime Minister advanced Mr Boniface Obbo, now deceased, the cashier at the Office of the Prime Minister then a total of Shs 125.9 million for this activity.

Hon. Members, we went a mile further even to demand for the passport of the hon. Minister and indeed, to the satisfaction of the committee, she went there once.

Conclusion

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank you for the patience and the support you have given to us in the course of our work. This has been a very complex probe, which involved three Government ministries and agencies, including Office of the Prime Minister, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Bank of Uganda.

It also involved three Arms of Government: the Executive, the Judiciary and the Legislature shrinking into action at the same time. Therefore, it took us longer than expected to complete our work. Nevertheless, we are happy to present this report to this august House and I beg for your support in adopting it.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to move.

As I move, we have made a number of attachments and I would like to formally lay on Table the original copy of this report, with original signatures of the committee Members. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those original reports.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the transcribed recordings as we interfaced with the various witnesses. They are in three sets, one is here and the other two –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the transcribed copies.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I lay this so that if there is any need for any other authority to investigate, it can have access to these documents and see how committed this committee was.

I also wish to hand over a file from Farm Engineering Limited detailing documents that attracted the payment. They are all here. This covers the districts of Lamwo, Moroto, Nakapiripirit, Kaabong, Nwoya, Amuru and Kitgum in 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that still Farm Engineering?

MR WADRI: Yes, this is Farm engineering for the ploughing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the documents.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, this also covers the same districts concerning the second ploughing and the rest. I wish to lay on Table the records of the minutes of the committee meetings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I also wish to lay on Table further documents referring to the ploughing and harrowing of the acreages in Kotido, Nakapiririt and Moroto in 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, once again, I want to thank you – this has taken long but I am happy that this can be my handover of the public accounts committee. Thank you.
Mr Speaker, there is also a minority report attached and the person going to present it is around.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We received a copy of the main report; is the minority report attached to it? Okay, it is attached.

4.34
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also thank my chairperson for presenting the report that has taken long. I also want to thank you, because you remember that I used to raise this matter in front of you, wondering why this report was not coming to the Floor. It might be fortunate to others but unfortunate to me that it has now come at a time when some members are from Kyankwanzi and the person I am pinning in the minority report is the same person they made recommendations against. So let it be on record that I do not have any personal interest in this – (Interruption)

MS JUSTINE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to talk about what happened in Kyankwanzi, which was an activity of a party of which he is not a member? Is he in order to relate our party activities to his minority report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the rules allow you – as indicated that it is a minority report – the rules allow you to present it and nothing more or less.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for you ruling. But I know that there is a party governing this country.

Mr Speaker, this is a minority report from the Public Accounts Committee – (Interjection) – Hon. Members, you all know the rules that I am following – unless you want to contest my minority report.

Although I am in agreement with the committee findings, I differ with the majority in failing to find that the Prime Minister, hon. Amama Mbabazi, is culpable in the financial scandal that took place in the OPM. It is for this matter that I present my case to this august House, with specific prayers that this House apportions due responsibility to the Prime Minister for his role in the financial impropriety in the OPM.

Observations and Recommendations

My assessment is that the evidence before the committee gives clear indication that the Prime Minister had a role in three particular instances, namely:
    a) Use of PRDP money to purchase vehicles for ministers at OPM;
    b) Interference in the transfer of Mr Geoffrey Kazinda and;
    c) Failure in his political supervision as explained below.

Purchase of motor vehicles for the Prime Minister and other ministers in OPM

The committee report rightly points out that Shs 1.818 billion of the PRDP funds were fraudulently transferred from the holding account to the crisis management and recovery account which was used to purchase vehicles for the Prime Minister and Ministers in the OPM, a fact that had been refuted by the PS through a press release.

It has, however, been found out that PRDP funds were indeed used to buy vehicles contrary to the press release by the PS. My point of departure from the committee report was failure to find the Prime Minister culpable in this matter. The Prime Minister allowed the PS to mislead the country through a press release that the funds used to purchase vehicles, including two vehicles for the Prime Minister, were not from the PRDP funds. The Prime Minister, after getting information from a member of this House, should have used the machinery available to him to establish the source of funding for the purchase of these vehicles. This is more especially that such funds had not been provided for in the Budget. 

His failure to do so leads me to conclude that:
    (a) The Prime Minister knew that indeed the funds used to purchase vehicles for himself and other ministers were from PRDP but decided to side with the PS in misleading the country to the contrary. 
    (b) Even if the Prime Minister did not know for certain that PRDP funds had been used, at least he was aware that funds for vehicles had not been provided for in the Budget for the financial year under review and should therefore have taken interest in getting to know where the funds were coming from.
    (c) Further, when the PS appeared before the committee, he submitted that he was put under political pressure by the Prime Minister to secure vehicles for himself and other ministers. I think these have been handed over and evidence is there – actually they are very good vehicles. 

Given the above explanations, I propose that this House recommends as follows:
    1. The Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Patrick Amama Mbabazi be held politically responsible for having influenced the PS to use PRDP funds for purchase of vehicles.

The Prime Minister further be held responsible for failure to use the information provided by a member of this House to the effect that PRDP funds had been used to purchase vehicles instead of helping the suffering people of Uganda as it has been planned.

Transfer of Mr Geoffrey Kazinda from OPM

From submissions received from various witnesses that the committee interacted with, most of the financial improprieties were orchestrated by the former principal accountant, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda. It came to the committee’s attention that there were instructions to transfer Mr Kazinda but the Prime Minister stepped in to stop the transfer, a fact that was confirmed by the Accountant-General when appearing before the committee.

Mr Speaker, I want to substantiate on this point. When we met the Accountant-General, he told us he was out of the country and while arriving at the airport, he was arrested by the Prime Minister’s escorts who told him he was wanted immediately by the Prime Minister. They drove him straight to the Prime Minister’s place. When he arrived, the Prime Minister asked, “Why are you transferring Kazinda?” And the Prime Minister, for reasons best known to himself, reversed the decision and warned Mr Bwoch against transferring Kazinda. That is on record and they are not my own words. I am on this side and they are there. 

2. 	It is my contention that the continued stay of Mr Kazinda in the OPM as principal accountant, served to give him clout that he had political backing of the Prime Minister. Mr Kazinda’s being in office fuelled the mismanagement of funds in the OPM as evidenced in the Auditor-General’s report and the committee inquiry. A lot of funds were lost during his continued stay in the office.

Given the Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi’s role in influencing the retention of Mr Kazinda in the OPM, this august House should find him responsible and recommend as follows:

The Prime Minister be held responsible for overstepping his powers by exerting political pressure on the Accountant-General, an act that led to loss of colossal sums of money under OPM. By the way, I have all the pictures with me which I took when I moved in Northern Uganda – and as Ugandans we all have the same blood groups and we only differentiate ourselves in terms of O, A or B. But what you see as effects of this, I expect people from there to support us. 

Political supervision – under Article 108A(2)(a) of the Constitution, the Prime Minister has a Constitutional responsibility to coordinate and implement government policies across all ministries, departments and public institutions. 

PRDP was a Government policy framework where funds earmarked under it were to be used to fund approved work-plans from implementing districts. Indeed, when the Prime Minister appeared before the committee, he said that his understanding of PRDP was that 98 per cent of the fund would go to the local Government; instead, as you all now know, PRDP funds were used outside the framework including purchase of vehicles and some of the funds were literary looted by officers under OPM. 

In view of the above, I implore this House to recommend as follows: 
That the hon. Amama Mbabazi, having failed to play his constitutional role in respect of coordinating and implementing the PRDP intervention, be found unfit to hold the Office of Prime Minister and H. E the President be requested to relieve him of his duties as Prime Minister. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, it is my prayer that this august House finds merit in my submission and adopts the recommendations contained therein. I beg to move.

I want to conclude with this. The time I have spent in this country and I have seen prime ministers, when you read what has come out of our report and what is coming out of my minority report in regard to the current Prime Minister; compared to the former Prime Minister, hon. Kintu Musoke whom I succeeded in Parliament from Kalungu; this one is well-facilitated and has all the equipment necessary to manage these scandals. He has soldiers and not policemen under his command. So, support me in my motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion before the House for debate is for adoption of the report for the Committee on Public Accounts on the special audit report on financial impropriety in the Office of the Prime Minister. That is the motion, which is now for debate. 

The rules also give us an opportunity to internalise these matters and come when we are prepared. Secondly, you will know that the recommendations alone are more than sixteen pages. There are more than 38 recommendations and more than 55 specific recommendations; some repeated on individuals, which might need some study to put them together so that we can shorten the recommendations and when decision time comes, we can process them. We can have one individual having about seven recommendations; stating the same thing that they should be prosecuted; it is said about seven times. So, I implore the Clerk at Table to make this compilation so that it is easy. 

It is a bulky set of recommendations and when processing time comes, we will be able to get them piece by piece. I now defer debate on this particular motion to tomorrow. I hope you will have had enough time to look through the report and then, we proceed with it. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the report. It is over 200 pages. And if you add the attachments and the minority report, between now and tomorrow, it may not be enough for us to give a thorough service to this report. I am of the view that Members be given an opportunity to thoroughly comprehend this report and then, debate ensues on Tuesday. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a new proposal that instead of tomorrow, we have it on Tuesday next week. Is that the agreement? 

MR KAFUDA: Mine is just a point of procedure. First of all, I support your decision, Mr Speaker, that this report be read thoroughly and we debate it tomorrow. But I have seen our colleague, the Prime Minister, being implicated in this report. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to give the Rt hon. Amama Mbabazi a chance to make a statement over the allegations levelled against him?

THE DEPUT SPEAKER: Let us first agree on when we want to debate this report. Tuesday, next week. Is that okay?

CAPT MUKULA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like, first of all, to thank you for your guidance, and also thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts for the wonderful report. It is a very important report for this country especially for those of us – when I hear of billions lost – I went to Luzira Prison for 52 days for money, which was not lost or for which I did not occasion loss. I never even touched or even smelt it; the Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee knows that.  (Laughter) I feel very hurt and I feel deeply touched that billions of shillings – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are debating now; should we debate now or we do it tomorrow? 

CAPT. MUKULA: Mr Speaker, as you have guided, there are some people who are ready to debate. There are some people who have internalised this report. Those who may not be ready can appear on Tuesday. Therefore, I would like to guide that this is a very important report for this country. We would like to account to the people of Uganda in our oversight function and I would like to urge that Members adopt my proposal that this motion be debated tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do not force a debate on this matter because the rules are clear. The rules say three days. So, I am only seeking your indulgence that we do not have a debate and be forced to make decisions based on the rules. That is why I was saying if it was Okay, it would be tomorrow. But if the opinion of the Members is that we debate it on Tuesday, there is no problem. 

So, let us not force a vote on this issue, please, because it is a matter of the rules. So, if it is now being contentious, I will go by the rules and refer this debate for three sittings and we debate it next week on Tuesday. Is that okay, Members? Okay, debate on this matter will be deferred to Tuesday next week. 

Hon. Members, you will recall that there were two items that were on the Order Paper today and the time they were called for presentation, the chairperson had been held up in some other meeting. Could we now go back and discuss this, receive the report and see if we can finish with them?

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION OF RESIDENTS OF THREE SUB-COUNTIES IN NWOYA COUNTY ON HUMAN WILD LIFE CONFLICT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are there copies of the report? This is item No.4.

4.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chair, we had agreed on the timeframe for your presentation. 

MS KABAHENDA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I am here to move a motion for the presentation, consideration and adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of residents of three sub counties in Nwoya County, Purongo, Anaka and Kochgoma on human-wild life conflict. 

The field report has its background from what happened on 3 July 2012 when hon. Richard Todwong presented a petition on behalf of the residents of the three said sub-counties, on the human-wild life conflict in his area. The Speaker directed the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to consider this petition and report to this Parliament. 

Methodology 

The committee travelled to Nwoya District to assess the level of destruction by stray animals and we held meetings and discussions with the area MPs, the local leaders, the community members of Lira Agung and Purongo sub counties and the Executive Director of Uganda Wild life Authority. Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the minutes and the photographs of the said meetings. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those minutes and pictures taken.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very important report, where honourable members should be having copies of the report. When we check on our ipads, the report is not there and I do not know if the copy is available. It is very important for us to have copies. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have hard copies of this report distributed, please? It was on the Order Paper yesterday but we were only time barred.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, the report is both on the ipad and in hard copy. I beg that they get distributed to the Members. The petitioners had only six prayers and then I go to the observations and recommendations:

    a) that Uganda Wildlife Authority immediately compensates the affected people for their crops, animals and property destroyed by wild animal; 

    b) that UWA immediately compensates the families of the dead for the loss of their loved ones and produces or causes the production of their bodies for decent burial; 

    c) that the Executive Director and any other official of UWA found to have been involved, facilitated or sanctioned the offending actions mentioned above should be asked to relinquish their office and be prosecuted for criminal liability;

    d) that the borders of the national park be clearly demarcated to avoid conflict with the local community;

    e) that all the people arrested from Nwoya by UWA be detained only in facilities nearest to the area and immediately produced in the nearest court, specifically Gulu, Amuru, instead of Masindi;

    f) that all elected leaders of the district while on official duty be given free access to the park.

Mr Speaker, I beg that the Members consider all the interventions and interfaces we made from page 4 up to page 12, but I am just going to read a summary of the observations and the recommendations. 
The committee observed that:
    1. Between 2007 and 2012, 126 cases of destroyed gardens or property, injuries to persons or death have been reported.
    2. The UWA Act does not provide for compensation in the event of damage to property, injuries or death.
    3. Some children had dropped out of school for fear of attack by animals from the park.
    4. Captured poachers were tried from Buliisa District and not Nwoya District where they committed the offences.
    5. Trenches are not as effective in stopping the marauding elephants as would be electrified fencing.
    6. The current game rangers do not respond fast enough to emergency situation because they are few in number. Bona fide people from the community should be recruited as game rangers to ensure quick action when elephants attack the community. 
    7. The area where oil activities were taking place had previously been a safe haven for the elephants, so, they have now moved toward the communities in Nwoya. I earlier asked the Members to consider pages 4-12 as what transpired but I am giving a summary of the observations.
    8. The revenue remittances to the local government do not benefit those who directly suffer the wrath of the animal attack.
    9. The four residents namely Robert Ojok, Christopher Acire, Peter Ochaya, and Morris Okello were contracted locally by an UWA official Walter Odokorach to dig a trench of 240 meters worth 1.8 million in Anaka Gwonchog area but have up to now not been paid. 
    10. The original park boundary was fixed in 1953 with metal plates on trees. However, in 1978, Mr John white transferred the boundary. It changed again in 1986 when new maps were introduced by UWA encroaching on community land. So, the community requested for a shift back to the 1953 boundary mark. 
    11. Poachers were killed by UWA but their bodies were never given back to their families. An example was Mr Jacob Okot killed on 27 December, 2011 and Justin Opio killed on 28 May, 2012.
    12.  Political and local leaders needed orientation in conservation of wildlife, cultural and tourism and to be encouraged to appreciate domestic tourism because they are key stakeholders and partners in mobilising and educating communities.

Committee recommendations

    1. Parliament should amend the wildlife law to include compensation for loss of lives, people injured and property destroyed by stray animals from the game park.
    2. The 36 kilometre of trench that were excavated by the Uganda Wildlife Authority should be maintained within the required standards to deter animals from crossing from the park to the community.
    3. Government should consider installation of electric fencing to create an effective barrier between Kochgoma community land and Murchison Falls National Park.
    4. Uganda Wildlife Authority should support growing of alternative crops that help to deter elephants such as chilli.
    5. The park boundaries should be extended to separate the park animals especially the elephants from the community.
    6. The number of park rangers should be increased and during recruitment, priority be given to the community members.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, due to increasing population that has exerted pressure on the lands and the ever-changing national park boundaries, conflicts between human beings and animals are increasing. This has made the people living near national parks vulnerable and intervention by the park authorities can go a long way in solving this problem.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Madam chairperson, for sticking to the time-frame and answering the call of the House that those petitions which affect members of the public should be handled expeditiously. I am glad that this is now before the House for debate.

Hon. Members, the motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of residents of three sub-counties in Nwoya County, (Purongo, Anaka and Kochgoma) on human-wildlife conflict. That is the report for your debate and the debate is open. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have looked at the soft and hard copies. The soft copy is a different version from the hard copy. So, I do not know what actually should be taken as the true copy. I do not know what you say on that because I am reading the two concurrently and they are not the same.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Chairperson, are the extract of the observations and recommendations from the main report?

MS KABAHENDA: The report that is in the hands of the Members and is dully signed by the Members is a true copy. I have not looked at the soft copy but I am sure that the Clerk posted it. I want to assure Members that what is in their hands is the true copy. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. So, let us then proceed with the text that we have in our hands.

MS KABAHENDA: Further guidance.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, chairperson. 

MS KABAHENDA: I thank you very much. I seek your indulgence that the report coming next is similar in nature with the one I just read and only the geographical location is different. I beg that you allow me read the second report so that the debate is – thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay, Members? The subject matter is the same. So, we agree with that. Proceed. Are there copies of that one? That is item No. 5 and then, we do the debate together because the issue is the same but we will adopt the resolutions and recommendations separately because of the specific requests.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE PETITION OF RESIDENTS OF KATUNGURU, KAHENDERO AND KATWE KABATORO TOWN COUNCIL, RURAMA, KABASWISWI, GOGOYA-KABAROLE DISTRICT

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to move a motion for the presentation, consideration and adoption of the Report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of residents of Katunguru, Kahendero and Katwe Kabatoro Town Council, Rurama, Kabaswiswi, Gogoya-Kabarole District.

On the 9 August 2012, hon. Boaz Kafuda, the MP for Busongora County South presented a petition on behalf of the residents of Katunguru, Kahendero and Katwe Kabatoro in Kasese District on community land encroachment by UWA in Queen Elizabeth National Park. The Speaker directed the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to consider the petition and thereafter, report back to Parliament.

The methodology we applied was that the committee travelled to the affected areas in Kasese District to assess the claims of the communities of Katunguru, Kahendero and Katwe Kabatoro. 

The committee in its oversight work included the affected areas of Nyabubale-Kiko Town Council, Rurama and Isunga in Kibale National Park; and Kabaswiswi in Kibale–Semiliki Game Reserve in Kabarole District.

The committee held meetings and discussions with Members of Parliament of the said areas and local leaders of Kasese and Kabarole. 

The committee also held talks with the communities of Kasese in Katunguru and in Nyabubale-Kiko Town Council, Rurama and in Kijura Town Council with the communities of Kabaswiswi and Gogoya and the Conservation Area Managers of both Kibale National Park in Kabarole District, Mr Edward Asalu and Mr Nelson Guma of Queen Elizabeth National Park in Kasese.

The prayers of the petition

There were two prayers that:
    1. Parliament compels Government to gazette at least four kilometres of land to enable the Katunguru community have status for its existence in Queen Elizabeth National Park because this will enable the Katunguru community get land to bury their dead, and also carry out other community tourism activities for their economic development.
    2. Parliament should immediately intervene in the verification of the UWA boundaries as gazetted in 1952 when Queen Elizabeth National Park was established as the only solution to ascertain the truth and convenience of the communities.

I beg to lay the minutes of the meetings we held and the attached findings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, allow me to proceed with the summary of the committee observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS KABAHENDA: The committee observed that:- 
    a) The issue of land encroachment by both the community and UWA was a big problem and that a permanent solution to it be sought.

    b) Population increase was on the rise and the communities living around these national parks were encroaching on the land for settlement.

    c) The UWA lacked manpower and they were thin on the ground and thus could not respond to all issues of the communities at all times.

    d) Some surveyors that UWA contracted were compromised by the communities in some areas such as Butuku I and Butuku II in Kabarole District in the course of their duty.
    e) There was room for negotiation between UWA and the communities to get a balance where either party had encroached.

    f) In areas where there were trenches dug by UWA, they were poorly maintained.

    g) There was no compensation to affected parties whose crops were destroyed by wild animals especially the elephants, and those injured or killed by the same.

    h) In most national parks there were no buffer zones between the communities and the parks.

    i) Most communities were using the 20 percent revenue sharing from UWA for digging trenches.

    j) The youth in the affected areas were willing to be recruited as volunteers to protect their communities.

    k) There were rising cases of school dropouts in the affected areas and since the communities were agrarian in nature, the source of livelihood was being affected by increased poverty rates.

    l) The Katunguru Fishing enclave had taken long in being declared a wildlife sanctuary as recommended by the survey team that carried out the survey in 2013. The virus that causes Anthrax when buried did not die and could survive for 50 more years.

Recommendations

    a) That Parliament should amend the wildlife law to include compassion for loss of life, people injured and property destroyed by stray wild animals from the game park.

    b) That Uganda Wildlife Authority should maintain all trenches in the national parks within the required standards to deter animals from crossing from the park to the community.

    c) That Government should consider installation of electric fencing to create an effective barrier between communities and the national parks.

    d) That Uganda Wildlife Authority should support growing of alternative crops that help deter elephants such as tea and red pepper.

    e) Government through the Ministry of Lands should survey and demarcate the park boundaries to resolve the issue once and for all.

    f) That Uganda Wildlife Authority should recruit more game rangers and priority be given to the community members.

    g) That the remittances of the district local governments be conditioned so that a certain percentage is used for compassion.

    h) That UWA should facilitate and encourage community tourism so that people know how to protect wildlife. UWA should also carry out strategic tourism related businesses.

    i) That the bodies of poachers shot by UWA officials in the park should be handed over to Police and then to the relatives for decent burial.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude that the cooperation between UWA and the communities, which are neighbouring the wildlife, should be enhanced and that UWA expeditiously handles the review of the UWA Act so that issues that affect wildlife and human activity are sorted out and easily streamlined. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson for the two presentations. Hon. Members, this is the second motion along the same line. The motion is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the petition of residents of Katunguru, Kahendero and Katwe Kabatoro Town Council and Rurama in Kabarole District. I propose the motion for your debate.

Hon. Members, as we agreed, we will debate these two motions jointly and then we process the decisions as per each motion. Let us have limited discussion on this. I had already noted some of the Members who had risen. 

Hon. Minister, do you want to speak at this stage or will you come in to conclude? It might be better to speak - Okay, let the minister speak if she wants to speak now. It might solve some of the issues that you might want to raise.

5.17
THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairperson and Members of the committee for the two reports. I really support the two reports but I want to state that today, in Cabinet, we were supposed to discuss the amendment of the UWA law, which we did not. We are going to discuss it next week. Thereafter, it will come to Parliament.

Secondly, I also request for time to go back and study this with my team and then, I will come back with a substantive statement on Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday next week so that I can give information. Otherwise, I had summoned my team here but when we realised that the reports were not here, they went back. My other technical team are out of the country for the tripartite meeting.  I really feel I need to get my team together so that we can deal with this substantively. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, wouldn’t the debate enrich what you are going to come up with since you are coming later? I think the debate would enrich it. We do not want to spend this time without some work. We will use this to debate then you take note and see how you can incorporate it into your comprehensive responses on the issues that we will raise. What we will do is to defer decision. Would that be fair? We would defer decisions on the two motions but we will debate. 

Should we limit the time for debating? Would three minutes be okay? Three minutes each.

5.19
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the petitioner in this report, there are three issues I would like to talk about. One is compensation. It is true that in the Wildlife Act, we do not have any clause on compensation and yet, very many farmers have lost their crops; very many people have lost their lives because of animals and they are not compensated.

In 2011, I had a case in Muhoki, Sub County where an elephant killed Mr Agaba and up to now, his family is still languishing. Nothing was done and the family never got compensation from UWA.

Another issue is about UWA encroachment on the people’s land. Uganda Wildlife Authority has got its own statutory instruments indicating the boundaries of the national park. I do not know why they never used those statutory instruments to re-demarcate the national park. They ended up encroaching on people’s land and already they are in conflict with the community. We are supposed to create a relationship between the animals and the people but UWA has totally destroyed that relationship and the people no longer have love for the animals.

Mr Speaker, concerning encroachment, in 2012, there was a fight between UWA and the community of Kabatoro Town Council, which left one person called Mr Mugisha dead. He was shot by the rangers and it has now become a habit that whenever a person comes up to fight for his land, which is being encroached on by UWA, you have to be shot. (Member timed out.)

5.22
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to a large extent and I thank the chairperson and the committee for a good report.

Although these are petitions from Nwoya and Katunguru, the same issue affects all communities that neighbour national parks. It is saddening that people are killed by wild animals. So, for me, the greatest concern is that we should be able to prevent loss of life. And I can see a recommendation that Government should consider electric fencing. 

I am wondering that with the low levels of awareness among our communities, how many people will die after being shocked by the electric fences as they prevent animals from destroying crops? If we can be assured that the electric fence will be more effective than any other method, then maybe, it would be a good idea. But we risk killing more people and so, I would support that we use the trenches and maintain them well to avoid animals from jumping over them.

The other alternative would be the chain link fence without electrifying it. So, maybe someone should assure me that the electric fence will be more effective than these two methods.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of compensation, people lose their loved ones and crops; you have a herd of elephants coming to an area and destroy people’s crops. In this case, people need to be compensated because they have lost their livelihood. And so, I would support that the law be amended to provide for compensation to communities for the lose crops due to animal invasion.

5.25
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. The conflict between UWA and the community of Nwoya District started way back when Nwoya was still under Amuru District Local Government. The most serious conflict is about the demarcation. It looked as if the officials from UWA do not know the boundaries of the game park and the local people also do not know where the game park ends. Therefore, I would like to support the committee’s proposal of demarcating the boundary. This will allow people to be properly sensitised; let them know the areas they are not supposed to be. 

Mr Speaker, looking at the behaviour of UWA in Nwoya, it is totally unbecoming and the officials need to be given a serious warning. What they currently do is to move from one trading centre to another and from house to house, looking for wild game meat, not considering that some of us are hunters – some members of the community could have hunted outside the game park. But with them whenever you are found with wild game meat, you are arrested without establishing where you got it from.

Recently, we lost several lives in Nwoya and we do not know why UWA does not arrest people and hand them to the Police; why are they shooting people to kill? Whenever they meet somebody – whether you are just walking without even a hunting weapon, they shoot and kill you within the park. I really feel this is a serious issue and UWA needs to be cautioned seriously.

When it comes to compensation, I would like to appreciate the committee. Crops and property in Nwoya were destroyed by elephants almost 20 years ago. And whenever you would report the issue to UWA, they would inform the people, “Tell your Member of Parliament to go and change the law.” They said they were not responsible for compensating anyone whose crops are destroyed by animals. And you can find a parent who has struggled – (Member timed out_)

5.28
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. On the observation that the community should get oriented to appreciate domestic tourism, to me, this is a nightmare; unless we minimise on the havoc and risks caused by these animals. There is no way I will appreciate seeing these animals when I have been losing my houses, crops and people. So, unless the ministry helps us to come up with a clear strategy to minimise on this destruction, I do not see a green light.

On the amendment of the Act, I would love to see a time pegged to it. Mr Speaker, Adjumani is a victim of this – I have been moving to this ministry but all they say is that they do not have it in the Act – they are using the absence of compensation not to have a human face towards the suffering of the people. So, unless we have a time-frame, I doubt the ministry’s statement and also that of the committee chairperson. This is because in law, we can have at least a grey area where we can have a human face towards the people. But when you get to UWA, they simply say they do not have it in the law. So, I pray we include a time-frame to this.

Mr Speaker, there should be a presentation of a clear strategy – I heard my colleagues talk about electric fence. It is that which will provide a sustainable solution; let us go and educate our people and we establish that. This is because this problem has taken several years and people are suffering because of wild animals. If it means talking to our people, let us go and talk because we are all affected.

Lastly, short-term solutions should be provided to these communities. There are many sectors that can help us to handle some of these solutions, for example, the Ministry of Agriculture. Since people’s crops are being destroyed, why don’t we get seeds and hoes instead of supplying us with maize flour and beans? Sectors should come together and provide short-term solutions –(Member timed out_) 

5.31
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chair and members for the report well-made and well-presented. I represent the people of Katungulu, who petitioned this Parliament and their petition arose from the fact that the national park – our neighbour – has been a menace rather than a solution to poverty eradication. 

Mr Speaker, as mentioned in the report, there is a dire need of the ministry to go to the communities and re-assess the situation on the ground. The demarcation points of the national park are just in people’s homes and you are telling human beings that they are your properties in the national park. You show that there is no worry even if the animals descend on them and destroy their property. 

Right now, the UWA people are telling the community to leave their homes. These demarcations found them already there, yet they are telling them to leave or face the wrath of the animals. Can the ministry have a human face and realise that our population is growing? There is need to give away some part to the communities that are already occupying these areas. 

The other reason we may not easily co-exist with the animals is that whereas it is okay for an animal to stray; that is according to the Act; and that when it enters your garden, you are supposed to chase it with humility. If it attacks you, nobody is bothered. But if you attack that animal, you will be held responsible; you can be thrown into jail, dehumanised and manhandled. 

Mr Speaker, those of us living in those communities have seen families fail because during cultivation time and possibly towards harvest, men leave homes to go and take care of the gardens and ensure that the elephants do not destroy them. The women are left at home. But sometimes, the women leave home to go and take charge of their small gardens. 

The trenches, which people have been digging using the little money they get, is nothing to the elephants – (Member timed out_)

5.35
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I represent a constituency that borders Murchison Bay National Park and last Wednesday, we buried three people who were killed by elephants, which strayed from the national park. 

I thank the committee for the report, although it is brought out of a petition from other bordering areas; all the issues reflect the menace facing all the people bordering the park. 

I thank the minister for coming personally to the constituency. I feel it is very crucial for the committee and this Parliament to make a decision on the timeframe within which this amendment can come before this Parliament. The minister said it should have been debated today in Cabinet and the major impediments are two: there is the root-cause of why the wild animals stray; and that one is being addressed as the committee is proposing; through the proposal of fencing, which according to the coverage of the national electricity cannot be a permanent solution because there are places where you do not have electricity. So, even if Government resolves to fence it, it will not work. 

The other is the trench; the trench works for other animals but not elephants. Elephants will get soil and fill the trench for them to cross over. They can pull up tress – actually, in one of the cases, they tried to bury a person after they killed him. So, with the elephants, it will not work. We need a multi-purpose approach so that when they stray, compensation is done for the family, the crops and the dead. 

The second issue besides the digging of trenches is the alternative of planting chillies and a beehive project, which beehive deters elephants. We need the ministry and UWA to come up with a project in all the bordering regions and ensure that the beehive and chilli projects are rolled out. 

5.38
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the committee for the report. If I were asked to vote on which report should be carried by this House, the second report is national in character because the recommendations are all-encompassing whereas those of the first one are specific for the petition area. 

I would have wanted to see us solving this problem once and for all in the entire country. People of Moyo, Adjumani, Kasese and recently, those who use Mbarara – Masaka Road were complaining about Lake Mburo National Park. Some people survived an accident due to the animals. So, if we are to solve this problem, we should handle it nationally instead of handling isolated cases. We can only state: “Starting with the following”- Otherwise, handling this matter in a piecemeal manner is not right. 

In the second report, we seem to be giving a blank cheque to the people of UWA. In recommendation No. 9, you state: “Bodies of poachers shot by UWA officials should be handed over to Police and then to the relatives for proper burial”.  It is not right for this House to associate ourselves with shooting people. We would be condoning crime in this country – we seem to be allowing the UWA to continue killing people. 

So, I distance myself from this recommendation –(Interjections)– no, I only have three minutes – (Interruption) 

MS NAMARA: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give my colleague is that the spirit in which we made this recommendation was on the ground that there were people who were shot and bodies were not presented to their families. In that regard, we made a recommendation that the bodies should be presented to their families for burial. But we are not encouraging shooting. 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, hon. Colleague, for the information. But I am saying, we need to realign or paraphrase this recommendation. But as it stands now, we are giving these people power to kill our voters. I take that as a serious concern. I want to commend the committee for the report and I entirely agree with it. But we should handle it in a national way. I thank you. 

5.42
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for bringing this report, which has taken one year. If you remember, this report was given in 2012, but we got it this year. I thank them for the recommendation they have given. 

While other parts of the country people are recovering from poverty, people in Nwoya District are being terrorised by the wildlife authorities. When people die in the lake, the police and other bodies endeavour to take their bodies out; when people die in landslides, they struggle to bring out their bodies. In Nwoya, UWA kills people and they disappear with the bodies. 

I want also to commend the committee for the recommendation that at least, the UWA Act should be amended. If all of us could move to those areas affected by wildlife, you would shed tears. The farmers have got loans from the bank, they planted rice, but all the crops have been destroyed. It is still continuous each time they try. We try to counsel them but it is not really working. People are sitting at home with their children because they cannot afford to get money. They do not have any other alternative of getting money to pay for their children at school. 

So, Uganda Wildlife Authority or the UWA Act should be amended and the people compensated. Not only that, we should not only say they should compensate; let them do their mandate; let them stop the animals from going into the community, if they cannot do it, we were almost forced to tell people to stop it in their traditional way, because they have ways of stopping it. They get their spears and kill, of course, if they stray. Why is it that if the elephants or animals stray in the community, they are not supposed to be touched, yet the people cannot stray in the park? Therefore, let them do the act. 

I also would like to request the government to try to do a research on how oil exploration is impacting on the wild life, because people have a feeling that probably because of the exploration in the breeding areas of the elephants, it is making the elephants move. 

UWA is even arresting people for having dry meat from just edible rats. People everywhere eat edible rats, but in my district people are not even supposed to eat edible rats and yet they cannot control it. Edible rats are everywhere; you cannot stop them from going to people’s gardens. (Member timed out_)

5.45
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe South, Busia): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am just going to pick from where my sister from Nwoya has stopped. Recently, I was in Nwoya with the minister and the experience I got there is very painful. 

It was late in the evening, towards 8.00 O’clock, but we got people complaining of elephants that had affected their homes. They were even not very sure whether elephants would not lean against their hats, which means they have to keep outside. 

At the same time, it is even destroying the whole environment around the home. What pained us most is that even UWA had already been informed but they were not bothered. The following morning, we got elephants all over people’s rice gardens; they had eaten them and people were claiming they had been there for three days. This is a situation where we feel there is some element of negligence from Wild Life Authority and, Madam Minister, you have a lot of work to do about this because the responses that come from the reports the communities make to wild life, are that there is a lot of negligence, and they are not bothered. At the end of the day, in case of any reaction from the community, you know the law will take its course.
 
So, we just want to avoid this by the responses from your team being a bit faster. There is only one problem that the report is capturing on particular areas, but this is all over Uganda. There are some communities like some of us who come from the neighbouring environments of the lake. River Zoya, which distributes to Lake Victoria, We have crocodiles; the same problem these people are suffering is the same we are suffering along the lake area. You have a crocodile, which will continue disturbing environment, does not allow people go looking after the cows, it captures people fetching water from the river, but in case you attempt to kill this crocodile, you will face the law. And this is a situation, which only comes after years and years of complaints. That is when you see Wild Life Authority coming up to capture those crocodiles and then, we find that there is some bit of sanity in that area. 

What I am only asking the ministry is that let there be immediate reaction and responses where we suspect that there could be loss of lives, or you allow people to kill these crocodiles and these other animals. Just allow us if you are unable so that we stay in peace, because if you are unable to trap these crocodiles like Kenya is doing to have them in cages, why do you allow them to stray and you cannot provide for the food, which they would be looking for? 

There is also one thing that I discovered in Nwoya. The old demarcation of the boundary of UWA has been extended deep into the villages.

5.48
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are all aware that wild life is not only confined to national parks and we in Mukono have been looking for you, Madam Minister because we are neighbours of Lake Victoria. The whole area in my ward, Nsuube Kawuga Ward, for example, there is a big conflict between the human beings and the wild life. 

Mr Speaker, what I want to request is that we discuss this matter in a broader sense because if you are to consider animals that live in our villages; they outnumber those that live in the national parks and we should be guided by a policy. For example, in Kenya, when wildlife attacks any person, even if you are not a neighbour of any national park, you will be compensated. 

That is why I want to propose that recommendation 1 on both reports be amended to read that Parliament should amend the wild life law to include compensation for loss of lives, people injured and property destroyed by wild animals irrespective of where they are. My colleague has just talked about the crocodiles, how about the hippos, which attack our people who live near the lakes? 

And secondly, this “shoot to kill policy” should also be investigated. How many people have been killed? It does not mean that when you attack wild life, you should be killed.  I understand the minister now has what they term as tourism police and I want her to brief this House about this particular section of the police. 

Mr Speaker, it is becoming a practice by ministries to have their own sections of the police. You hear the Fisheries also have police, Madam Nankabirwa knows that, they have also their police; there is one for the Forestry Authority, there is police for Tourism and I saw the minister passing them out. It appears now that each and every ministry wants to have its own police department.

Mr Speaker, I request that Parliament be briefed about these various sections in the police that are attached to ministries.

5.50
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion. In Apac, I have the same problem where crocodiles have eaten my school children and others have been maimed. Many of them have now dropped out of school. Apac community has a very long coast line by the River Nile. We have crocodiles and we have hippos that are constantly destroying people’s crops and the crocodiles threatening the livelihood. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, this part of the community although they donated very big land to the Government as a ranch –

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on the point of procedure. It has been a norm and a practice in this Parliament that if you are a member of a committee, which is presenting, you are not supposed to debate your own report. I do not know whether the Member is procedurally right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who is a member of the committee? Are you a member of the committee?

MS AJOK: I do not know whether you people want me to bring another decision on the same issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules are clear. If you are a member of the committee, you cannot debate.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FISHERIES (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for this report. 

 I also represent the fishing community by being their minister. And being a minister in a very important ministry, the Ministry of Agriculture, I just want to bear witness that what the report has reported are very pertinent issues. I have been confronted by many people who are within the national parks complaining about the animals, the crocodiles, the hippos, which are really disrupting Government programmes.

In the ministry, you are aware of a programme where we have been supplying seeds and planting materials but you find out in some of these areas, we are wasting resources because in most cases, people report that animals stampede their gardens. Therefore, I know that my colleague will be responding but I felt that I should at least bear witness because I have ever presented a report to the minister who indicated that something is being done.

On the issue of population control – you know we are scrambling for the natural resources that God gave us which are not expanding but the human population is expanding.  It is high time that we controlled the population of some of these animals if not all the animals, which we can really control.

The issue of crocodiles finishing fish in the natural water bodies is a big issue. I know that illegal fishing is part of the methods that are depleting the lake but also crocodiles eat fish. The issue of hippopotamuses destroying ponds – because we are now popularising aquaculture and people are willing to go into aquaculture but the –(Member timed out_)   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Let me take the next lot. 

5.55
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute once again on this very important issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Had you contributed before? 

MRS ALUM: Yes, sometime in 2012 I rose on the Floor of this Parliament and I talked about this very issue; the relationship between the wildlife and humans. At that time, it was the buffalo that had killed a woman who was a mother of twins. She was taking her children for immunisation.

I would like to commend the committee and support this motion of amending the Act because last week, as the problem once again happened and this time it was not the buffalo but the elephant. This very issue came up very seriously even with the communities that indeed, we need to amend the laws because as per now, it looks as if the wildlife is more important than the humans. On top of that, if your try to do anything, people are always taken to Police, they are killed and many other bad things are done to them but the animals that normally do this havoc are left to walk the way they want scot-free.

Secondly, I want to talk about sensitisation both to the communities and also the wildlife staff. The way the officials respond to people who have lost their dear ones; the way you talk and interact with the community matters a lot. 

So, I urge the minister that we really need to do something as far as the rangers are also concerned. Then also sensitise the communities because when the elephant attacked our people, the children were playing with the ears of the elephants; even the people did not know which direction to run. But when the minister came, she sensitised the people that if you see an elephant, you should not just run straight but manoeuvre, turn a corner here and there.

Finally, this other recommendation on reclaiming the land which was encroached on by the communities, I have a bit of reservation because we had a similar case with the Forest Authority when they started reclaiming their land; they went up to one of the sub-counties in my district and even affected the schools. So, I do not know how far this reclaiming of land will go. Are we trying to - (Member timed out_)

5.58
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the chairperson and the committee members for bringing out such two good reports.

I happen to come from Bundibugyo which lies in a valley between two national parks; Semiliki National Park which I would call a game reserve and then Rwenzori. All these reserves have animals and sometimes we share with Kasese and the other side, we share with Kabarole. The other side down, we share with Congo. So, we are in the middle of a valley that borders animals only. 

There is recommendation No. 4 where the committee recommended that the wildlife authority should plant tea and red pepper to guard against the animals crossing. But what causes these animals to cross? There are things that are lacking in the game park and game reserves that these animals want. If for example we recommended that the wildlife authority puts those things in the game reserves that these animals come to look for in peoples gardens, for example, maize and potatoes – if they put them there so that the animals do not pick interest of coming to the people because they are causing food insecurity. 

I border almost seven sub-counties where our food basket is, but we are now having a shortage of food because of these animals. Why can’t the wildlife authority put something down there in the bush – plant maize for their animals if they are bothered about their animals more than the human being? 

The other one is the water. They come to look for water. You pull water and put it there. Let them find the water there. They are planning to guard animals more than human beings and yet we are promoting food security, life – the Police are guarding life and property but the wildlife authority are leaving us to die and our bodies are left there.

Recently, we had a route that was crossing from Kasese to Bundibugyo, which the businessmen use to bring goats from the mountains to the market. Now the wildlife authority closed the route and now whenever they bring the goats, they threaten them and they leave the goats there. Where do these goats go? The wildlife –(Member timed out_)

6.01
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Agago is about 100 kilometres away from Kidepo National Game Park but as I talk now, the elephants have left Kidepo National Game Park and invaded the sub-counties of Adilang, Lapono, Palwo, Arum and Pachwa. It is not only the elephants but even the lions that come to Wol sub-county; just that far. I wrote to the ministry concerning this but the unfortunate thing is that the UWA people, I think, are the ones that facilitate the movement of animals. 

So, this thing has to be taken seriously. Our people are suffering so much because of these problems of the wild animals.

The committee has recommended- but I think that the committee should have gone a bit far to demand that they should bring the dead body immediately. Why should we beg? They have killed these people claiming that they have gone for poaching. Have they confirmed that they had gone for poaching? So, I think this House should demand for those people to be brought back.

In 1986, Acholi sub region had war and everybody was in a camp. How can somebody just go and start drawing a map that we want the national game park to come up to this area? For example in Agago, we got information that in 2007/2008, some white man just went and started redrawing an area to extend Kidepo up to Agago. You wonder how that kind of thing can be done in that way. I think the ministry should take this seriously because we are endangering our own people in the interest of the wild animals.

Finally, Mr Speaker, there is UShs 1.8 million that some people worked for: Mr Robert Ojok, Christopher Acer, Peter Ocaya and Morris Okello. They dug a trench to deter elephants but their money was not paid. Why is it that they cannot push these people to bring the money? This is not a matter of begging, it is a matter of command so that they can respond accordingly.

I thank you so much and I believe ministries should liaise with the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness so that we do not wait until we amend the Act –(Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. This topic seems to be quite touchy, the debate will not end today but we will proceed.

6.05
MS GRACE BYARUGABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Isingiro): I am very grateful to you, Rt hon. Speaker for this opportunity. I also want to add my voice and thank the committee for the good report. The challenges that are being faced in Nwoya and Kabarole are almost similar to what we are facing in Isingiro. For your information Rt hon. Speaker, I represent a district that shares a border with Lake Mburo National park so the challenges are almost the same. However, I want to share with this House that in spite of those challenges, we also have some successes and achievements or benefits from the national park. For example, the sub counties that border the park have advantages like getting their schools constructed and they have the community roads repaired so some of us are not complaining. However, what I am interested in is about the recommendations that have been made by the committee.

I entirely agree with many of them but I disagree with the recommendation about installation of the electric fencing. The reason I disagree is simply because as you all know, Isingiro District is a dry area and in the dry season, we agree with the park authorities and they give us passage to take our animals to Lake Mburo to water them. We have always cried for water and if you install this electric fencing, we shall have our animals dying and we shall have our people not getting access to water. So this recommendation about electric fencing surely should not be implemented until we have water in the district of Isingiro. I thank you, Rt hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the Leader of the Opposition will speak tomorrow when we are concluding this debate. Hon. Minister, we will conclude this debate tomorrow so do your consultations tonight and tomorrow morning. We will conclude this debate tomorrow please. We will not extend it beyond tomorrow because these matters are clear and you know them, they are not new. So please, we would not want to extend it beyond tomorrow. So prepare to make your responses tomorrow and we will take a decision then. 

For today, the member for Isingiro will be the last. When we resume tomorrow at 2 o’clock and I request these Members who I have seen but who have not spoken to be here early enough so that they can speak. The hon. Bwambale, Bukonzo East you are there. I have seen Kisoro, Zombo, Amudat, Busongora North, Kanungu District, Lamwo, Kween, Kapchorwa, Kalungu, Kwania, PWD Eastern and the Members for Iki Iki and Gulu District. So these Honourable members will start the debate tomorrow, and if there is a balance, then the Leader of the Opposition will speak at the end and the minister will respond and we will conclude this debate tomorrow.

Hon. Minister, you are duly given notice that this matter will be concluded tomorrow. Thank you, Members for today’s business, we have been able to achieve quite a milestone. Even if decisions have not been taken, we have covered a lot of ground that can facilitate our decisions tomorrow and next week so that we can move properly. This House stands adjourned to tomorrow 2 o’clock and I mean 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.09 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 20 February 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
