

Wednesday, 22 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Please, be informed that the requiem Mass for the late hon. Logiel Annie, has been scheduled for Friday, 24 February 2017, at Christ the King Church, beginning at 9.00 a.m. The cortege will then arrive in Parliament at 10.30 a.m. and it will be received by the Rt. Hon. Speaker, at the steps of Parliament. It will be placed in the front foyer of Parliament for Members to pay their respect.

A special sitting to pay tribute to our fallen colleague will be held at 2.00 a.m. in this Chamber and, thereafter, the body of the deceased will be transported to Moroto on Saturday morning. Burial of the late will take place on Sunday, 26 February 2017. 

Honourable members, may I take this opportunity on a very special note to thank our Ambassador in Denmark, His Excellency Kibedi Zake, for facilitating the return of the body of the late Member of Parliament.

Honourable members, on another note, please be informed that the Bible Society of Uganda will hold the official launching of the Children’s Bible in Uganda on Thursday, 23 February 2017, at Mbarara University Sports Ground between 10.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. The Guest of Honour will be the First Lady who is also the Minister for Education and Sports, Mrs Janet Museveni. Members, you are invited to attend.

The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has also organised a number of activities to commemorate the United Nations World Wildlife Day, which falls on 3 March 2017. Please, follow these activities and see how you can participate in them. Members, you are urged to participate in these activities which will begin with a marathon on 26 February 2017. The main purpose is to raise funds to support families of Rangers who lost their lives in the line of duty. Details of the programme will be availed to you, honourable members.

In the distinguished VIP Gallery this afternoon, we have His Excellency Donal Cronin, Ambassador of the Republic of Ireland to Uganda and Mr Wilson Frazer, his father in-law. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. 

I have a quick statement from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development arising from the debate we had yesterday.  

2.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving us this opportunity to update the House and the country on the steps we are taking to intervene in the current crisis especially, the need for food relief.

Mr Speaker, following on the promise I made to the House yesterday, Government has made some adjustments in the budget and we will be able to raise an additional Shs 15 billion, for immediate food relief to the country –(Applause). We have also in terms of planning taken advantage of the current rains; Government will raise an additional Shs 27 billion, to buy seedlings to supply to farmers so that we can prepare for the next season.

In the meantime, we are taking advantage of the donation that we received from China for rice and that will be available to supplement the efforts of Government. 

Mr Speaker, this is the information I wanted to give to the House and the country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I ask the committees responsible for this sector to monitor this and update the House on the progress, and how it is moving because we have had this debate almost every week. I am glad that some money has been found for immediate intervention. Can the committees follow up and see implementation of this project? We have debated this matter long enough; yesterday, we said we are going to look for money and we have got money. Let them start the implementation now.

2.13
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on matter of national importance regarding the unprecedented closure of many secondary and primary schools. In my constituency, at least more than 20 schools have been closed. I have also received reports of similar cases across the country.

Mr Speaker, I am not against the closure but the timing. This has greatly affected the pupils and parents who had already paid school fees. What perturbs me is that the Ministry of Education and Sports is very silent on this matter.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that Parliament and the Ministry of Education and Sports, should come up immediately and intervene. Lastly, the Minister of Education and Sports should give a comprehensive report about the closure of these schools and the state of the schools in the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

 2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have been experiencing closures of schools which are below standard. It is an ongoing programme. There are schools which are doing a disservice to our children.

As to what timing it should be done – I do not know because you cannot close a school while in holiday because it is not operating. When the school opens, you close and you give the reasons – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chief Whip. Mr Speaker, I agree with the closure of schools. Actually, the best time to close schools is during holidays because there is inspection.

Secondly, the schools they are closing are not worse than Government schools. I have UPE schools in my constituency   but there is a school with only four rooms. I visited that school and found a primary four child studying with primary seven pupils and being taught by one teacher. When you look at the structures of Government schools, they should actually be closed before the private schools.
Madam Government Chief Whip, are you selectively closing these schools? UPE schools are condemned. Why do you close those ones that are at least better and leave out Government schools which are also supposed to be closed?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, these schools are not abruptly closed. Ministry of Education and Sports have a network of monitoring working with the districts. By the time they come to close a school, inspection is done. When you talk about the UPE schools, Government has plans to improve our UPE schools. 

However, the private individuals who own schools are always asked to submit their plans for improving their schools. If they do not oblige, then the Ministry of Education and Sports comes in and closes them. Normally, they are warned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can our committee responsible for this sector take a look at this thing? It will also be proper before these actions are taken for Parliament to be alerted. We represent these areas and we need to know what measures, why and when they are going to be taken so that we can be the ones to clarify to the people that all procedures were being followed. This will prevent Members from making a big matter out of it. The people’s representatives get very angry when things happen without their knowledge. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY AND PENSION
TO MILITARY VETERANS

2.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Mr Speaker, I acknowledge that there were challenges. First of all, hon. Reagan Okumu was the one who asked this question during the Prime Minister’s Question Time and I was asked to make a statement on payment of gratuity and pension to military veterans today.

Mr Speaker, I acknowledge that there were challenges that led to the delay in processing of terminal benefits for military veterans including the following:
Our country’s turbulent history since Independence from 1962 to 1985 led to many combatants leaving military services without formal discharge hence could not be paid their retirement benefits.

Although they were given ex gratia payment by the NRM Government, this, coupled with the inadequate budget appropriated to Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs, constrained the capacity of the ministry to pay terminal benefits promptly, leading to build up of backlogs.

The Military Pension Scheme which is regulated by the UPDF Act, 2005 and the Pension Act, Cap 286 is currently jointly administered by the ministries of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Public Services.
 
This dual management has led to some delay in the management of the pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits.

In addition, despite the fact that the processing of the retirement benefits was decentralised to Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, other agencies and Local Governments, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service still retains the pension authority. This delays the movement of records and payment benefits since the files move through various levels of approval at the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Public Service.

Many military veterans whose packages are being processed have not received their benefits because of their invalid or dormant accounts leading to bounced payment.

Mr Speaker, the number of military veterans within the country has been growing since colonial time without proper and comprehensive plans for the management of their welfare including compensation, rehabilitation, resettlement, reintegration, psychosocial support, gratuity and pension.

The establishment of Uganda Veterans Assistance Board (UVAB) in 1992 under the Act of Parliament was the first step the NRM Government took to provide assistance to military veterans. The UVAB’s mandate, however, is limited to co-ordination of activities and issuance of some limited items like hoes and iron sheets to promote military veterans’ smooth transition into productive civilian life.

Mr Speaker, the scope of the board is also limited to military veterans in the category of “Reduction in force” of the NRA. It does not cover other previous forces that were disbanded or retired. It does not include the definition of veterans of all retired officers and militants discharged from the regular forces at the period of time. 

This initiative, though positive towards addressing the welfare of military veterans including pension and gratuity, lacked a comprehensive approach towards the holistic reintegration of their communities. It also did not provide for a mechanism for a robust and up to date database of military veterans in the country.

In May 2010, however, a countrywide documentation exercise was undertaken to generate data on the ex-military service personnel since colonial time. In total 168,645 persons were documented. All the records were verified to confirm the authenticity and payments have so far been processed as categorised below in the table.

Out of 168,645, 57,026 have been paid; 83,183 are still pending. Again, 28,436 did not qualify because their records were either forged or not authentic. The outstanding claim of unpaid benefits to military veterans and/or their eligible beneficiaries currently stands at 83,183 cases. This requires a budgetary allocation of Shs 536,461,633,580.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has, therefore, undertaken a strategic review of the situation concerning management of military veterans’ affairs in the country. A work plan for clearing the backlog of unpaid terminal benefits has been developed initially focussing on clearing all ex gratia cases of UNLA and Uganda Army totalling 24,469 and residual cases of World War II. These cases will be paid beginning in March 2017. I wish to report to the House that we are securing the money to clear the 24,469 cases. 

Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has agreed with the relevant banks to validate and activate previously dormant accounts to enable beneficiaries access their benefits once paid. 

Currently, all soldiers who are released from the military services receive their terminal benefits on the principle of “Pay As You Go”. I would like to report to the House that over 1,400 soldiers that were recently discharged have since got their packages. The plan and budget for the clearance of the backlog is in three financial years and has been developed starting from the financial year 2016/2017 to 2018/2019.

The cost of unfunded and unpaid pensions and gratuity is assessed at Shs 543.172.713.580 including administrative expenses. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is preparing a project proposal to have the money sourced outside our current budget and have all veterans paid once and for all.

Mr Speaker, this is an initiative that His Excellency has given us a go-ahead to prepare a project proposal for onward discussion and possibly presentation to Parliament.

In Conclusion, Mr Speaker, in the history of Uganda, it is the NRM Government that has prioritised and committed to payment of the eligible militant veterans and those eligible to the estate of accounts of the deceased. The processing of retirement benefits is ongoing and once the required budget is available, all the standing cases of unpaid benefits will be cleared in less than three financial years effective this year. 

To this end, a full spectrum approach is being pursued to address management of military veterans in a holistic and comprehensive manner in line with our national vision. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a statement from the minister that does not fall within the rules where policy statements are made by ministers. It is information that was sought by a member on the question raised before Parliament. We can have a limited discussion on this or seek clarification in areas where we do not feel the matters are clear. Therefore, can we have interventions?

2.29
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the minister for this statement. However, I have some issues that I need clarification on. One, he has talked of the veterans or ex-servicemen of World War II; I do not know whether the minister has a total number of all the veterans that offered their services in World War II? 

As I speak, in Teso, for example, there are quite a number of people who worked in World War II. Most of them died and the few who are living have never received anything. Whenever they come to Bombo, ministry of defence in Mbuya and other offices, nothing is offered to them. Also, the document where these people’s information was recorded was burnt in Bulange Mengo. Therefore, I do not know which document the Government and particularly the minister is using to avail us this information. In Teso, less than five per cent of the ex-servicemen have been paid.

Secondly, I hope the minister this time is sincere about the paying of the veterans once and for all in three consecutive years. It has been a tendency whenever it is nearing election time, that is when the Government goes throughout the country trying to record people -(Member timed out.)

2.31
MR WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I was listening to the minister’s statement, I was wondering whether the minister had just landed from Mars. If you are from this country, have served in the army and represent the people on this Floor, you know what goes on around in this country concerning the ex-combatants.

The retired people from the army are everywhere crying and running around. They have been to Bombo and I have supported some of them with transport to travel to Bombo and they return empty handed. Therefore, when you tell us that this Government has paid people and is still going on to pay, you leave us wondering.

Where are you getting money in March to pay all these ex-service people? Where is the money coming from? We know the situation of the economy in the country; things are hard. Therefore, whenever you have meetings, these ex-combatants come around and are always complaining. Everybody on this Floor is aware that they have not been paid. Even former civil servants who are retired have never been paid and the situation is worse there.

Therefore, we would like you to tell these ex-servicemen that we are looking for the money and once you possibly get the money –(Interjections)– but there are so many there languishing in poverty, they cannot even send their children to school. Many have died and left their pensions there, yet there is no money. We would like you to tell the truth to the people that Government has no money, so that they can live in the know that there is no money coming in March. We know how the economic situation in the country is like my good friend.

I would want you to speak the truth and people will not get annoyed. If you are telling them there is no money, they will wait. Many have died and perished and many have lost limbs and are suffering. They are beggars on the streets. 

Therefore, Mr Minister, this is a serious matter and we would not want Ugandans to be taken for a ride. They know the situation and have not been paid and we would like you to look at those people because they fought to defend this country.

2.33
MR JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I request to know from the minister whether the tedious process they are using cannot be reduced in terms of decentralising this process to district level. Many of our people have not been paid and in Adjumani District, these people are in each of the villages.

I have been facilitating them and they feel they are not well attended to even when they come to Bombo. Can you ensure that at least the process is made in a way that is friendly and when they come to these centres they feel that they are at their former home?

Secondly, can we get the list, district by district, of the 57000 veterans that were paid? Thirdly, can we also get the list, district by district, on the cases after verification? You have concluded that they have not met the criteria because we have these people; they have given us their files and we can assist you to do more verification at our level?

Lastly, these people are highly indebted. They open accounts through borrowed monies and since you take too long to respond to them, you find that their accounts are closed. Can you regulate and inform them appropriately so that they do not continue borrowing when they are not sure on when they are going to get their money? Thank you very much.

2.35
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and would like to thank the minister for the statement he has given us; it has given us hope. However, when you look at the trend of submissions on these veterans; it is not clear. It is only towards elections that we hear issues of veterans coming up. In 2010, old women who are administrators to the property of the deceased lined up in all districts of the country hopeful that they would be paid by 2011. That time passed. 

In 2013, another round of verification took place and it also passed. In 2015, towards the elections, another exercise took place and this time it was said that they were decentralising the services to the districts.

Mr Speaker, we would like to know which is which and when are these people to be paid? The old women are dying without getting this money while others are waiting to die without getting the money. We are wondering why do they say that money has been put – is it another handshake? I thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you for giving way. I did not want to spoil your optimism. The only information that I wish to give you is that despite the statement from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, his own office is even unfunded. He has no funds in the ministerial policy statement to run his office and he is now busy telling us that he will be able to find money to pay for the veterans. (Laughter)

The other information that I wish to give is that before you have high hopes, the person reading the statement has no money to operationalise his own department.

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Mr Speaker, the minister should clarify –(Member timed out.)

2.38
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not blame the minister but the people who were in the docket before him.

I would like to ask if the military MPs here represent only the UPDF in active service or even those that retired. If it is that, then they have a huge job to do because veterans are suffering. 

I would like an explanation from the minister how somebody’s account changes all of a sudden and the money that was being deposited goes to another person.

You say that you pay them but when they come to us, they tell us that they have not been paid even a single shilling. So who is paying who and who is taking people’s money? You need to investigate and find out otherwise we are sitting on a time bomb because these veterans recall the days when they were in the bush during the war. 

It is said that some of them even stopped bullets and you are here telling them that they do not have payment after confusing them that you were going to pay them. It is high time that we get serious and pay those people in the villages.

In most instances, we as MPs stand in for you. When they come to us, some of them tell us that they are going to Bombo because they have a sick wife – now you think that an MP is always here to donate for things that should be obvious?  

You should investigate to find out who is paying out that money, where the money is going and get the itemised bill otherwise you will make these people suffer, the Government will also face consequences and as MPs, we are also being endangered. I thank you very much.

2.40
MR KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for his attempt in answering the question. 

Mr Minister, give us the list of the people you say have been paid. Even if hon. Ssekikubo says your ministry does not have money, with the way this Government operates, money can come from anywhere. 

The minister could be right that people have been paid but who are these people who have been paid? For purposes of verification, this is very important. 

Honourable members, you remember the case of pensioners from the Uganda Railways Corporation who were allegedly paid but at the end of the day, those who received the money were different.

Mr Speaker, because of the state of desperateness of these veterans, you find that whenever the UPDF wants people to be deployed to Somalia or any other operations abroad, it is the veterans who are called. They are now like rented soldiers.

These veterans go to Somalia but unfortunately some of them who return home with injuries are not even paid. The AMISON Memorandum of Understanding states that if somebody is killed or injured out there, there is a figure to be paid in the thousands of dollars. 

I have met soldiers who have been deformed as a result of injuries from Somalia and some of them are veterans. When I see this, I ask myself if the UPDF only sees soldiers as useful when they are still active and healthy in the army. Do they not care for them when they are desperate and deformed in that manner? 

There are many private security firms across the country and some of them export Ugandans to work in the Middle East. These firms also exploit these veterans after recruiting them as private security guards to go work in the Middle East – at the end of the day, you find Ugandans fighting in those terrible wars in the Middle East as mercenaries.  You have created a situation of desperation where anyone who needs ready-made soldiers, simply comes to Uganda and recruits and deceives them after all they went to Somalia –(­Member timed out.)

2.43
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving what I would call “a lamenting statement”. 

Bukedi and Busia Municipality in particular have suffered a lot with the case of veterans. Many a time when a list of veterans who are supposed to have been paid comes out, it is very difficult to find the people of Busia who helped during the time of crossing in and out your things.

It hurts me a lot that the UPDF Members of Parliament in the House do not talk about their colleagues at all. We know that there is “order ya jesh ni moja” in the army but I think one of your roles is to talk about the issues affecting the veterans and your colleagues in the army. (Applause) I rose on this point to encourage the UPDF Members of Parliament to speak about the issues affecting their people. 

Secondly, the children of fallen veterans should be placed. For example, we have the children of the late Chango Macho and many others in this country who are lamenting the fact that they have become the same. Whenever they laugh at them, they laugh at veterans and the UPDF.

Honourable minister, something must be done because you people started with your veteran colleagues and you should all move at the same pace. I thank you. 

2.45
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to understand why the Government is not concerned for the veterans who served between 1962 and 1985 and yet they did serve this country.

Two, I would also like to know why 28,436 former servicemen are not eligible according to the report of the minister.

Finally, the minister said that some veterans were not paid because their accounts were dormant. We all know that in 2010, the Government decided to register all the former servicemen and they requested them to open accounts. 

Is it the problem of the people who opened the accounts or the Government’s? This is one scenario that is very critical at this stage.  Mr Speaker, I am only requesting the minister – I am worried because he is saying that they are preparing a proposal. Why are we talking about a proposal now and yet people have not been paid? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.46
MS ADONG LILLY (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the minister. I would like to ask Government to stop raising false hope in people who are already suffering. In 2011, they raised the hopes of the veterans who were quietly living their lives in poverty; they said they were going to pay them. Many people suffered; you remember in Gulu, we lost three veterans who had come to open their accounts and the rest. When you calculate the amount of money spent to open up accounts for these veterans plus the number of veterans present, you would find that banks raised over a billion shillings in just opening accounts. 

Now, they have to spend that money again and give it to banks. So, they should be fair to the veterans. Many widows and other beneficiaries sold their properties to get letters of administration. Each time I go to the constituency, I get a number of them in my office asking when they will be paid, to the extent of others asking for transport to bring them to the headquarters. Let them make it last this time; if they continue that way, it will not be good; it will just raise hope and leave them in a hopeless situation. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to inquire from the minister, what about the auxiliary forces that were used during the LRA War? We had the home guards in Acholi Sub Region, the Amuka in Lango and Arrow Boys in Teso –(Member timed out.)

2.48
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the presentation. The issue of veterans in this country is very important and should be discussed on the Floor of this Parliament. There have been a number of centres in this country where veterans were told to register: some were told to go to Mbuya, others were told to go to Bombo, others were told to go to district headquarters, others to Ministry of Public Service – they have also had mass registrations in especially when the campaigns are near. 

I remember in my district, Nakasongola, Gen. Bamuze came and registered all veterans, and asked them to open up accounts. Indeed they opened them; but now, their accounts are being deactivated by the banks. But right now they are asked to reactivate those accounts. 

Mr Speaker, I know a soldier, who passed on, who was RA-2000, but the widow and the people he left behind to cater for his family have never been paid. Soldiers know what I mean when I say RA-2000. 

Mr Speaker, my humble prayer is that let the money be identified in the national budget and veterans get paid so that we can close that chapter. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

2.50
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the minister for this statement. The minister himself was a soldier, he is a retired solder and he knows how soldiers have been suffering. I want clarification from the minister on two issues: what is the number of soldiers that have passed on and how much money is that? Secondly, we have heard honourable members of Parliament who are serving soldiers; they also contribute to our scheme here. Those who have left are earning pension with us and are also earning pension on the other side. How is the minister reconciling those people who are earning from two pension schemes; even the law may not favour them –(Interruption)

COL. KULAYIGYE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to inform the honourable member that you are only paid pension for uninterrupted service. Once you are seconded to Parliament, you do not earn pension from the UPDF; so there is no case of double pension. 

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I know the law provides for deferred pension; if you do not earn from UPDF that is defined as deferred pension – for the period that you are in Parliament. But if it is deferred, what do you do with the pension that you would have accumulated for the years you have served when you are not seconded –(Member timed out.)

2.52
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, the matter of ex-servicemen in this country is a matter that requires Government to come out very clearly to address. 

Majority of these people were called to Bombo; people sold their land to go to Bombo to register. Now ten years have passed by and nothing is coming to these ex-servicemen. Why is Government so negligent in running the affairs of the country? 

I would like to ask, why in particular have they sidelined the ex-servicemen who served during the UPC Government? I went to Soroti Veteran Office and we were openly told that those who served under the UPC Government are not in the Government programme. I want to know why and I need an explanation from Government what crime these soldiers committed during their term of office. 

I want to conclude by asking, when money was released for paying the veterans who served during the LRA War, it was found out that some UPDF soldiers embezzled the money. A committee of inquiry was instituted to follow that case. Up to now, no payment has been given to these boys – (Member timed out.)

2.55
MR ABUDALLAH ABIRIGA (NRM, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have only two points. One, I want the honourable minister to explain to us, how much money are they paying to the veterans? The President already declared another amount, which is Shs 10 million for each veteran – (Interjections) – yes, he said that when he was going around during his campaigns. So why are they paying Shs 1.2 million when the President said Shs 1.2 is not enough? Every veteran must get Shs 10 million and the minister is not telling us this?

The second point I got from somebody here - he is saying that we have got our brothers in the UPDF; people like hon Oula - whenever there is a debate on the army of the UPDF, they are not telling us or explaining to us everything. They let the minister lay statements which are not coordinated. They are not explaining to us here in Parliament. That is not good; they are here representing UPDF. If something is about the UPDF, they should stand up and tell us and help the minister. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

2.56
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for that – I will call it a de facto hopeful report.

In the Ninth Parliament, we were grappling with the issue of the veterans and I am very happy that my honourable friend, the minister, is a former soldier. My area of jurisdiction and which I represent, Mubende Municipality, has almost the largest number of veterans. But we have this confusion; I think it is high time that Government defined who a veteran is because at the moment we still lack the parameters to define a Ugandan veteran. Are we talking about people who supplied food? So you should come up with the parameters.

Secondly, I am urging the minister to make sure that when they are compensating the veterans, the issue should be transparent. I have very many cases whereby the Government claims to have compensated some veterans and I have very many names to that effect, honourable minister. If it needs to table those names, maybe next week I will do that. People have not been compensated and yet when they go to Bombo, they are informed that they were compensated. So, honourable minister, I think there is something that needs to be rectified.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is three o’clock and our rules are clear on what we should be doing on Wednesday at this time; Prime Minister’s Question Time. We will pause this matter and resume when we finish with the Prime Minister’s Question Time, which starts now. And it is 45 minutes. We will use 45 minutes. 

Honourable members, there was a matter that I deferred to today for the Prime Minister to start with before we start with other questions. And that was the issue of UPDF’s presence in Equatorial Guinea.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

2.59
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, on the subject matter of our countrymen and women who are now in the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, the team is there under a memorandum of understanding between the two ministries responsible for defence and it is a Uganda military training and mentoring team. And it is there, as I said, under a memorandum of understanding between the two ministries and the two countries. This is something which is consistent with Uganda’s well known policy of promoting regional and Pan-African cooperation and collaboration in various fields. 

As you definitely know, Uganda has had significant advancement in the area of military training and military activities. And it is only fair that this experience should be shared with our fellow African countries. And, therefore, this is an innocent mission specifically to mentor and train and also to promote Pan-African cooperation in the area of security. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this matter came yesterday from a newspaper report. And the statement was that why our soldiers deployed in Equatorial Guinea without the authorisation from Parliament. And that is why the statement has come; we will pause it there and will deal with it by asking our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to find out if there are other details that they need to look at in the memorandum of understanding and others and come back to the House so that we can have an informed engagement, if necessary. Thank you.

3.01
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is about implementation of the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, which Uganda duly endorsed on 22 July 2010. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is: When will Uganda undertake legislative instruments to domesticate this treaty? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if there is need for domestication of the charter in our own laws, this matter will be pursued with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the ministry responsible for gender issues so that this can be actualized as soon as possible.

3.03
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we received the report from the Ministry of Agriculture yesterday, a lot of the causes of the current food insecurity predicament are largely attributed to climate variability which might eventually turn into climate change and to some extent the rural-urban migration. There was less mention of what I will call a systematic policy and institutional failure over the years.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you agree with me that if we had been doing things correctly, we would probably not be where we are now. I would like to give examples of things like – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, ask the question.

MR ACIDRI: Alright, I will ask the question. I had wanted to provide a brief background but the clear question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is: We have had policy and institutional failures. An example is the valley dam saga; we have had promoting crop farming in Karamoja without investment in water for production. I would like to know from the Prime Minister what the Government is going to do in a very unique way to avoid us getting back into this predicament. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, yesterday the Minister of Agriculture dealt extensively with issues leading to the current drought and food shortage. It is the intention of Government to rigorously pursue the programme of implementation of the already well set and correct policies that will mitigate the damage and changes in climate. We have already announced reclamation of swamps, afforestation and other related programmes. So, Government is going to pursue its programmes to mitigate climate change.

3.05
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) issued and imposed a ban on polythene bags amidst conflicting positions in government institutions, including Cabinet. Could you inform this country about the status of the ban on polythene bags because we see many people still using the same, despite the pronouncement?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is no conflicting position in Government and Cabinet. Cabinet has one common position on the ban of kaveeras with width of 50 microns. Therefore, we need more rigorous enforcement to ensure that this is indeed actualised in practise.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what do you mean by the word kaveera?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I salute you for your guidance. I am referring to polythene bags.

3.07
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Cases of diabetes are on the increase in the country. Last week, I attended a meeting of the Diabetic Club in Mbale and there were so many patients. The concern is that Government has come to the aid of people who suffer from cancer and HIV but diabetic patients have been ignored. What is Government doing about it? 

It is good that you are a professional trained doctor. What is Government doing to address the issue of increasing diabetic cases? The patients in Mbale would like to have a ward in each and every hospital in the country so that they can get access to medical treatment. Moreover, the medicine is so expensive and the patients cannot afford it. Many people are dying quietly while Government is looking on. What are you doing about this since you are a professional doctor? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the concern of my colleague is right that diabetes cases are clearly on the rise. The focus of Government is first and foremost education because a lot of the different types of diabetes can be prevented if proper nutrition, exercise and other related matters are followed.

Secondly, screening should be carried out for early detection and, therefore, early treatment because if it is detected early and treated, the complications associated with diabetes can be reduced. 

Finally, if you have got the disease, definitely there must be care and Government, through improved healthcare and services, is endeavouring to do this.

3.09
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have witnessed a number of deaths attributed to misuse of firearms. When will Government start to regulate the use of these firearms? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is legislation in place already and the Firearms Act under UPDF law and other laws dealing with firearms. However, there is a small lacuna that still exists and that is illegal small arms, especially crossing borders. Government is now in the early stages of preparing a Bill to bring to this august House to ensure that there is tighter control of illegal use of small arms.

3.10
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time back, some whites were killed in Bwindi, which made the President of Uganda to go and clear the situation after the UPDF and other security agencies had failed to connect. The President directed that there should be a security road from Buhoma to Nteko. 

I would like to thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister because you wrote a letter in July to the Minister of Works to pursue that road. My question is, since then up to now, what are we doing as a Government to ensure that that security road is put in place? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, a decision has already been made to construct the road. However, the process of dealing with the actual procurement and mobilisation of money takes time. The details could be made available to you by the honourable minister responsible for works.

3.12
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is that there are a number of teams and committees that have been constituted in this country like the Child Protection Committee at the sub-county level and the village health teams. However, Government seems to have neglected them, including the Parish Development Committee, which is an important planning unit. What is the position of Government regarding these bodies and how is Government planning to improve their working environment and facilitate them to do their work? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government firmly believes that mobilisation of the people through the local networks and these committees are crucial in order to prevent disease and improve their own health and hygiene. 

However, the issues of maintenance, remuneration and allowances have been of concern. Government is, therefore, reviewing the matter of village health workers and how the village health committees can be organised. I believe that fairly soon, the Ministry of Health, which is already working on this programme, will come to the House to inform this august House on the progress of organising village health teams and workers.

By the way, honourable members of Parliament and other local leaders will be expected to play critical roles in mobilisation and giving information about health to the wanainchi.

3.14
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is common knowledge that throughout Uganda, there has been an outcry concerning the unnecessary hiking of fees in all educational institutions, right from primary schools to tertiary institutions. This morning, I read an article in one of the dailies of Uganda saying that the Minister of Education has said that Government will not allow the hiking of fees. 

However, I would like to know from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether this is a policy and if it is, what the content of this policy is because there is no minimum, it was just a statement. Would you like to inform Ugandans what the Government policy is concerning this issue? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I saw the article that my sister is talking about. It is true that under Government schools, the ministry regulates and indeed there are regulations. The private sector, nevertheless, is a little trickier and though it may be tricky, the Ministry of Education still gives general guidelines to them.

A more comprehensive and authoritative statement on this matter can be brought to this House so that the House is properly informed on what the Ministry of Education and sports are planning to do. 

This will also allow the honourable members to make an input in this policy proposal. Indeed, it affects the Wanainchi in urban and rural areas as well as the whole country because all of us are concerned about the cost of education.  

3.16
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is an exodus of Ugandans abroad to look for greener pastures and this has left us with a brain drain. What plans does Government have to stop this? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Upe County, would you like to repeat your question a bit nearer to the microphone? 

MR KIPTERIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a mass exodus of Ugandans abroad looking for greener pasture. What plans does Government have to stop this?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is an exodus of Ugandans looking for greener pastures. Do you have a plan?   

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is only reasonable that Ugandans within and outside Uganda look for better opportunities. In my view, if Ugandans are legally looking for better jobs and opportunities, it is good for them. 

By the way, when they go, they know Uganda is their country and quite often, the country becomes a beneficiary because these Ugandans often remit substantial amounts of money to the country, to their families and we all gain from that. 

3.18
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a simple one. I really appreciate the efforts of Government in curbing the food crisis in this country. However, in addition, can Government put a temporary ban on food export and temporarily exempt taxes on food imports? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we consider the current food shortage as a temporary phenomenon, which should not grossly distort the economies of our families and our country. We do not even believe that the currently growing regional trade should be disrupted because of this temporary situation. 

As a Government, we therefore have no intentions to ban purchase and export of food. Actually, we would like to encourage and promote regional trade because we will end up importing certain things we do not have and selling to those countries things they may not have in plenty. Hence, the answer is that there is no plan to ban food export. 

The final comment is that the rains have started coming so let us take advantage of that. Let us know that the prices of food are good and let the food shortage in the country encourage us to produce food for our own consumption and for the regional market. 

3.20
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari North County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that every constituency must have a health centre 1V. Recently, Government created new constituencies, which do not have health centres IV. When will these constituencies get health centres IV? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother has rightly stated the policy. It is the intention of this Government to see that as we go through the next few years, we fulfil all the promises that we have made to the people of Uganda, including a health centre IV per constituency. 

3.21
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda has lost 1,347 shares in the African Development Bank. This is specifically due to Government’s failure to meet its subscription worth $1.293 million, with further losses expected this coming year. This is because we already have a balance of $1.655 million not yet cleared. 

Looking at it as a wider perspective, our payment to subscription as an organisation today stands at about $27.4 billion. Failure by Government to meet these subscriptions has disadvantaged Ugandans from getting jobs and other benefits from this organisation. Having just looked at the Budget Framework Paper, we realise that there is a still a problem. 

What is Government going to do to ensure that payment of subscriptions are done on time such that Uganda, as a Government, does not lose out on the benefits of belonging to these organisations? I am raising this issue because I have had two Ugandans who were denied jobs due to our failure to meet subscriptions. This is also an embarrassment at international conferences. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as all colleagues know, Uganda is a very passionate believer in Pan African institutions. Definitely, Uganda will definitely meet its obligations. There may have been a lapse but this is going to be investigated. If your information is accurate, Government will take a decisive quick action to ensure that normalcy is restored.

3.24
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Ndugu Prime Minister, in Busia District, the local community is being exploited in the gold mines and the condition of their work is very bad. The other time you said you handed over this gold mine to a certain private company. However, the company is not known to the people. What is the policy of gold mining in this country? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we have a general policy and laws on mining and they cover mining of gold. If there are any distortions or irregularities going on, I will ask the minister responsible for mining to pursue this matter. I will also ask you to make the information available to us in Government so that we can expeditiously deal with the matter. 

3.25
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We have nursery schools everywhere and we have not regulated the age at which a child is supposed to go to school. Hence, you find a child of two years being taken to baby class.

Secondly, these children go to school very early in the morning. Sometimes by 6.00 a.m., they are already seated on a motorcycle and yet they are not wearing protective gears. That means we are retarding their growth at an early age. What is the Government doing to safeguard the health of the children so that they grow into brilliant citizens in future? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: The Minister for Primary Education is very welcome. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, at the moment, Government policy has plans to ensure that children before pre-primary, primary and upwards are handled and controlled under the Ministry of Education. 

With regard to children going to nursery when they are two years old, that is obviously too tender to be in school. However, sometimes, you may find that some parents prefer to expose their children to education at a very early age. Others may have other problems about employment and jobs and the say, instead of looking for somebody to look after the child at home, they put the child in a day care centre where the chid will be able to play with others? 

As such, we should avoid the danger of overwhelming condemnation. We should examine specific issues and find out why some of these parents are being compelled to do what you have described to their beloved children. Mind you, parents love their children and they want the best for them. Therefore, in a normal situation, there must be a good case for them to decide to do that.

3.27
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, yesterday we had a lengthy discussion about the use of technical schools and one of the major issues Members expressed here was that most of these schools have remained white elephants. I have one in my district and one of the major challenges I discovered was lack of teachers for these technical schools.

Much as we were talking about building more technical schools in all these constituencies, it appears that Government has not paid attention to developing teachers for these technical schools. I, therefore, would like to inquire about the Government plan in terms of development and recruiting more teachers for these technical schools. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has raised one point of lack of teachers. There may be other reasons why, sometimes, institutions may be not working very well. However, under the BTVET programme, Government has a plan of training an adequate number of teachers to be able to cover our vocational institutions. 

3.29
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, can you explain why Government has continually allocated a very small percentage of its national budget to agriculture, with the 2017/2018 projection being at only 2.9 per cent, which is a reduction from 3.2 per cent of 2015?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my brother knows very well that agriculture is a ministry or is an activity that pulls many other ministries. Definitely, when you make good infrastructure to enable farmers’ produce to reach the market; if you empower the Ministry of Water to ensure that water is available to animals and the population, you are, in effect, supporting an agriculture activity.

In a nutshell, Mr Speaker, the nominal figure that appears in the budget of agriculture, in a way, is deceptive because the real situation is that many different ministry budgets impact positively on agriculture and agriculture benefits from the different budgets in other ministries.

3.31
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, Government has in place the Women Development Fund, which is rolling out throughout the country. Is it Government policy to have this fund selectively given to only NRM cadres? If not, Rt hon. Prime Minister, what would you do to stop errant RDCs who are going out telling people that this money is only for specific people?

The point I am raising concerns Kitgum because it reflects negatively. What are you doing to ensure that such enthusiastic RDCs do not misinform the public?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my sister, Betty Anywar, for giving us feedback that this very good programme in some districts, perhaps Kitgum, may be hindered by some errors being committed. 

The money is for the women of Uganda, not for a section of the women in Uganda. Therefore, this is a matter that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will pursue and if there are mistakes, as you have reported, they will be corrected and the people involved in this will be disciplined.  

3.33
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minster, there are increasing suicide cases among refugees from South Sudan, particularly in Moyo. In a space of two weeks, three refugees attempted to commit suicide and two succeeded in doing so while one woman was rescued. These were in Moyo, particularly Afoji at the border, in Obongi in a settlement called Pararoje refugee settlement, particularly Morobi.

My question here is, what is the Uganda Refugee Policy in as far as protection of people who have sought refuge in Uganda is concerned? Why should refugees kill themselves in Uganda when they survived death from their own country? What is the policy of Uganda on refugees? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, let me remind my brother, hon. Fungaroo, that Uganda hosts perhaps the highest number of refugees in Africa now. Secondly, Uganda has, the best policy of dealing with refugees, definitely on the continent and perhaps beyond.

However, on the issue of committing suicide, your information does not, in any way, surprise me. It is true that when you are displaced from your own familiar environment or home and you go to a strange new place, there are many challenges and stresses and that can cause mental problems, mental distress, depression and other related mental issues, which may lead to one committing suicide.

I, therefore, believe that your information is consistent with what is expected. It is true that we expect higher cases of suicide among distressed people compared with a normally settled population. Therefore, the answer is to do whatever is possible to give more support to these brothers and sisters in refugee camps.

3.36
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, according to the UCE and UACE results, there is poor performance in science subjects. It is also well known that Government is putting more emphasis on science subjects, according to the job market conditions. 

What is Government’s plan to provide science teachers, especially in rural schools? Is it also true that Government has reached the recruitment ceiling for teachers? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as we all know, we are promoting education in general but we are also putting more focus on science and better consideration to science teachers.

With regard to ceilings, they have partly been dependent on availability of the wage. However, I know that the Ministry of Education does all that is possible to expand the wage and to put as much emphasis and as much support to science teachers in order to promote science education.

3.38
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, in the recent Primary Teacher Colleges (PTCs) intake, the cut off points have been so high that so many people were left out. The two essential subjects became necessary in that if you do not pass them, you are not admitted. That has left many people out and many PTCs did not admit people to their capacity. 

What plans do you have, as Government, to absorb those people that were left out and those that passed only one necessary subject like Mathematics or English? What are you going to do for the PTCs that have not admitted students to their full capacity?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I expect PTCs to recruit the required numbers. If there are gaps, I think that the ministry responsible for education will have to explain this. Therefore, please provide that information to us in Government and to the Ministry of Education so that if there is a gap, it can be handled accordingly.

3.39
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, this country has waited for too long to have the LC I and LC II elections. Unfortunately, there have recently been very conflicting positions between the Executive and Electoral Commission (EC). The EC is saying that we should wait and probably we might not have them as early as we had expected. Can you kindly provide an update on that?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, this matter has been discussed in the House a number of times. The last time I spoke about it, I said that elections were expected between March and April. I did, however, say that the authoritative and statutory body would announce the actual date for the election for LCs, which is the National Electoral Commission. 

Therefore, I would advise that we hold on until the National Electoral Commission pronounces itself on the issue of the date for the elections. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have four minutes to end of Prime Minister’s Question Time. I will ask the Leader of Opposition to raise some issues and the Prime Minister will conclude. Another opportunity will be available next week on Wednesday.

3.41
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A question or two on food security and agriculture have been asked and the Rt hon. Prime Minister, with due respect, has casually responded to them. I expected someone trained by the former President Milton Obote, in a group that he liked a lot - because he kept mentioning Rugunda, Mutebile and Museveni. At the time of his death, he said he was surprised that Rugunda, who was the most intelligent, was not the leader - to have casually answered these questions.

Mr Speaker, the policy of this Government, as stated on agriculture, is that there should be five professionals: a production coordinator, principal agricultural officer, principal diary officer, principal fisheries officer and an entomologist at every district. The total, as calculated by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, would come to about 600. However, only 77 have been recruited so far. 

We are supposed to have the same policy as stated: an agricultural officer, a diary officer and a fisheries officer at the sub-county. In the old days, they used to be called extension workers. Can the Rt hon. Prime Minister tell this House because the Shs 49 billion that is required to have these professionals recruited has not been provided in the budgets of several years yet we have a budget of Shs 62 billion to recruit activists who are called ISO. There is now ISO everywhere, even in villages and sub-counties. Why has the policy of this Government shifted to survival than to improve the welfare of Ugandans?

The money to recruit ISO and PISO can be found easily but the money to recruit people to coordinate and supervise agriculture cannot be found.

It is the same reason the Rt hon. Prime Minister speaks as if he is also helpless because when he is answering questions, he says, this will be done. The Prime Minister cannot speak as if he is lamenting. He needs to be ordering things to be done. For agriculture, he says we have roads and schools and he says all that is agriculture. Really?

Lastly, yesterday the President of Azerbaijan, Ilham Aliyev appointed his wife as Deputy President. This wife had been a Member of Parliament and has been rising. Can the Prime Minister assure this Parliament and the country that with a similar situation in Uganda of a wife of a President becoming an MP and a minister, that this will not take us to where Azerbaijan is? Mr Speaker, that would tantamount to nepotism, which I know he does not like.

Finally, the Rt hon. Prime Minister studied from Mwiri but he was born hundreds of miles away. During the Government of Milton Obote, which he served, there was a policy that every district must have a very good school. That is why he studied in Busoga from Kigezi and the late Aronda studied in Kitgum in Acholi. Hon. Bidandi Ssali in Nyakasura. 

This Government speaks about unity and integration yet these days we are all descending on Kampala. You no longer have the Rugundas from Kigezi going to study in Kitgum. Has it become a policy of this Government that everybody is for himself and God for all of us?

DR RUGUNDA:  Mr Speaker, if I may start with the last point about schools, it is true that during our secondary school days, there were a handful of schools scattered in the country that we struggled to go to and I agree that Busoga College Mwiri was definitely one of those.

However, now the whole country is full of good quality schools. Therefore, there is no more compulsion that you must travel from Kabale to Jinja in order to get a very good school because there are very many good schools in Kabale.

I am glad that my brother, hon. Ssemujju, has indeed helped us to tell this august House and the whole country that the quality of schools in Uganda is very high. That is why, at the beginning of the term you will see buses from our neighbouring countries heading to our schools because of the quality of education and secondary schools that we have. 

With regard to the issue of appointments, the laws of Uganda are very clear that in conduct of public affairs in the governance of Uganda, the Constitution is a supreme document and it will guide hon. Ssemujju or anybody who will be in charge of the affairs of this country.

Let us not over speculate or create stories. Uganda is on the right route and the question of doing things that are bizarre does not arise. 

Regarding the issue of security, I am rather surprised that hon. Ssemujju questioned the improvement of security and helping the intelligence and security network to be strong. In order to have meaningful governance and economic progress, you must be secure as a country. 

Therefore, rightly, Government has prioritised security as a prerequisite for stability and development and the intelligence network plays a critical role in making the country secure. 

My last comment is that I share the views of my brother that we must do everything possible to get more qualified staff, as much as our budget can allow, so that they can be in the field to organise, sensitise and educate the wanainchi so that our agricultural practises can be modernised and we get the best out of it. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, I apologise for stopping here. I had many honourable members in my list including Agago, Mityana Municipality, Amuru district, Kamwenge district, Kumu County, hon. Ndeezi, Member for Kwania and Koboko district. All these were on my list but the clock did not permit us to go that far. 

Honourable members, we had a matter that was pending. We stayed it in order to finish with the Prime Minister’s Question Time and then go back to it and conclude. It was a statement on the pension to the veterans.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am afraid that the Prime Minister might leave us before we close the House. Yesterday, by the time we adjourned, he had promised that they were going to have a Cabinet meeting and come back to this House with a report on the issue that was on the Floor. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, while he is still here, to give us that feedback? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The matter on food security was handled by hon. Bahati before you came. (Laughter)

The issue was initially raised by hon. Reagan Okumu. Would you like to raise some supplementary issues? Is the minister for veteran affairs here?

The Leader of Government Business is around but there was somebody who had presented a statement and who has more information on the specific content of the document; the honourable minister in charge of veterans. Can we proceed with this discussion in the absence of the minister? I think we should wait for the minister to come back so that it is comprehensively handled.

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE RESCHEDULING OF THE BUKAKATA-KALANGALA FERRY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have been informed that this statement is not ready for presentation today. Next item.

MOTION FOR LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BILL ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL CONTENT BILL, 2017”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that motion was presented yesterday but it was not justified and I did not pose the question. Honourable member, would you like to briefly speak to your motion?

3.53
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the time that you have accorded to us to speak to this motion. 

For Members who were not here yesterday, we presented a motion seeking leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017” and this is the justification.

Mr Speaker, I would like to begin the justification of this motion by paying tribute to the Ninth Parliament and to you, Mr Speaker, for the provisions of local content in the Petroleum Law of 2013. 

The Ninth Parliament found it prudent to give local content provisions special attention when they were enacting that law. Although the law did not define local content in the Act to clarify if it meant to benefit a company registered in Uganda or owned by a Ugandan citizen and does not mention penalties for non-compliance, the local content requirements provided for in that law have resulted in the increased participation of Ugandans as well as the utilisation and consumption of locally manufactured goods available in the petroleum sector. 

Mr Speaker, yesterday there was a conference in this country discussing local content matters in the oil and gas sector. Oil and gas is just one sector and yet the country needs local content provisions in almost all sectors. 

In all loans we approve, in every project where public funds are spent, in every engagement with multi-national companies and foreign Governments, we need local content so that this country’s local suppliers, manufacturers and service providers will benefit from the backward, forward and sideways linkages associated with our engagement with foreign contractors and investors. 

Mr Speaker, you may recall that the President of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, while delivering his first State of the Nation Address to the Tenth Parliament, used the term haemorrhage while referring to the donations of the dollars this country gives to different countries where we import goods and services. In his wisdom, the President wished and advised that this haemorrhage must be dealt with if this country is to attain the much cherished middle-income status by 2020. 

Mr Speaker, the biggest donors of our dollars in Uganda to foreign countries are not the people of Uganda. Actually, it is the Government of Uganda. Through procurement of goods and services, our Government has, over the years, been donating dollars by engaging foreign companies in almost all procurements from constructing drainage channels, mere roundabouts, Government buildings to major roads and power dams. 

The Government has often claimed limited capacity of Ugandan firms yet there have been limited efforts to build this capacity, making the country continuously donate more dollars to foreign countries to provide goods and services, thereby worsening the already poor balance of payment accounts. This has partially contributed to the on-going volatility in our foreign exchange regime where we continuously witness our shilling weakening against all international currencies.

Mr Speaker, you may also recall that on this Floor, Members of the Tenth Parliament have often insisted that Government should endeavour to take into consideration local content provisions while negotiating loans, implementing projects and negotiating with investors so that Ugandans can benefit from the transfer of skills and technology and gain employment. Promises have been made by every minister and the willingness seems to be much in Cabinet. However, they have no enabling law and guidelines to support them to undertake local content requirement. 

Since Government has been slow or maybe had no intention of bringing a local content law for Parliament’s consideration, the movers of this Bill, who are seeking leave, thought that Ugandans needed this law sooner rather than later. We have provided a draft and we shall get input from all stakeholders. We need Cabinet’s support to make this law possible. 

Mr Speaker, donors, foreign companies and missions might be quick to criticise this effort of enacting such a law, claiming that it is against the principles of international trade and might scare away potential investors but each one of them, in their respective countries, work tirelessly to protect their local companies from international competition.

Mr Speaker, it is not the Americans who are constructing bridges, roads and power dams in China but the Chinese companies. The French companies may not be given a chance to handle projects in the United Kingdom. Preference is given to the British. The new American President, Donald Trump, is gaining a lot of support with his policy of “Americans First”. On the contrary, we have no policy that puts Ugandans first. In fact, it is foreigners first and Ugandans last.

Look at our procurements. Most of the major projects involving large chunks of money in Uganda are awarded to foreign companies. For purposes of this motion, I worked with the Department of Research where we had a review of the major contracts awarded in this country in just one sector of transport during the last five years. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay, on the Table, the preliminary findings of that research. The total value of money committed for just 38 contracts above Shs 50 billion is around Shs 15.9 trillion. Out of this, Shs 3,646 billion are loans while grants are about Shs 12,324 billion. 

Mr Speaker, we did an analysis where we categorised, which companies are being awarded contracts of above Shs 50 billion both for grants and loans as well as Government of Uganda money. We discovered that under grants and loans, 91 per cent of contracts were given to Chinese companies, equivalent to Shs 11.2 trillion. Israeli companies get about Shs 444 billion, about four per cent, Portuguese companies get two per cent, Japanese and South Korean companies get four per cent and no Ugandan company is given a contract under grants and loans.

On Government of Uganda money, Chinese companies got 60 per cent of the contracts. Indian companies got 13 per cent, Israeli companies got 13 per cent, Turkish companies got 10 per cent, Serbia got three per cent and Ugandan companies got zero. 

Mr Speaker, most of these contractors are under no obligation to build local capacity, skills or transfer technology to Ugandans. There is no legal requirement that a given proportion of the work or a contract be allocated to local firms dealing in similar services or supplying required commodities made in Uganda to enhance the opportunity to build capacity.

The New Vision of 6 October 2016 reported that for most of the foreign contracted projects by the Chinese, the Chinese nationals occupy 100 per cent of the managerial jobs and 76 per cent of the engineering posts while Ugandans are mainly machine operators and casual labourers. If this is not regulated, I fear for the worst where the forward and backward linkages will continue to accrue to China and not Uganda. 

Ugandans are watching us, the Tenth Parliament and the Government to see whether we shall let the status quo remain or do something to increase their participation in all development projects. We have all the justification to come up with an affirmative law to develop and support our people, negotiate for our companies and support Ugandan businesses, especially from public finances we appropriate every budget year.

Mr Speaker, I know some colleagues may be persuaded by the argument that instead of the local content law, we should rather have local content policies or strengthen the existing ones. I will remind you about the “Buy Uganda, build Uganda” policy, which aimed at increasing consumption of local products and increasing participation of locally established firms in the domestic market. Much of the “Buy Uganda build Uganda” policy provisions remain on paper without any significant impact because it had no enabling law through which legal obligations and penalties could be imposed on specific persons or bodies who are subject to the policy.

Mr Speaker, allow me to also draw your attention to the preferential requirement of Section 50(1) of the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003 which tried to impose obligations to public procurement entities to give preference to domestically manufactured goods, Ugandan contractors and consultants.

Honourable members, PPDA and other procurement bodies have not taken the provisions of this section seriously because there is no mandatory entity where they report to about local content requirements.

Recently, I read in the newspapers that China Harbour Engineering Company, the Chinese company preferred to be contracted to implement the Standard Gauge Railway, came up with a local content strategy, which was presented to the Minister of Works and Transport, to ensure participation of Ugandans in this multi-million dollar project.  They should be applauded for the good gesture to the people of Uganda.

However, we have no law that can make such initiatives mandatory; neither do we have an entity in this country that can monitor compliance to local content provisions. Without a law and an entity, the contractor may have no serious obligation to implement the local content strategy.

Mr Speaker, Kenya last year enacted a local content law with serious penalties for non-compliance where 40 per cent of contractual work is reserved for the local content. Angola, Ghana and Nigeria have come up with comprehensive laws that ensure balanced growth where their people participate and own the country’s progress. The Mozambican Government is in the process of drafting a local content law with a view of regulating business links between major projects, small and medium-sized  Mozambican companies.

Mr Speaker, Ethiopia is far on issues of prioritising participation of their people in development. They preserved some sectors of investment including electricity generation, banking and others for local companies. They trust their engineers to design and build their roads and dams. They have empowered and built capacity of their local firms to do better work than most international contractors.

I will not close my ears to honourable colleagues who may disqualify our local suppliers and contractors on grounds of limited capacity to deliver quality work and outputs. However, we must appreciate that Government has had faint efforts to support them build the capacity. It is common knowledge that Government has not only failed to prioritise in allocating major projects but often fails to pay them in time hence further weakening any opportunity to build capacity. 

If you crosschecked the outstanding domestic arrears in the Budget Framework Paper we recently debated, most of the victims are local firms and suppliers. I further did a fact check to find out whether Government is doing anything to build their capacity with Uganda Development Corporation and Uganda Development Bank. However, I found no component or line of credit focusing on building capacity of local firms to make them competitive internationally. I also checked whether Fr Lokodo’s Ministry of Ethics and Integrity has previously organised patriotism and integrity capacity building for local contractors and suppliers to reduce on the shoddy works. I found that their effort in the ministry is mainly focused on morals of civil servants.

The Kyankwanzi retreats where patriotism and nationalism would have been nurtured among contractors and suppliers is often mainly for the political class not the business group. Some of us believe if we planned our development well, we could have intended investment towards building local capacity; we would effectively utilise our human resource and only hire international labour and contractors where we must.

The first express way we built should have given us the required experience to construct the subsequent express way. With the current situation, we are most likely even to run back to the Chinese to maintain the roads we have constructed because we are building no capacity.

Mr Speaker, the benefits of the Bill; if this Bill is passed, all Government engagements will have mandatory local content provisions ranging from employment of Ugandans, building local capacity and transferring of skills and technology. Joint ventures will be promoted where a given proportion of international contracts should be given to Ugandan contractors including bilateral loan negotiations.

Mr Speaker, if this Bill is enacted into law, the country will for the first time have a secretariat working on behalf of the relevant Government ministry, not only to ensure compliance but also engage in dialogue and negotiations with the international contractors, lead multinational corporations and their first year international suppliers to ensure that Ugandan contractors participate in project implementation, Ugandans take up the available jobs and supply the required products and services.

Once we pass a Local Content Bill into law, we would have ensured that politicians and civil servants who are involved in negotiations and awarding contactors and investment licenses have a law that can be used to impose obligations on an investor or a contractor, where public body, agency or entity granted a contract or license to exploit our resources to give first priority and consideration to locally manufactured goods  and services, to procure certain goods and services from Uganda and exclusively from the Ugandan Companies; giving priority and utilising locally available raw materials and giving first consideration and priority for the employment of Ugandans in all undertakings. It will restrict the employment of non-citizens in Government-funded projects especially, where we have the local capacity and we will prescribe a minimum number of Ugandans to be employed for every project to be undertaken using public funds.

It will also take into consideration steps aimed at promoting the effective transfer of technology, transfer of know-how and skills relating to the undertakings of such a person and body for what it is contracted to do and it will develop a national local content strategy.

Mr Speaker, the Bill will for the first time create a local content committee to participate in contract negotiations, supervision, monitoring of compliance, coordinating and developing the national content requirements for Uganda. For the first time, Ugandans will comply with international companies for incentives both tax and fiscal to punish those that do not comply through imposing penalties, including banning them from future procurement.

The law will also prohibit the importation of goods and services for use by an investor or a contractor undertaking projects paid by Ugandans where such goods and services are readily available in this country. The Bill will also create offenses against contractors who do not comply with the local content requirements.

As I conclude, I am already excited that many of us in this House today would wish to come up with this law. I have colleagues that I worked with. I am sure they will present more information about this. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Nsamba for this. The motion has been properly spoken to. I need the secondment and then, I will propose the question for debate. There are two seconders in the House and I will have to limit their contributions because the Member has really justified the motion.

4.15
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise to second the motion of Local Content Bill.

I will refer you back to 1987 to the economic reforms, which this country has been going through. I will mention three reforms, which are still very pertinent to the local content. I will start with liberation of trade, the second one is the currency reforms and the third is the privatisation of Government enterprises.

Under the liberation of trade, Uganda became a free market economy. Under the currency reform, it came with the devaluation of the shilling to a magnitude of 70 per cent. This reduced the billionaires to millionaires and millionaires to low status. The main losers in this one were the business community in Uganda and their companies. 

After those two, we then had privatisation, when Uganda privatised the Government enterprises. There was no consideration and incentives for local and indigenous companies. Foreign investors were invited and they purchased whatever belonged to Uganda without any incentive and participation of Ugandans.

After that, Uganda came up with no direct trading anymore. Two forms of taxes emerged: the indirect and direct Taxes. The indirect tax is payable through goods and services. The direct tax is payable by private companies and some rich individuals. Local companies were paying Corporation Tax of 30 per cent, Property Tax is 30 per cent, NSSF contribution is 10 per cent and Pay as You Earn is at 10 per cent. All that is paid by local companies. When it came to foreign companies, a tax holiday of five years was given to them whereas the indigenous companies who lost out as explained are busy paying taxes. (Member timed out.) (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, wind up. We need to see if we can grant you the authority to present this Bill. If you spend all the time and we do not do that-

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What are the benefits of the Local Content Bill? The Local Content Bill - we have the capacity to build our local companies, if we widen the tax base of the Government of Uganda, we create more jobs. You heard that the foreign companies do not create jobs for the indigenous people. They employ them as casual labourers. Above all, Uganda will have built strong entrepreneurs, which will be the engine for Uganda to attain a middle class status by 2020 and upwards. I strongly second the Local Content Bill. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ariko is the second person to second this motion.

4.19
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I stand here to second the motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce the Local Content Bill.

Whereas my colleague, hon. Oshabe mentioned the aspect of what constitutes Local Content, some honourable Members have been asking what Local Content exactly means. 

Wells and Hawkins (2008) defined “Local Content as the involvement of Local enterprises and labour in planning designs and construction services as well as local value addition in transactions occurring throughout the contractors’ supply chain. In this context, Local Content would be understood to mean national or a defined geographical boundary.”

Our case now, Mr Speaker, is looking at Local Content in terms of projects, transactions, as well as business engagements within the auspices of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, going by your guidance in the previous cases where Members moved motions seeking leave of Parliament to introduce Private Members’ Bill, you said that we indeed need to state why Parliament should grant us leave.

I will seek, as a seconder of this motion, to address that element. Under the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, Rules 110 and 111, Members of Parliament have the right to introduce a Private Members’ Bill in exercise of their legislative functions. We are, therefore, proceeding to exercise the privilege that is enshrined in our Rules of Procedure.

The Constitution under Article 79 empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter concerning peace, order, development and good governance of this country. Therefore, it is, indeed, our desire and request to this House to allow us proceed with introduction of the Private Members’ Bill so that we seek to make effect as Parliament to the development of Uganda as a nation.

May I, therefore, say a few elements that will be bettered when the Local Content Bill that will eventually be introduced in this House is passed? Whereas the “buy Uganda, build Uganda” policy was formulated in 2014, no legal framework as of today has been put in place so as to enable us operationalise the Bill. As we know, for any policy to become operational, it needs a legal framework for it to have a basis. Therefore, we wish that we strengthen the framework under which the Local Content policy will be implemented. 

Mr Speaker, we also know that most of the companies and investors who come into the country usually do not plough a substantial amount of their profits within Uganda. We know that with a regulatory framework, which helps us check into the participation of foreign investors in the play of our economy, the country can be able to evaluate how much of the earnings and profits gained out of such investments or contracts are ploughed back into Uganda.

As the Shadow Minister of Public Service, I concern myself with the issue of unemployment. The unemployment among our trained, semi-skilled and unskilled youths stands at over 65 per cent. Today, in most of these projects, including road construction, Chinese are the ones guiding people on the roads with the green or red flags. This is a job a Ugandan who has sat PLE could easily do. However, we have not specifically defined the boundaries of what constitutes who is employable at what level and at what part we will bring in the expatriates, semi-skilled, skilled and unskilled labourers. 

Mr Speaker, we believe that with this kind of law, it will be possible for our country to critically evaluate how much the foreign investors and contractors will bring foreign labour into this project.

Mr Speaker, many times honourable Members and other leaders of this country introduced themselves as patriots and nationalists. Determining the level of patriotism and nationalism should go beyond simply mentioning them out. The people who win contracts in this country, how patriotic are they? Because their engagement and contract obligation with Uganda is a profit; to which extent the profit they gain out of the contracts they win here.

However, a Ugandan entrepreneur will have one thing that he or she would like to leave in terms of patriotism. What legacy did you make? Therefore, the quality of the projects that are executed here would also be much relied on if we build the capacity of our people to do this because they owe Uganda as a nation in execution of this project.

I, therefore, urge honourable members that if we are nationalists and patriots, let us put in place a law that ensures that our people are more protected and that they can have equal play in the award of projects and investment opportunities in this country.

Indeed, Mr Speaker, many a time when contract evaluation is done, there is always a question that is asked. Do these companies have the capacity? Do they have the technical manpower? What experience do they have? Indeed, it is true the international companies may have had opportunity of capacity as well as experience because they enjoy a bigger advantage. 

As a country, we need to find a way in which we build our own people’s capacity and then, give them the requisite experience to compete in these contracts. I would like to cite an example of the Uganda Urban Municipal Council Development (UUMCD) project. Most of the local Ugandan companies were locked out in the programme from participating because we needed to cluster and bring in foreign companies.

Whereas a company with international background was given five municipalities in this country, today through a report of the Local Government Accounts Committee, we know that this did not go well in the cluster of Tororo, Soroti, Mbale, Hoima and Fort portal. Probably, if we had given opportunity to Uganda companies as I said earlier on, the element of nationalism and patriotism should have allowed our people to do a better job because they are Ugandans and owe Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by enjoining the Members to look at a possibility of a country such as Kenya where local content stands at 30 percent of all national projects that they award. In Tanzania, it also stands at 30 per cent, in South Sudan Mr Speaker where you and I have had the privilege to do a bit of work in terms of helping them, it stands at 40 per cent; Zambia stands and 20 per cent and South Africa there is a 30 per cent black empowerment programme that ensures that local content participate in the investment and contractual projects in the country. 

I, therefore, seek to second the motion and I would like to implore and enjoin the honourable members of the August House to go ahead and consider and find it fitting that you grant us leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017.” I beg to second , Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much hon. Nsamba, hon. Mbabali for his speech and hon. Ariko. Honourable members, the motion that is before the House is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017.” That is the motion before us seeking leave of the House. That is the motion I propose for your debate.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague hon. Nsamba and other colleagues who seconded the motion. This is a very important motion and I appreciate my colleague’s mention of the policy that is on the ground by Government.

It is true there is no law but as it is enshrined in his submission, the “buy Uganda, build Uganda” is a policy in place. However, what has not happened, indeed, as they rightly pointed out, is that we do not have an enabling law. Therefore, I do support the initiative and as a ministry, we look forward to working together with them. (Applause) I had talked to him that I wish - anyway I do not want to empty everything that we discussed this afternoon.

I wish we had been notified, we would perhaps have shared more and that could have been enshrined in this motion. Nevertheless, I think this s a very important motion and under “buy Uganda, build Uganda”, even His Excellency gave directives to implement whereby now Uganda Police Force, Uganda People Defense Force (UPDF), medical departments or Ministry of Health are directed to buy what is possible from Ugandan companies and factories and industries in their operations. Therefore – (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Mr Speaker, notice for moving this Private Members’ Bill was given long time ago and I believe that as a sensitive minister and I know he was aware that this motion was coming on the Floor of Parliament. It is always the pride of back benchers to come with an idea, which is bought over by Government. That is our first priority. If the Government can buy it off, the better because you are the implementers.

However, in the event that the minister and his team did not come up to intervene at the right time before the motion is brought on Floor of Parliament; it, therefore, means that the private member can go ahead and now Parliament is being asked to give way for this Private Member’s Bill to be moved.

The procedure I am seeking guidance on is that the minister could make a substantive contribution to the Bill, which has already been moved and already have a precedent. You remember the one which was moved by hon. Atiku; the Government came in and made substantive contribution. Therefore, you can come in and make substantive contribution instead of meandering around. We knew and read all about it and we have been waiting hoping that if we had a Government with good and sensitive ministers, this law should have been in place long time ago.

However, because it has taken so long, that is why private members have decided that they take the lead. That is the guidance I am seeking. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Cecilia Ogwal who is a Parliamentary Commissioner has  a way of using long service in this House to create a situation that makes her say things that she needs to say even without following the rules. (Laughter) 

She rose on procedure but never raised any procedural matter. I was waiting for it in order that I can guide but she made a substantial contribution in this matter. 
Honourable members, it is within the Constitution a right granted to any Member of this Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill. That right is not prohibited in any way but the only qualification is where it will lead to a charge on the Consolidated Fund.

The question we should be interrogating is whether this particular proposition is a necessary proposition. Would you like to rule on this? (Members rose_) That is how a properly thinking person interrogates issues before they conclude. I am not seeking your opinion; I am seeking my opinion. (Laughter) Is it a necessary proposition?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well if it is yes, is the case met for the private Member to move this motion? If the case has been met, are there any legal prohibitions to the Members moving this motion? If the answer is no, do we need a debate on whether to grant leave to the Member to move the same? 

HON. MEMBERS: No need.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I would like to find out – dear member for Kalungu West, in some of these matters, I kind of know what I am doing.

Can we now find out if there is any objection from the Government to the proposition that this matter can be raised by a private member. If there is none, I will put the question and we grant leave. Rt hon. Prime Minister -  

4.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, Government considers this issue of local content very significant and we salute the honourable member for taking the initiative. 

Government is happy because we are precisely working for the same cause and what Government will do is to convergence so that we can get the best Bill on local content worked out. (Applause)               

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to this motion? I now put the question to the motion that Parliament grants the honourable members leave to introduce a Private Members’ Bill entitled, “The Local Content Bill, 2017.”

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave granted. (Applause) The Government is now on board to facilitate the honourable members in preparation of the Bill for its first reading. 

If in the process the consultations are wider and you have views from Government and all the other sectors and we have a comprehensive Bill that can handle these matters sufficiently, the House will be prepared to move with the first reading of this Bill and processing it to its conclusion. I thank you and congratulations.

Honourable members, I have sad news to communicate. The husband to hon. Betty Aol Ochan passed on at 2.30 p.m. this afternoon. On a very personal note, he was my Physics teacher and it is a personal loss to me as an individual and to our people and to this country. 

Mr Ochan was a retired secondary head teacher. He taught in most of the secondary schools in Uganda, which he headed. I request members to rise for a moment of silence in his memory.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have the Insurance Bill and we also have to conclude the debate we had started on the statement made by the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs. Can we go to that debate and we see how far we can go with dealing with the motion for the second reading of the Bill? If we can, then we would have made progress and we see how to proceed.

I had already asked the member for Aswa County, hon. Reagan Okumu, who had earlier raised this matter to supplement and then we see how to progress.

4.42
MR REAGAN OKUMU (Independent, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. I would also like to thank the Prime Minister because when I raised this issue, he directed the minister and indeed the minister gave me a copy of his statement yesterday.

I raised the issue of veterans in the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments and I almost got a similar response. I again raised it in this Tenth Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the issue of veterans is very touchy. For some of you who may have lived in the barracks with relatives or parents who were soldiers, you have seen the kind of life our people go through.

For some of you who have stayed in war zones, you have seen how soldiers suffer. They walk long distances without food and water and unfortunately when the ordinary soldier retires, he or she does not have the privilege to get their benefits except with the exception of the few who negotiate their retirement, are first promoted and retired.

Why do they get promoted and then retired? -  because they want to get good benefits. 

I went through the statement of the minister but there are many things lacking. I do not think that his statement is an assurance to this Parliament. This Parliament should today resolve to have a way forward for our veterans. 

First of all, I am not sure about the figure of 52,000 paid since when, what category be it UA, UNLA, NRA and UPDF. We have known the number of soldiers and we know those that have retired. I do not think that the ministry has the actual figure on its finger tips. 

This Parliament should be interested. We have always borrowed money here to solve our problems. We have always created projects to clear back log for very many things.

I am of the view that Government gives us the commitment today through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on when and how they intend to clear all our veterans. It is not enough to just promise people. We must have a time frame which should not go on forever and ever. 

We are in our budget period and the budget session is one for the Financial Year 2017/2018. We want to see something come out of it. We want to get assurance from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that this will be done.

Why should we subject these Ugandans who have offered service to this nation to death, leaving their families? There are others who are disgruntled as if they have never served this country. Others are disabled. At the moment, we have quite a number of soldiers who are disabled in Mubende. They are in between retirement and service but they are being kept there. There are many in these villages. 

So, Mr Speaker, I think it is important that before we conclude this debate, we need a time-bound assurance from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Leader of Government Business to the people of Uganda and this House that you are going to clear the veterans. 

Therefore, the next lot you are going to send home from service should be cleared before send them away.  Before you retire them, you should be able to give them their package and they return home. (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the mover of this matter is talking about paying veterans. I think in the discussions that came before, questions were raised as to who a veteran is. So, can we be assured on who a veteran is; does it include those who served during the colonial era, post-colonial, Obote’s regime and so forth? Let us know who the veterans are and how you categorise them. For those who died already, how can they get their benefits to help their families? That is the clarification I am seeking. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, I have been in this Parliament and there are interest groups, which have been representing the interest of their people effectively. With all due respect, I am very disappointed with the UPDF representatives in Parliament, because they have kept silent all these years. As the chairperson of an accountability committee, I would not hesitate in future to ask for value for money audit for Members of Parliament representing their people. How do you represent them if you cannot represent those soldiers in whose name you are now called honourable members of Parliament? In whose interests are you here? 

Mr Speaker, we get disappointed that Members of Parliament from the backbench continue to raise issues regarding the welfare of UPDF, issues of veterans and issues of army housing, yet the army representatives are here, quiet – what are you doing? Who do you represent in this House, if you cannot represent those soldiers, in whose name you are here? This is disheartening. 

That also calls for questioning, I am proud of the women representatives in this House, they have stood for the interests of women; I am very proud of the youth representatives, they have stood for the youth; I am very proud with the representatives of the disabled persons; they have moved motions, laws have been made in this House to cater for the interests of the disabled persons but I am very disappointed with the UPDF representatives. And that is not only for this Parliament, even in the previous Parliament; you do not even make a statement concerning the welfare of soldiers? This is very disappointing and I think this House should revisit the representation of UPDF if their Members cannot represent the interests of the soldiers who continue to suffer. 

There were problems in Somalia and it was the backbenchers who raised the issues. Soldiers were going without food and it was the backbenchers who raised the issues. When soldiers did not have houses, it is backbenchers who raised the issue, when soldiers are not paid their salaries, you remain here quiet; you cannot speak. This is quite unfortunate, Mr Speaker, and I think they should pull up their socks. Otherwise, we shall also think of a way of expelling them out of this House because they do not represent the interests of the people they should be representing. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will allow the minister of Security to speak. But honourable members, this is a national Parliament. There are processes that we go through to constitute this Parliament, but once it is constituted, it becomes a national Parliament. Any Member of this Parliament can articulate any matter on any subject on anything that comes up in this House. 

It does not have to be a woman to raise a matter on women; it can be any Member of Parliament. It does not have to be a soldier to raise a matter on soldiers, because we all have soldiers coming from our constituencies. It does not have to be a workers’ representative to raise a matter of workers, because this is a national Parliament. In fact, it would be shameful for the whole Parliament to leave the issues of persons with disability to only Members representing the people with disability; it would be a shame. If we said, only the four or five of them can articulate issues relating to disability, that would be a shame to this Parliament. 

We should all be conscious about the peculiarities in countries - we have soldiers, we have people with disabilities, we have workers, we have young people and all these categorisations. All of them are put together to form this Parliament and they are all the responsibility of this House and not any individual Member. That is my attitude to this and I hope it is the attitude of this Parliament that we are a national Parliament. 

4.53
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Henry Tumukunde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I should categorically say that I am a veteran and it is also on record that I got some privileges the other day. So, I have been a typical veteran and a member of the defence forces. 

Mr Speaker, I hope you will allow me more time than what was given to others so that we can go deep into this matter. Issue number one, these people are very important and I have had the opportunity of traveling in this country. I have seen that they have special needs. 

However, these are veterans, among others. First of all, because of your political patrols and the differences we have had during the different regimes and so forth, the definition of a veteran has been expanded. The reasons are that many other interests arose. 

All political interests in this country most times were defended by some military force or they made a contribution. So whenever you are discussing these subjects about veterans, then FEDEM comes in, UFM, Save Uganda Movement – those who served during the colonial times. However, because of the political temperatures we have gone through during our times, we have become more accommodative and this expanded numbers. When we expanded numbers, it brought in complications of who to start with and who to end with. 

For example, Mr Speaker, when you are a parent looking after children and some are not yours, who do you start with when paying school fees? If you are a serious parent, you start with your own. So, these have been very big issues of debate within the Ministry of Defence. 

Recently, we also got the very issues we have with schools today. We do not know the numbers – we are forming groups now to go and count – it is also part of our work. Corruption is a gazetted vice that we have to deal with every day.

So, whenever it comes to numbers, you cannot be very sure even if you have done the definition and the categorisation; you have to go into the battle of numbers. For example, in public service – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the minister did not read the statement. In this statement, there is a matrix or a table and in it the minister gives the number of veterans and eligible beneficiaries documented. He then gives the number of veterans paid; the backlog and; then the number that did not meet the requirements. Now, this one definitely tells us that the number is known because it was generated by the minister.

Hon. Tumukunde, when you talk about the number – there is no argument about that one; the number is known. That is the information I want to give you.

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: Mr Speaker, I do not intend to dispute the views of the minister – he is the relevant minister but he has been a minister for only seven months and yet this is an enormous task. And I am sure that when the Ministry of Public Service comes here, they will tell us figures. But I am telling you that this is work in progress; I was a Chief of Personnel and Administration and I know that even with the standing army, there is always a battle – the problem lies with ourselves; corruption. It is a mere failure by us to attach importance to details. So, we praise him if he has achieved that – this is very good. In any case we have to have some working figures.

However, as we go through this, I would want us to give it sufficient time and attention. By the way, sometimes, maybe Parliament needs to be reminded that we are the ones who determine the budget of this country; you hold the purse. Since morning, I do not know how many priorities have come here; we have starving people who have died and we have to do something about it; we have heard about these issues. So, the main question comes to: Who starts and who ends?

Sometimes we go back and tell our soldiers, who are not necessarily that well paid as you all know. If I told you my salary as a retired general, you would be shocked. So we go back to our soldiers, who are built on the foundation of the revolution and tell them to wait because the reasons are simple; that this economy is not necessarily equal to the demands of our own people.

So, back to the soldiers, I have this to say: We put up a ministry of veterans – it is full-fledged and a colonel has just been appointed. I am of the view that the only thing we should perfect is information - let us get information.

And another thing we should do in case any debate or motion come here or should there be brought a budget to us, if you think these veterans are a priority, please, say so; and say so by providing enough money as they need it. 

There was a member who was talking about a minister who does not have a budget – actually the security sector has a lot of pressure as you know but we do not get as much of the budget. But if people are complaining about hunger; if drought is hitting Uganda and East Africa at large, how do we come in with our own views about whether we need funds or we do not need them. I am sure that you know that we need funds.

So, the critical point that should guide this Parliament is that we should give attention to veterans. And should a matter come here before you on veterans be see to give it priority. 

About blaming the UPDF officers, I ascribe to the view of the Rt Hon. Speaker that these soldiers are ours and they defend our country; they even defend other countries on our behalf. So, I ask that if it is giving them priority, give it to them and walk the talk. If that is the case, we shall then give special responsibility to the minister who has just been appointed and it is for special reasons to give immediate priority to sorting out these veterans. This includes even defining which veteran is which and maybe should we start giving priority to veteran A against veteran B do not complain; leave it at that.

On cases like Mubende, this is a special programme; a special programme dealing with the disabled soldiers of our –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister for the explanation. Following the debate that has been going on and the subsidiary questions that came later on this same matter, you have been hearing that Members of Parliament have been concerned, right from the Eighth, Ninth and this Tenth Parliament over issues of payment of veterans. You have just told us that when it comes to budget time, Members of Parliament should be seen to be supporting veterans by allocating the money as a priority. 

Yet, I know that we have been treating that as a priority; Parliament has pronounced itself several times. So, the clarification I am seeking is; Where exactly do you want us, as Members of Parliament, to intervene other than the talking and emphasising the fact that we usually do to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allocate all the money that is required for veterans? What else do you expect Members of Parliament to do?  Thank you.

LT GEN. (RTD) TUMUKUNDE: First of all, we really must be humbled by the concern that we get from all of you – and I think it is for good reasons. But for example, the other day, we had meeting for the security sector, the Ministry of Public Service had taken over these veterans but they did not have any money to pay them. So, the question is: Who is supposed to walk the talk? In this particular case, it was decided that they return them to the Army, especially after the creation of the new ministry, for purposes of giving them special attention.

The problem in this whole matter is; Is it in our mean? Maybe that is the bottom line.

Then the second most important matter is that – including ourselves – we may have to offload some of our priorities and we take on this matter and give it the maximum attention it deserves .For purposes of advice, this is what I advise –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I did not want to interrupt Lt Gen. Tumukunde. A statement has been presented to Parliament by the minister responsible for that sector and he has given guidance on how this matter is going to be handled. For example, he says that in March 2017, they are going to be paying UNLA veterans. And the statement goes on and on. 

The procedural issue I am raising is whether another minister, without adding value to a statement given by a colleague, should go on telling this Parliament how – because he says, “We put up the Ministry for Veterans.” I do not know whether he is now part of the presidency or there is somewhere he sits with the President and both of them put up ministries – just showing this Parliament how super he is as a minister, instead of adding value to a statement. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the information of the Members, the Ministry of Security is directly under the President’s Office. So, you may want to think about that.

But honourable members, speaking more clearly on this issue, this is the problem we have with the way we have been handling business in this House – “ad-hoc-ing”. This has paralysed our work; we do not interrogate matters in detail and our interventions lack details. Why? The reasons our procedures are laid out in the Rules of Procedure is to make sure that each matter that is brought before the House is properly interrogated and recommendations made by the appropriate divisions of this House. However, what happens in these cases - which have been a failure from the Executive. What happens in this Parliament is that matters become so pressing yet there is no direct response from the Executive, so Members rise on urgent matters of public importance.

For example, when hon. Reagan Okumu rose on this occasion and spoke about the veterans - and because the information is lacking - a direction is made from the Chair that we need a statement tomorrow or the next day about this matter and we call it a comprehensive statement? Now, you are about to tell me how comprehensive a statement can be about a matter that is so national, presented in two days and such a statement then becomes a basis of our debate. How far shall we continue like this?

We have committees that can interface with these agencies, interrogate these matters into better details and come out with formal decision points as recommendations for this House, which we can either approve as recommendations or adopt as resolutions and directives to the Executive on how they can implement such proposals from Parliament. But that is where we are. Really we are expecting supper human beings to deal with some of these issues. 

I do not like to be in the shoes of the minister in charge of Veterans because this matter was an issue in the Eighth Parliament and  Ninth  Parliament and it is now also in the Tenth Parliament and we are asking him to bring comprehensive discussable statement within two days? No, this is where the problem is, honourable members. 

What conclusions will we draw from the minister’s statement? There is nothing. It will be just little information that is gathered in two days; that is what it will be and how can such little information help us to make concrete recommendations on how we shall proceed? How? It is frustrating from the Chair to see things proceeding like this with no direction.

Therefore, the way I understand it is that this matter was raised as an urgent matter. However, because the statement could not be presented in a comprehensive way to deal with it as an urgent matter, a statement was requested for and that statement had come in today to guide us how to debate it. But now we cannot.

Therefore, the proper way on how to have this matter anchored on our procedure, the way we have traditionally processed matters - we could have referred this specific statement to the committee to interrogate by calling the minister, representatives of the veterans, acting soldiers and these UPDF soldiers who are shy to speak here, but can speak in the committee more eloquently, for engagement more. The committee would then present to the House their findings and concrete recommendations for adoption, as a way forward.

I would like to inform you that I am so dissatisfied with the way we are handling serious matters. And because we are not following the structured way of doing things, we are doing ad hoc work yet such procedure has its own limitations. 

Therefore, can I now propose that this matter and the issues that have been raised by both, the minister in his statement and the statement that has been raised by the honourable minister in charge of security - and what have been captured on the Hansard of Parliament – be referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs? It is hoped that this committee will interrogate these issues, do a small study and call the people who are affected plus their representatives before making their recommendations to this House in regard to what we should adopt in giving directions to the Government. Wouldn’t that be a proper way to handle this matter?

LT. GEN. TUMUKUNDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. What I was about to propose is what you have just raised. (Laughter) Yes, because I don’t think I borrowed it; that is how I think we should go about it. 

However, Mr Speaker, as a Parliament, there are very critical things we may have to start thinking about across the year, as we debate these issues. We should appoint some financial expert to be tabulating the financial needs of the many issues, which are raised on the Floor of the House. This may help us to know whenever we have –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you have just guided that this matter be sent to the relevant committee of Parliament. Your guidance, according to our rules, is final. Therefore, is the Minister responsible for Security in order to continue smuggling back the same matter on which you have already given guidance?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this whole procedure interrupted the statement, but the honourable member was still holding the Floor before I got to give the procedure. I think it is within his right to conclude what he was saying before I  ask the Minister in charge of this particular matter to summarise it. That should help us to conclude this matter before we send it to the relevant committee for further action.

LT. GEN. TUMUKUNDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think what you have ruled will favour my thinking, but maybe I repeat the point - all issues we raise here across the year, should maybe have financial tabulations. That will help us to examine ourselves on whether we have moved according to what other governments would have done or we just simply responding to issues because there have temperatures, which will lead us into making mistakes.

Finally, while we do all the above, I would like to ask this august House to provide a reasonable budget in the next fiscal year for some of such issues to be attended to. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR VETERAN AFFAIRS (Maj. Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, for the enormous positive contribution towards solving this problem. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to assure the House that with the little money that there is, we are accumulating cases. All soldiers and officers who retired last bunch have received their money. Those who have not yet received either had their files queried, but I only know about 32 cases, which are pending and I monitor them every Monday between Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Public Service. 

Secondly, we have agreed strategically that the files, which are ready, especially UNLA and UA, whatever money is available or that comes in, we must pay them. Therefore, I would like to assure Members that we will not accumulate any more backlogs; we are only reducing. 

Also from the contributions made by Members, one member actually said that he seemed to be from Hansard so wondered where we would get this money. If that is the case, then all of us are from Mars. 
The appropriation of the budget is done by this House, Mr Speaker. I agree with hon. Reagan Okumu on the point that we must have a project. If it needs to borrow, let us borrow to clear these cases because they deserve. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister - in this table in the document, you gave a number of veterans and eligible ministers as 168,645. 

Also you gave the number of paid veterans as 57,026 and the backlog is 83,183 - that is what you wrote in the document. However, when you subtract the number of paid veterans from the number of eligible, the difference is 111,026 veterans. Could you clarify on this because the figures do not tally?

The Last clarification is: according to part (d) of the minister’s statement and which I beg to read verbatim, it states thus: “Many military veterans whose packages have been processed have not received their benefits because of either invalid or dormant accounts leading to bounced payments…”

Whenever we go for campaigns, veterans are asked to open up accounts and indeed they go to the extent of swearing oath and hiring lawyers so that those accounts are opened. Though they are kept there to support the campaigns in terms of security, they are not paid when the campaigns are over and so their accounts become dormant for about five to ten years. 

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is for you to clearly explain who the cause of this is? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, as we have observed, the information that we have got does not tally. The Minister of State Defence for Veteran Affairs has said that he has paid some veterans. However, the Minister of Security says that the list keeps on expanding and so they do not know who to start with and who to leave. That statement came from the Minister of Security. 

We have veterans, for example, my father was in the army in the early 70s and he keeps on asking me together with other veterans, when they will be paid because there was a headcount carried for three days but and up to now, there is no answer. 

In the constituencies, these people keep asking me every day as their representative when Government will pay them.

Therefore, the issue that has not come out clearly is what category or year they are beginning with in terms of payment. But also which veterans have you paid as per the information that you have given us?  This information will enable us explain to our people which years have been paid and those that are yet to be paid so that at least we are clear and we move on the same page. Thank you. 

MAJ (GEN) RWAMIRAMA): Mr Speaker, you have already ruled that this matter should be handled by the responsible committee. Honourable colleagues, let us first - (Interjection) - you asked me to give you information so allow me to give it to you. I need your protection, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural point.

MR AOGAN: Mr Speaker, since morning I have not said a word. I did not raise up just to say nothing. I rose up to say something. Through your wise ruling, you put it so clearly that- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I came to Parliament at 2.05.p.m. I do not know what you had been doing here in the morning. (Laughter)

MR AOGAN: Okay, thank you, Mr Speaker. But what I want to say is: you put it so clearly that the statement, which is before us, took such a short time to be delivered to the House and therefore may not be well detailed to our expectations. 

Two, you also put it rightly that we need to let the relevant committee handle this statement appropriately. My issue is, shall we be proceeding well if we continue debating on a matter that has been ruled upon by the Speaker? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know when we go on like this, we lose time, which we would have used to do something else yet we are coming back to this. 

Honourable minister, can I take the final decision that this matter goes to the committee? You will interface with the committee and all the people responsible for this. The people affected by this should also appear before the committee before it will come to advise us with recommendations on what we should do. We can even make a motion with resolutions on how these matters can be handled. Some of them are budgetary situations but since we are in the budget period, that same committee handling the budget can see what to do in order to elevate this situation. 

This matter hereby referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for expeditious handling given that the matter is urgent. This is not one of those things that is going to be deferred by the committee. Honourable members, if you could come back in two to three weeks and advise us on how we can proceed with this matter, that would be helpful so that our veterans can also feel clearly taken care of.  Two to three weeks - three weeks being the maximum and two weeks being the minimum period within which we can do this. Thank you. 


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INSURANCE BILL, 2016

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2016” be read for the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Member for Kibuku, who is also the Minister of State for Local Government and the Member for Tororo, also the Minister of State for Health (General Duties). 

It is also seconded by the Member for Bungokho, the Government Chief Whip, Member for Jinja, Member for Kilak North, Member for Kumi Municipality and the Member for Kiboga District. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?  

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of the Bill is to repeal the Insurance Act, Cap 213; to amend and replace the law relating to insurance; to provide for the regulation of insurance business; to continue in existence the insurance authority of Uganda as a board responsible for regulation of insurance business; and to provide to related purposes. 

The Bill also seeks to incorporate the International Association of Insurance Supervisors; insurance core principles; the recommendations of the financial action task force including providing for anti-money laundering, anti-counter financing of the terrorism and for related purposes. 

This Bill has been fully studied by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and it is ready to make a report to this House. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I propose the question for debate on the motion for second reading of the Bill. The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2016” be read the second time. That is the motion and to kick off our debate will be a report from the committee. 

5.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Like the minister has moved, The Insurance Bill, 2016 was referred to our committee and we are now ready to report back. 

Mr Speaker, in the process of consideration of this Bill, we had a number of meetings and I would like to lay on Table the minutes of the proceedings in the process of conducting the hearing. 

Mr Speaker, this file contains the minutes and other relevant documents that were used in the process of considering the Bill. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the supporting documents reviewed by the committee. 

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay a copy of the original report of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of this report.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the minister has already dealt with the objects of the Bill and the introductory bit of it. I would therefore, like to straight away go to committee’s observations and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please proceed.

MR MUSASIZI: The committee observes the following:
    i) The current law on insurance in Uganda is contained in the Insurance Act that came into force in 1996. This Act was amended in 2011 to improve administration, supervision, regulation and control of the insurance industry in Uganda. However, at the time of amendment, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors’ insurance core principles had not yet come into force. These ICPs or Insurance cored principles, which are adhered to by 240 countries, are now the benchmark for all insurance business in the world and Uganda is obliged to give effect to them, in order to compete on the world stage;
    ii) The insurance Act does not incorporate the recommendations of the financial action task force including recommendations relating to anti-money laundering and countering financing of terrorism. Uganda’s compliance with the ICP and the task force’s recommendations gives investors comfort, the bankers’ willingness to lend and leads to re-insurers to reduce their rates. This makes Uganda a more acceptable destination for investors;
    iii) Risk-based insurance aims to minimize inherent residual risks the insurance company faces. The insurance companies assess the risks and allocate enough resources to cover it. It operates the principle of minimising inherent risk control, residual risk and additional support. Uganda is currently using rules-based supervision to regulate the insurance. However, this is not sufficient to protect policy holders from risks since the companies have capital requirements, which they must fulfill, irrespective of the policies underwritten. The proposed Bill will introduce risk-based supervision, which will require companies to hold capital, on near capital assets according to the risk undertaken;
    iv) Whereas the Government of Uganda came up with the policy of buy Uganda, build Uganda, which aims at increasing consumption of local products and increasing participation of the locally established firms in the domestic trade, the committee notes that in the Insurance Bill, there is no provision allowing for local risks, persons and imports to be insured locally by Ugandan firms. The absence of the protection and development of the local insurance firms, leads to capital flights as most of the insurance company are foreign. There is need to protect the local companies to grow capacity and reduce the capital flight;
    v) One of the major challenges facing the insurance sector includes poor saving culture of the insured, lack of insurance knowledge and bad perception of the insurance industry, which hinder the growth of the sector. Massive sensitisation must be undertaken by the Insurance Regulatory Authority to encourage insurance and reduction of risks especially in the agricultural sector;
    vi) The liquidation process, under the insolvency law does not state policy holders as a priority, in terms of creditors, to the insolvent company. There is need to provide for liquidation of insurance companies in the law of insurance as opposed to the Company’s Act. This will improve confidence in the sector and attract more investment;
    vii) The Bill provides for distribution of dividends, which should be approved by the Insurance Regulatory Authority. However, the distribution of dividends is traditionally a preserve of the body of directors under the company law. This will tantamount to micromanaging a company and it is not a supervisory function. Insurers should be able to distribute their surpluses as deemed fit, subject to meeting solvencies and capital requirements set by the law;
    viii) The Bill states the amounts of capital requirements in the law. However, this makes the process of revision of the amount in future more time consuming as the law has to be amended. The amounts should be removed from the Bill and put in the regulations, and currency points should be used as opposed to figures. This will improve regulation of the sector; and
    ix) The Bill provides for the preparation of financial statements by the insurance companies. It also provides for reporting according to international financial reporting standards. However, international financial reporting standards are applicable in a manner adopted by the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda. The Council of the Institute of Certified Accountants of Uganda is empowered under section 12(i) of the accountant Act 2013, to issue and adopt international accounting and auditing standards and promote their usage in Uganda, and make suitable adaptation where necessary. Therefore, the Bill should take into account the provisions of the accountant Act 2013.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Insurance Bill, 2016 be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson and the committee for a very comprehensive work and a clear report. I can see you have suggested several amendments that would improve on the Bill, but we will come to that at another stage. Honourable members, the question I have proposed, motion for the second reading of the Bill relates to the principles of the Bill and we will have a debate on that. The debate starts now.

If there is no debate, I will put the question to the motion for the second reading of the Bill so that we can go to then committee stage of the Bill and examine it, clause by clause. 

5.35
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for his detailed report. As I listened, I realised that the Bill does not talking about certain areas, which are supposed to be insured. More specifically, I am talking about agriculture. Recently, the sugarcane growers lost a lot of canes to fire outbreaks; even the tea growers too lost a lot of their acreage to fire outbreaks. 

It is only Uganda, which does not provide insurance to farmers. I would like to find out how the farmers are catered for especially in today’s world, where we have a lots of risks and they need to be insured? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.36
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a very comprehensive report, which particularly articulates all the needs for insurance and the insurance industry that affect this Bill.

 I am interested in the re-insurance sector. When we talk about the Bill and local content, foreign exchange and how we must contain as much as possible the risks within the country - I am more worried because we have so much of our money and/or the risks are so high particularly in the oil and construction industries. I did not see, in that Bill, the component of re-insurance. How much is supposed to be retained in the country and how much is supposed to be shared with reinsurers abroad?

That is important because if we retain so much in the country, then we are exposed to the liability and the payment of the losses just in case they occur and of which they will. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member from Ngora, are you rising or you are thinking about it?

5.38
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the very a clear and comprehensive report. I have been meditating to understand the details.

Mr Speaker, when we had an official visit to Mombasa last year as the Committee on Foreign Affairs, our Consulate there told us that Uganda loses $51 million because the insurance companies in Kenya are the ones that do insurance for all the imports that we get in this country.

By the mere fact that the details are now clear, I would propose that let this Bill be passed into law so that we regulate such issues that are taking place.

Secondly, as we all know in business if you are a risk-averse you will do anything in this country. If you fear taking risks that means you will get nothing. Likewise, we had to risk standing as Members of Parliament and that is why we succeeded in coming here.

Therefore, this law talks about terrorism and you know what happens in the global environment. When we pass it into law, I am sure many issues will be regulated. That will help us in guarding this country and moving forward. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can respond to the few issues raised by Members. Hon. Jalia Bintu raised an issue on whether this law covers agricultural insurance. 
Mr Speaker, as we go to the next stage, there are a number of clauses that will address the concerns of that Member because this Bill is aimed at improving the insurance industry generally. It also provides for micro insurance and bank insurance among other products that will be addressed.

On re-insurance, the principle underlies the fact that where the risk is too big, so many companies can apportion it in order to avoid the companies collapsing in an event of an occurrence of such risk that is insured. This can be done at the national, regional and international levels. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, at the committee stage, there is a clause that we will come across in regard to reinsurance. We will be introducing the improvements that are needed in that clause.

So, I would like to allay the fears of the Member that the Bill provides for Uganda National Reinsurance Company, among other reinsurance companies that will be allowed to underwrite risks of this nature nationally, regionally and internationally.  

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to urge the Member who raised the issue of the risk of agriculturists losing their products due to fire and so forth. The problem we have in Uganda, according to what we saw as a committee, is that because the committee provides - at the committee stage, we will realise that there are provisions for all insurance products.  But the problem in this country is that Ugandans have not appreciated what insurance is. Most farmers do not even know that it is their right to insure with providers, including insuring their agricultural products. Thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I pray that we go to the next stage so that most of the revelations about Members’ concerns can be discovered. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we can examine the details of the provisions when we go to the committee stage of the Bill. If there are other interventions that Members would want to be taken care of, it can be aired at that stage. 

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I stand to disagree with the hon. Franca Akello, especially when she says that the farmers do not know that they are supposed to insure with any insurance company.

The farmers from Masindi specifically, those who grow sugarcane, try to engage the insurance companies- and they insurance companies informed us that there is no law that provides for agricultural products to be insured.

Mr Speaker, I think that it is at this moment that we have to plan for our farmers. Today, it is sugarcane growers, tomorrow it will be tea growers, the other day it will be coffee or cocoa or even maize growers.

Therefore, although the chairperson has responded and talked about products on the market, I think this law would be specific to include the fact that if farmers are willing to insure their products, they can go ahead and insure them, and the insurance companies should be ready to take on that. 

As we speak, the insurance companies only provide insurance to the millers and not the growers. I engaged the Insurance Regulatory Authority but this is still a lacuna.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I beg that this House comes to the rescue of the farmers and we plan for them. Agriculture is the backbone of this economy. We need to protect it.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, the Insurance Regulatory Authority has abdicated its responsibility. In its mandate it is supposed to sensitise our people especially the insured because they have very poor knowledge on insurance and have a very poor saving culture. For instance, in the agriculture sector someone from Bududa insures against a natural calamity like landslides, but another risk, inform of a different natural calamity like floods happens, that insured farmer is not indemnified. So, there is need for massive sensitisation of the population by the Insurance Regulatory Authority. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS KATALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add on what my chairperson and other colleagues said in response to the concerns from the Member for Masindi. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you a member of the committee?

MS KATALI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you are giving information, proceed.

MS KATALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As it is in the Bill, the companies provide the products. We are not limiting them but the difference is that insurance is moving from compliance to risk-based insurance and that is where we are going. So, which companies are willing to take on the agriculture? We are leaving it open to them to decide on whether to or not to take over the agricultural sector. Maybe we need more sensitisation to the insurance companies – we spoke to them and they are willing to do it. However, if Government does not come up with a proper plan they are scared because it is risk-based. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, if there is no further debate or any response-

5.48
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I only seek clarification on a few things.

We were told that the National Health Insurance Policy and Programme will be in place. I would like to know if the new law we are coming up with will comprehensively cover the health insurance scheme.

Secondly, we have observed banks issuing performance bonds and so do insurance companies. Will banks engaging in insurance kind of business be governed by this law? 

Third, I have also observed that the current regulatory framework does not extend the insurance services to the rural people who need them. You might find that I get knocked by a motorcycle but the insurance company is nowhere to help.I wonder whether the structures you have provided for in the new law will either extend to the regional level or districts so that it becomes easy for our people to access insurance services. Thank you. 

5.50
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to add my voice in thanking the chairperson of the committee for presenting a very good report.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament enacted a law on Islamic Finance and Islamic Banking and among the products covered was insurance. I would like to know how far this law goes in incorporating the Islamic insurance. 

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, on the health insurance, I would like to say this Bill is different but I made to understand that the Ministry of Health is yet to bring the relevant Bill to the House for consideration. 

On the relationship between banks and the insurance business, Mr Speaker, the Bill is providing for bank assurance. This means that insurance companies will enter into an arrangement with banks to allow them (banks) to offer insurance products.

On the extension of services to the rural areas, the insurance industry is a private one. What informs the decision on where to invest are the returns? So, in the wisdom of the companies based on their research, find that there is good business for example in Pader, they will be able to open a branch there. If it is not profitable, the companies may decide to offer services to people in Pader, Kitgum and other areas of Acholi, from Gulu. That is also permitted in business operations. 

On whether the Bill provides for Islamic banking, I would like to say that the Bill provides for Takaful. This is a model in insurance that will be operating like Islamic banking. 

I am sure that when we get to the committee stage, I will be able to come back and give clear justifications about these matters raised by members. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We will handle the details of this matter at the committee stage of this Bill. Can I now put the question to conclude the debate on the principles of the Bill, which is motioned for second reading? I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Insurance Bill, 2016” be read the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have concluded this stage of the Bill, which is the motion for the Second Reading and the discussions on the principles of the Bill.  However, I have some concerns in the next stages relating to how we are going to proceed in this Bill. 

This Bill has 155 clauses. There are proposed amendments to 87 clauses of the Bill, and there is a proposal to insert six new clauses into the same Bill.

I urge the Rules Committee to help this Parliament so that we build a threshold. If the amendments to a Bill are such that you can no longer recognise the original one, it must be ordered for reprinting because it will now be a new Bill.

By the time you are amending 87 clauses of a Bill of 155 clauses, it is a vote of no confidence in the Bill; it is more than a half of it and so it is a new Bill. And processing that kind of Bill at committee stage is the most difficult because that is where we get areas where members start making proposals at committee stage and we make mistakes. It is just because the proposals that will be coming with such various amendments will not have been properly interrogated; will not have crosschecked with the people affected by this.  They may not have had any discussions about them; they are just brought on the Floor and we adopt them; they end up bringing problems. 

The Public Finance Management Act is a good example; some amendments were proposed here. But we ended up with the Appropriation Bill being presented before supply is done; it is all because of such amendments that are not interrogated properly. They just bring and we adopt them because they are popular but we end up making mistakes. 

Another example is in the regulations in the Uganda Communications Act. Amendments were proposed here and the committee said that certain categories of regulations should be brought to Parliament for approval before they start, but that the rest of them, about 87 of them, should be left to the discretion of the minister to announce and just inform Parliament. When it came here, Members said, “no, let all the statutorily instruments that are going to be issued by the minister first come to Parliament for prior approval”. That is re-legislation. And what happened? 

One day Uganda Communications Commission came to my office with compiled regulations. It was this big – standing about half a meter on the table. They were sets of regulations to be brought to Parliament. (Laughter) When would we have the time? I am using the example of half a meter because it was a heap of regulations because we said so and it was a mistake. I tried to guide here, saying you cannot do that because you would be re-legislating. Why don’t we leave them? Since we have already delegated that responsibility to the minister, why don’t we trust those people to handle those tail ends of the things? So we often make these mistakes when we have these several amendments that come.

I can never forget the Finance (Amendment) Bill that I processed here where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development itself decided to amend its own Bill by making the amendments five times bigger than the original Bill. Of course the rules don’t accept, but it was during the budget time and we were running out of time. I sat there for three days. If there was somebody nearby and was concerned, I could have committed some breaches of the law. But there it was.

Anyway, we have 87 clauses to amend and can’t finish it in one day, yet it is an urgent law. We have to go and look at these proposed amendments and understand them so that we don’t make mistakes. 

Therefore, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline has to help us. The committee should set a reasonable threshold and provide that if proposed amendments to a particular Bill reach a certain threshold that Bill should go back for reprinting. They could consult and if the sponsoring ministry agrees with the amendments, they should just reprint the Bill and bring a Bill that can be processed easily by Parliament. 

Honourable members, that is my concern and I say this from experience and sometimes very painful experience. We will not be able to commence the committee stage for this Bill. 

Honourable members, this House will not sit tomorrow but we shall have a special sitting on Friday to pay tribute to the honourable member who passed away. The body will come here on Friday at 10.30 a.m. and debate will start at 2.00 p.m. 

In addition, you recall that Tuesday next week will be 28 February, 2017 which is the gazetted day for electing our representatives to the East African Legislative Assembly. There are many candidates and they all have to stand and address us for at least seven minutes each before we vote. Therefore, we have to agree that the normal sitting should start in the morning of Tuesday. This particular sitting of the House is now adjourned to Tuesday, 28 February, 2017 at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 6.01.p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 February 2017 at 10.00 a.m.)








          

 








