

Tuesday, 26 February 2019

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice-President, members of the Cabinet, members of the Opposition, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I hope that we shall deal expeditiously with the issues on the Order Paper. 

I have three matters to communicate. You recall that last week on Thursday, 21 February 2019, the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) presented to this House its report on the special audit by the Auditor-General on defunct banks. Since then, I have received a number of documents from Mr Benedict Ssekabira, Director, Financial Markets Development Coordination, and M/s JN Kirkland and Associates who took issue with some of the findings, conclusions and recommendations made by the committee. 

In order to ensure fairness, I have directed the Clerk to scan the documents and distribute them to you, Members, so that you can take them into account during the debate. I will give the authors of the committee report an opportunity to clarify on some of the issues raised in those letters if they feel that it is necessary.

I, however, would like to take exception to some of the contents of the letter from Mr Ssekabira, the Director of Financial Markets Development Coordination. On page 2, he says, “In the event that my requests herein are not met, I will have no option but to conclude that you…” – referring to me, the Speaker – “…and the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) have elected to treat me prejudicially and with bias”.

Honourable members, I do not know Mr Ssekabira. I have never met him. Therefore, I do not know why I would be biased against him. I find that part of the letter an attempt to blackmail me and arm-twist Parliament and the committees. I would like to warn anybody that no one can blackmail this House or the Speaker. (Applause) They should stop those attempts. I have no interest in COSASE neither do I have interest in any committee of this House. They are all committees of the House. I do not know this man. I have never talked or sat with him. 

I would like to remind the public that the work of the committees is duty bestowed by law and by this House. It is this House which gives the work to the committees. So they work for us and for the public. Therefore, let no one try to arm-twist or blackmail us in performing our statutory duties. The duties were given to us under the Constitution.

The second matter concerns the National Local Content Bill presented by hon. Nsamba, MP for Kassanda North. When it was read for the first time, inadvertently I referred it to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I have looked at the Bill again and in accordance with rule 128(1), I withdraw that Bill from that committee and send it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For the avoidance of doubt, the 45 days run from today.

The third matter is to about an issue that was raised last week by the people of Tororo, concerning failure to conclude the issue of the district. I was reminded that sometime back, I authorised a number of Members of this House, together with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, to go to London and establish the boundaries of those districts. I have never seen a report. I know that they came back but no one has reported. 

I would like to call upon the minister, who was the leader of the delegation, to come and report to this House so that we know what the boundaries are. We and the people of Tororo should know, so that we end the conflict. Thank you very much.

There were some issues of national concern. 

2.49
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, District Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

On Sunday, 24 February 2019, the nation witnessed a regrettable incident of army officers in uniform manhandling a female police officer on duty. This incident has shocked the nation because in this modern era, we expect officers in uniform to respect others on duty. It is a testimony to several risks which very many female staff are facing in Uganda.

On behalf of Budaka, the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and all women in Uganda, I condemn this act in the strongest terms possible. (Applause) It is not only an act of abuse but also a direct attack on the dignity of women. I pray that with your permission, Madam Speaker, you allow me to bring a motion tomorrow so that we give chance to honourable colleagues to debate it. I beg to move (Applause).

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give her is that in a similar manner, the learned Deputy Attorney-General, while appearing before Justice Catherine Bamugemereire, used intimidating remarks in a manner that was similarly playing a gender card. This is equally unacceptable conduct on the part of an officer holding the office of Attorney-General. Therefore, this motion should incorporate the conduct of the Attorney-General while appearing before Justice Catherine Bamugemereire.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the request by the honourable chairperson of UWOPA is accepted. However, I think you need time to prepare, so we cannot debate today. Please, bring the motion tomorrow with your prayers. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils of Hormisdallen Primary School, Kyebando. They are represented by hon. Ssebagala and hon. Ssempala. You are welcome. (Applause)

2.52
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter that I had prepared to raise is what the chairperson of UWOPA has just raised. I will ably participate in the debate of the motion or as a seconder because as shadow Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs, we are equally concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We note your desire to become a seconder but discuss with the mover. 

2.53
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, District Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance. 

I have been receiving complaints from mostly teachers and health workers from Agago District regarding the faking of documents by Bayport and Platinum financial institutions. They get information from somewhere about individual employees of the district. I wonder whether they connive with the district human resource office. However, by the time an employee gets to know, some amount of money has been deposited on their account and it is called a “loan”. The following month, they start deducting money from your account, alleging that it is the first instalment for repayment of the loan that has been imposed on you.

Madam Speaker, for several years, most of these workers have complained but they have not received any assistance, even if they go to the district human resource office or Bayport and Platinum. The deductions are made and they are denied information about their accounts and so forth. 

Madam Speaker, this has been occurring for a long time and civil servants are complaining because their monies have been deducted for many years. Some of them have had their money deducted for over six years. Actually, they do not even have any idea about when such loans will end. Whenever they try to complain, nobody gives an answer –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Use half a minute to conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I, therefore, would pray that some attention is given by the ministry in charge of microfinance so that they check these financial institutions that defraud civil servants, especially the lower cadre civil servants who do not even apply for such loans. Let an investigation be carried out so that attention is paid to the victims. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Franca Akello. Honourable members, I think that is a serious issue. If you put money on my account when I have not requested for it and you just keep on deducting, I think it constitutes a breach of trust. I ask the minister in charge of microfinance to examine this issue urgently.

2.56
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, the issue is a serious one because Bayport is a microfinance institution that operates in the whole country and in almost every district. What sounds very unique is how they deposit money on teachers’ accounts, maybe in connivance with workers of the district, who must be the chief administrative officers and chief finance officers. This is terrible.

Madam Speaker, instead of directing the minster in charge of microfinance, therefore, I would like to inquire if we could direct the microfinance authority, since these institutions are regulated and they are licensed. If they find out that it is true, I think their licences should be revoked.

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean the Financial Intelligence Authority?

MR BYABAGAMBI: There is the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority (UMRA), which was established by an Act of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the authority cannot report here. However, let us ask the minister in charge of microfinance to work with them and bring a report to this House by Thursday next week. Thank you very much.

2.58
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding the tragedy that hit my area. 

On Friday, 22 February 2019, we had a very heavy rainstorm which hit my area, killing three people. It also destroyed one hundred houses and two schools and all the crops were swept away. People are now in serious trouble. They are living under open skies and suffering to an extent that I cannot describe. 

I request Government to provide emergency relief of all forms and to consider urgent rehabilitation of the schools since the school term is ongoing. They should also provide some planting materials for these people so that they can recover from the problem they are going through. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The Office of the Prime Minster, especially the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, should expeditiously proceed to Buikwe to examine the situation and address the needs of the people as requested by the Member of Parliament.

3.00
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 24th and 25th of February this year, a heavy hailstorm hit Nakaseke District, specifically Nakaseke and Kaasangombe subcounties. Approximately, 300 families do not have where to sleep now. Gardens of crops were destroyed and a number of people do not have what to eat.

Madam Speaker, this is the third time hailstorms have hit this area. Every time it has happened, I have reported this matter but nothing has ever been done, except merely promises by the minster. My prayer is that this time, the minister in charge of relief comes and rescues the people of Nakaseke so that they can get what to eat. Maybe they can also donate some iron sheets to the people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Again, the Office of the Prime Minster, especially the minister in charge of disaster preparedness, should assist the people of Nakaseke South County and address the issue of lack of housing, seeds and other support.

3.01
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise in respect of violation of the human rights of a one Mubarak Kirunda by the Uganda Police Force, contrary to Article 23 of the Constitution on personal liberty, Article 28 on fair hearing and Article 29 on freedom of movement. 

Madam Speaker, Mubarak Kirunda, the chairperson of Jinja Central Division, in the normal course of his duty, was attending a workshop in Mbarara organised by Lake Victoria Region Local Authorities Cooperation. After attending the workshop, he proceeded to Kisoro to conduct his business. However, he was arrested by the police and has been held for about two weeks now on suspicion that he intended to cross to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).

I would like to emphasise that under Article 29(2) of our Constitution, Ugandans have a right to move freely throughout the country without any hindrance. I request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to prevail on the Uganda Police Force, who in the course of violating people’s rights, have actually also ended up violating the rights of my division chairman. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not speculate on the reason. I think you should ask the minster to tell us why he is holding him. Minister of Internal Affairs, please come back to us next week and let us know why the chairman of Jinja Central Division is in custody.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I was briefed about this issue by my colleague as we came to the Chambers. What he has not stated here is that this gentleman was arrested and he did not have any documentation on him. He is the Local Council III (LC III) chairman, but he did not have a passport or national identity card. Therefore, it was his word against the word of the people of immigration and the security forces at the border.

However, as you have guided, Madam Speaker, I have sent a message to the police to give me a brief. We will be able to answer next week. Thank you.

3.04
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker I rise on a matter of national importance.

I am concerned about the plight of our pensioners - the old men and women countrywide who continue to find it hard to access their pension. Beneficiaries are being tossed up and down between their respective districts and the Ministry of Public Service. In my constituency, I have some pensioners who have failed to trace where their monies are. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time that the Government came up with a statement to help these pensioners who are suffering, walking everywhere, looking for their pension, which they have failed to get. I would like to know the measures Government has put in place to help these pensioners access their funds. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a very general inquiry. Could you perhaps narrow it down to the number of years they have been walking - can you give us their identity or classification?

MR MUGUME: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please pass the information on to the minister.

3.06
MR GEORGE ABOTT OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance.

My constituency is comprised of a number islands and one of them is called Bukana. Bukana Island has no health centre and my people are seriously complaining. We have actually written several letters to the ministry concerned.
	
Madam Speaker, this is an island and the people need proper attention. It is now raining and people have many aliments. It is, therefore, my prayer that the ministry gives the people of Bukana a health centre so that they can get health services. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Is the minister in a position to say something now? 

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been to some of the islands in this country and I would like to appreciate the point that the Member has raised.

We are working on a list of health centres III to be constructed or health centres II to be upgraded to health centres III. I would like to assure the Member from Bukooli Islands that we are going to pay specific attention not only to Bukooli Islands but to all the islands and mountainous areas in the country. Madam Speaker, you actually gave a directive to that effect. We shall share the list with Members once we are done. Thank you.
	
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you come back, tell us about water ambulances for the islands.

MS OPENDI: Noted, Madam Speaker.

3.08
MS AOL JACQUELINE (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the delay or absence of by-elections for the position of LC V Chairperson of Nebbi District, which fell vacant on 24 September 2018. Our beloved LC V Chairperson, Esrom William Alenyo, met his death in a fatal accident caused by an errant truck driver.

Madam Speaker, these by-elections are stipulated in section 171 (1) of the Local Governments Act. My prayer, therefore, is that the Government explains to the people of Nebbi why these elections have not taken place. There are only five months and 28 days left for the elections to take place.	

THE SPEAKER: We ask the Minister of Local Government to come and inform us why elections have not been organised for Nebbi District.

3.09
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter I am raising is in respect to the strained relationship between Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) and the people of Bududa who are living along the fringes of Mount Elgon National Park.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development must be in advanced stages of securing the boundaries of Mount Elgon National Park. This had improved the relationship between UWA and the people. However, as we talk, this relationship has deteriorated. The UWA personal who in the past have been trigger happy and killed our people have now started arresting people arbitrarily, and it is as if these matters have fallen outside the jurisdiction of Mbale courts. They arrested eight of them and brought them to Luzira. They are in prison but they have not been arraigned in court. 

The Bududa District Local Government has a memorandum of understanding with the people who are living along that national park. It is termed as a collaborative restoration of Mount Elgon National Park? It is about conservation of the ecosystem. If the people were in breach of this memorandum, Mbale courts would have handled this, and I am sure that there are enough courts and authorities. What reason is given for bringing them to Luzira and even denying them bail and yet these are bailable offences?

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the responsible line ministry should prevail upon these errant staff – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not given us the names of the people who were brought to Luzira and you have not told us how long they have been there. 

MR NAMBESHE: The names are here and among them, there is minor of 13 years old who is being held in Naguru. Could you please read out the names?

MS KHAINZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As hon. Nambeshe said, there are eight persons arrested, namely Namukhowa David, Kutosi Michael, Mafumo Michael, Kitsewa Fred, Wamono Samson, Makhowe Stephen, Irene Mpuya and Job Mpuya, who is 17 years old. Actually, this boy sat for Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) and he has been admitted at Bulucheke Secondary School to start his secondary education. This morning, I interfaced with him; he is at the remand home. This is the information I wanted to give to the honourable colleague.
	
MR NAMBESHE: Thank you very much, my Woman Member of Parliament. My prayer is that the ministry, which is supposed to be in advanced stages of mapping and opening of Mount Elgon National Park, should expedite the securing of the boundaries.

Secondly, these people should be released unconditionally. There is no serious offence that has been pinned on them. Once this is done, it will improve the relationship between UWA and the community. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is directed to come and give an account of the people who are in custody. Secondly, update us on when the border demarcation will be concluded so that our people can coexist with the –

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Nambeshe for raising this matter. We sympathise with the people affected. 

Like you have directed, Madam Speaker, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will give us the details of what happened. However, Government has been trying to reopen the boundaries of Mount Elgon National Park so that the park officials and the community know where the boundaries are. This exercise has been concluded. I led the Government team and we disseminated the results to the leadership of Bugisu region. The results were well accepted because the exercise was done together with the local communities. We also did the same for the Sebei region. 

Madam Speaker, the exercise has been completed. However, in some situations, communities were found to be inside the park and in other situations, where the officials of UWA thought the area was a park, it was found to be a local community. We are now doing a mapping exercise to ascertain the people who we should relocate from the park. If there is any area that needs to be de-gazetted, then the proposal will come to Parliament. 

The leaders know that this exercise is ongoing. This matter has been –(Interruption)   

MR WOBOYA: Thank you. I would like to just clarify one or two points. Indeed, as the minister has said, the communities are awaiting for the outcome of the mapping. However, I would think that the status should remain as it is. This is because some of these people had crossed to the other side and they cultivated slightly beyond the boundary. However, what is happening now is that the Uganda Wildlife Authority officials are destroying some of the crops even if they are about to get ready for harvest. It is a very bad situation.

Therefore, we would request that as we wait for the mapping exercise, we leave the status as it is until the map is out and everyone knows where to stop. Right now, you are antagonising the community and yet the map is not yet out. This is the clarification. I advise that you leave the community to continue surviving as we wait for the outcome of the mapping exercise.  

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister was giving information or responding to that issue. Are you responding or just giving information? It is because proposals are being made and I do not know how to deal with them.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, in your guidance, you had asked the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to update Parliament about the progress in terms of reopening the boundaries. That exercise is led by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, so I volunteered information just to update the House. However, if it is the wish of the House that the minister brings a complete statement, he can still bring it. I was just giving an update on how far we have gone. 

The information I gave is that the boundaries have been opened. Cabinet has discussed this matter and what remains is identification of the areas which may require de-gazettement or where we have to relocate people from the park. 

THE SPEAKER: If the report comes, that is when we can discuss how this matter should be handled. Right now, it is a bit premature to discuss it. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: For the specific issue raised, however, I think the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will find out what caused the conflict between the people on the list that has been read and UWA. Government will handle that issue.

THE SPEAKER: We would like to appeal to you to quickly bring the report. You know, issues of boundaries between people and wild animals are really a problem. Does the report on the boundaries cover the whole country or it is in respect to the Bugisu region only?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I think the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has been trying to reopen boundaries for many parks but we have completed the Mount Elgon National Park. I also know they have been opening the boundaries of Queen Elizabeth National Park; an issue came here a few weeks back. They are opening the boundaries for most parks. It could, therefore, be a comprehensive report showing us all those issues about the park. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us urge the minister to quickly come so that we can handle it as a country. 

MR MANGUSHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. The Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Dr Baryomunsi, is saying that the demarcation is complete. However, there are areas that are not yet complete and there is still conflict among the people and wild life, more so in the areas of Sebei and Amudat. 

As we talk now, there is even conflict as the rainy season is coming. The delay in that area was because of too much water. However, even when it was dry, the people from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development did not go there and complete that work. Now, the rain is coming back.

The ministry is putting in money year in, year out. This persistent delay in demarcating the boundaries has caused us problems. The conflict with Uganda Wildlife Authority and the people is because of the failure to have permanent boundaries and also settle the affected communities because these communities have no other means of living. Therefore, I wish the ministry could take action. 

When we had consultative meetings with the minister and other stakeholders, we set a timeframe but those timeframes have always elapsed without any action. I think Government should do something seriously. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct that the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities comes next week to update us on the people who were in custody. However, by 13 March 2019, he should bring a comprehensive report here about the mapping of the whole country so that we can debate and settle it once and for all. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE ARBITRARY INCREMENT IN SCHOOL FEES BY SCHOOLS AND THE COMMERCIALIZATION OF CLASS NOTES IN PRIMARY SCHOOLS, AND THE SUSPENSION OF ADMISSION OF STUDENTS TO GULU UNIVERSITY - KITGUM BRANCH

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education -

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, we raised the issue of Gulu University and the minister was requested to come today and give a response. The students are now stranded; they do not know whether they are going to continue or not. If this issue delays, they will be thrown into panic. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for you to help these students by directing that the minister comes to their rescue and reinstates their admissions? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those two items are urgent and they will reappear on the Order Paper tomorrow. Hon. Oyet, what is bothering you?

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My apologies for rising on a procedural matter. Last week on Thursday, I rose on an issue of national importance regarding the payment of Ugandan traders in South Sudan. 

On 3 April 2018, this Parliament passed resolutions giving directives to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to secure a loan to the tune of US$ 41 million to pay Ugandan traders in South Sudan-

THE SPEAKER: Can you wait until we run through these, which are on the Order Paper, and then I will give you a chance to raise your issue at the end?

RESPONSE TO THE QUESTION RAISED BY HON. MUHEIRWE DANIEL ON THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS ARISING OUT OF THE EVICTION AND DISPLACEMENT OF OVER 200 FAMILIES IN KIGOROBYA, HOIMA DISTRICT

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, you had asked the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to respond to this question and he had in turn asked the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs to respond. However, because the police were involved, after consultations with the Prime Minister, he directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs should respond to this matter. That is why I am responding.

Madam Speaker, the aim of this report is update this Parliament on what transpired at Kyabisagazi Village in Kigorobya Subcounty, Hoima District, on 13 February 2019.

I would like to give a small background to this matter. The people referred to as militia had settled on Plot 5, Block 6 Bugahya, Kyabisagazi Parish, Kyabisagazi Village in Kigorobya Subcounty. Some of them settled way back in the early 1950s, 1960s, up to the 1990s and new arrivals have also been registered in this area. 

This block of land, according to the available title, belonged to Mr Neko Rukanyanga of P.O. Box 223, Hoima. In 2005, one Mr Edgar Agaba acquired the same land under the Non-Performing Assets Recovery Programme (NPART). Mr Agaba agrees that he kept all the tenants who settled in the area and who had rented from Mr Neko under the same agreement he had with NPART and Mr Neko.

The tenants requested for the opening of boundaries of the same land because they doubted Mr Agaba's ownership was legitimate, so that they could pay rent to the rightful owner. They were renting the land from whoever was the rightful owner, so that they could cultivate the land and stay there for the period that they would agree on.

On 26 September 2017, a meeting was convened in an attempt to solve the conflict because some of the tenants had not agreed. Mr Agaba in turn accused some politicians for fuelling the feud between him and the tenants and misleading the tenants that he, Mr Agaba, had no title for the land, therefore the tenants should not pay rent.

Later, Mr Agaba sought for the intervention of the Minister of State for Bunyoro Affairs, hon. Ernest Kiiza. The minister convened the first meeting on 7 September 2018 in Hoima at his office - Madam Speaker, if you could kindly inform the people recording to give me more time so that I do not keep pressing the button.

Some sections of tenants refused to pay rent- 

THE SPEAKER: Should they give you ten minutes?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Well, ten minutes is enough. Mr Agaba, in retaliation, served 20 tenants with termination of tenancy agreement letters for the Kyabisagazi land. One Mr Simon Achille, who was the LC I Chairman and a member of the land distribution committee, was among those whose contract was terminated by Mr Agaba. Mr Agaba threatened them with eviction. However, he acknowledges that some of the tenants are bona fide occupants of the land because they have been there, as we said, from the 1940s and 1950s.

It is at this point that once Mr Agaba disagreed with Mr Achille, Mr Achille started mobilising the residents against Mr Agaba by bringing more people on the land from within Uganda and from the Democratic Republic of Congo, and also misleading them that they should protect their land. A one Mawa Umak, for instance, a Congolese national who was born in 1974, according to his Congolese identity card, was also brought to this area. The same person acquired a Ugandan national identity card in the names of Mauwa Umaka. His National Identification Number (NIN) is as stated in the records. 

This group went ahead to declare what they called “Pele Republic” on that piece of land. They formed a Cabinet structure of their own for administration. This “Republic” and “Cabinet” would not allow anybody to visit the land without permission of those residents. Security received intelligence that there is a militia group which had established structures parallel to the administrative structures in Kigorobya Subcounty in Hoima District, calling themselves “The Pele Republic”. The leader of the group was Mr Simon Achille who was a member of the land distribution committee and LC I Chairman of the same area.

On 7 February 2019, the District Security Committee held a security meeting at the Resident District Commissioner’s (RDC’s) office in Hoima and one of the items discussed was the security situation in that village. On 19 February 2019, a cordon and search operation was conducted in that village to find out who were in the area. Unfortunately, in the process, a police officer, Police Constable (PC) Rutaremwa Vincent, was hacked to death by the group in the village. Another police officer, Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Emoti George, was also wounded.

During the course of the operation, a total of 78 suspects were arrested and 43 of them were captured during combat with their weapons. These were mainly pangas, harmers, bows, arrows and sticks, among others. A full security patrol roaster was captured from this group. Also arrested were 114 women who were later released after screening by the police and immigration officials.

Security maintains a platoon strength of Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) and Uganda Police Force (UPF) in the area to monitor the situation. Calmness now prevails in the area. It is important to note that the police simply conducted a cordon and search operation as required by law, to identify whether there were bad elements or not. 

On the allegation of people who are camped in the bush and are in dire need of humanitarian assistance, this group does not exist. However, there is intelligence which indicates that some politicians are registering people from their homes in order to attract political sympathy. Otherwise, there is no humanitarian crisis.

Madam Speaker, after the operation, the honourable Minister of State Minister for Bunyoro Affairs convened a meeting to discuss land disputes in the area generally. Among the people who attended were a number of our colleagues in this House. These are: 

1. 	Hon. Karubanga David, Member of Parliament for Kigorobya Constituency;
2. 	Hon. Daniel Muheirwe for Buhaguzi Constituency;
3. 	Hon. Pius Wakabi for Bugahya Constituency;
4. 	Members of the District Security Committee;
5. 	Land owners and other people.

That meeting made the following resolutions:

a) 	Screening of all people be carried out and those who had lived on the land for long should be left to stay but recent arrivals should be sent back to where they came from.

b) 	A meeting be held with the encroachers and land grabbers to hear their side of the story in order to build a harmonious co-existence/relationship between the people and those who claim ownership of the land.

c) 	Efforts be made in getting search reports on land titles for verification purposes for those who claim land in that area. This was in relation to the report that some titles were overlapping and if possible, they could have been forged.

d) 	All illegal landing sites in the area be closed, particularly since this is an area at the border with the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which has some security issues.  

e) 	Opening of the boundary on Edgar Agaba's land should proceed as earlier planned but should wait for the elapse of the six month period as directed by the Bamugemereire land commission.

f) 	Individuals who could have committed offences should be brought to book.

g) 	Immigration posts be created along all gazetted landing sites to check and monitor movements of foreigners. 

We do believe these measures will be able to bring lasting harmony in the area. Thank you for listening to me.

3.38
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Kikuube): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank God that the minister has been able to bring a statement that we can always refer to. 

As you have heard, this is a land wrangle in which somebody has designed a scheme to brand people “militia”, so that they can be evicted. This minister can bear witness that he has not reached Hoima. (Laughter) He has received the same report I received in the security meeting I attended and rejected its outcomes. This is the reason I am still convinced that this report cannot be relied on by this House.

When you say people have been allowed to go somewhere else other than their homes, it means it was a total eviction. You cannot say there is no humanitarian crisis when people’s houses, which are customary evidence, were burnt and bulldozers are working, opening boundaries and creating perimeter walls. After that, you say that it was a “cordon and search” and you bring harmers and pangas, which are household items, as tools of war. 

You then see somebody who has been threatened with eviction anytime being told that they should not patrol their land at night because they have been warned. They tell you that somebody who acquired a title in 2002 wants you who settled there in the early 1950s to start paying rent to a new comer who acquired a title in 2005. There are so many ambiguities in this report.

Madam Speaker, I still insist that you choose a select committee to go on ground. (Applause) They would be able to ascertain whether Achille is from Congo; whether the national identity card they have mentioned is for the same person or a fabrication; whether the people in the cells have bullet wounds or are they healthy; whether 78 people can combine their efforts to kill one person. All those can constitute ingredients for investigation by a select committee.

Madam Speaker, I thank you and ask for your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I will give my ruling on a way forward tomorrow. Let us take a comment from hon. Ssengo.

3.41
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of land evictions is becoming a national problem. It is happening every day. In Gomba, people are being evicted every day. We have got families, which have lived on land for over 50 years, but they are being evicted. 

Our suspicion is that people are manufacturing fake titles. Once they see a piece of land where people have not been active or the owners have been a bit negligent, they go and produce new titles for that land. They then come and straight away and evict people, and as they survey, they sell off the land because they know that it is not their land.

Madam Speaker, before you set up a committee, we need something very urgent to save the lives of our people. Otherwise, if we do not take steps, this case is going to explode and we may have a national problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I said, I will give a ruling on how to move tomorrow. However, I would like to comment on the issue of border people. 

Honourable minister, you have to design a strategy of identifying who the Ugandans are and who are not. I went to Nakapiripirit last year and the leaders there were telling me very casually that those Kenyans vote here and we also vote there. They said they influence our side and we also influence their side, and they were very open about it.

We have been getting reports that there are people from our neighbouring country who have our national identity cards. I have those reports. Therefore, honourable minister, it is really a serious issue.  

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a serious problem here. The problem we are having is that our people own land communally. You find someone coming straight to Kampala and acquiring a land title when the real landowners are not aware.

Madam Speaker, I tried this - When I went to Entebbe to find out about the status of land in my district, according to the map the land is vacant because our people do not have land titles; our land is owned communally. Therefore, anybody who is greedy can connive and acquire the land title when people who are on the ground are not aware. This is the problem, Madam Speaker. 

In addition, the minister stated very clearly that the people had been living on that land in Hoima for 50 years and the other man acquired the land title in 2002. It means when that man acquired the land title, people were not aware. Therefore, Madam Speaker, as a country we need to be very serious on this matter –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the issue that we are discussing is very crucial. Just yesterday, one of our Members was telling me about an issue in Masindi where around 50 members of the community are trying to gather money to give an advocate who is demanding for over Shs 50 million to defend their rights. Therefore, it has gone out of hand now. 

This same problem is also in Teso. People come with animals and they let the animals go ahead of them and then they come later and take over the land. It is a challenge. You talked about people who vote from both sides of the border; somebody votes in Sebei and Nairobi, in Nakapiripirit and Turkana, or in Busia Kenya and then Busia Uganda. What are we going to do? 

I would suggest that – (Interjection) - Yes, we are talking about the East African Community; we are going to be a community but the borders are not going to be eliminated. In addition, we have not signed any protocol that says you can vote from anywhere. Madam Speaker, this is a very big challenge. We might have to put in place a law against people who are voting redundantly like that, moving from here and there. We must institute punitive measures because it is getting out of hand. Tomorrow, if such populations increase, for you to become President, you must have people next to the border and that will be a problem. Therefore, I think we need to bring a law so that we become stringent with people who do not know what they are doing –(Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way and for the information he has given. Concerning the issue of grabbing land, there are some officials in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who use a Global Positioning System (GPS) to focus on a place they think is vacant. They did it in my constituency in a place called Odwarat in Ngora. They even got the land titles but when they went there to evict people, because we had mobilized our community to defend our land, they fought and stood firm and were able to overcome. If Ugandans do not come together to fight these kinds of land evictions, we are going to have a big crisis.

MR AOGON: As I summarize, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the real issue in Teso, for instance - I think Justice Bamugemereire has not gone there; she needs to also visit our place so that she checks the temper of our leaders. There are those who are conniving with people. She needs to also come to Teso.

3.49
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we need to help our people with. First, the Land Act and the regulations do not allow any authority like the District Land Board or Uganda Land Commission to allocate land which is occupied by people. However, this is what is happening. If you move through all these urban setups, you will realize that some unscrupulous people have applied for certificates of title where there are people. This has happened in my constituency. 

Under the Land Regulations, you can only allocate land after visiting the locus. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development needs to come up with guidelines for these area land committees. We have seen forms which state that there is nobody on the land, and that is why they have even allocated school land. Last time we were in Jinja over the same issue.

Madam Speaker, the other issue is very pertinent and I think it requires the amendment of the law. When we came up with the law, we allowed the landlord to transfer ownership of his or her land without the consent of the kibanja holder but we criminalized transfer of ownership by a kibanja holder. If he sells off his kibanja without consent from the landlord, it is criminal. He does not have to do that.

What we are seeing now is a situation where some speculators apply for a certificate of title on land where there are people. They then sell off to other people and after the transfer, they come and evict people. I think that is what the minister is trying to facilitate in Kigorobya. We must understand that as long as that is how we are conducting business, we are bound to have problems.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, even under those lease agreements which are given out, there is a developmental term of five years. If someone is a speculator and is putting on a shoe of a developer, you are not allowed to transfer that lease until you have developed. However, what is taking place is very different. I think as Parliament, we need to study this and provide solutions to our people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of land evictions has become so rampant and worrying because it is nationwide. I have gone to radio a few times and in each programme, people ask me, “Can Parliament help us? What can Parliament do about these evictions?”

Therefore, I think we need to have a general debate about the issue, so that we can make proposals for changes. We cannot continue sitting here and people are being thrown out. Therefore, Members, you could organise and prepare a motion and we debate it. However, honourable minister, I think you will still do the things which I asked you to do.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of a strategy to identify our people correctly. It is problem to a certain extent because we are beginning to register people at point X and at this point X, there are people who have settled there longer than others and some came later. The best point for us to start with is the population itself. 

What have we been doing in terms of this identity? In future, the best solution will be that all our people will be registered, even at birth, and therefore there will be continuity. However, that is for the future. At the moment, when we go to the village to register people, we rely on the evidence of the people in the village, including the local councils and some of these LC1s might actually be people who have just come into the country. 

Therefore, I entirely agree with you that we need a more in-depth strategy of identification. However, it calls for everybody’s integrity. Right now, even as we register people, there are communities for example in Bunyoro, who came from Kenya and other countries. We do not know whether they are Ugandans and can be registered or not. 

At the moment, we are using a multi-faceted approach to identify who is a Ugandan and who should be registered. In the long run, we believe that once we have completed the preliminary registration of Ugandans by identification of the National Identity Card, we should be able to overcome this problem. 

I cannot comment on the issue of the land because you have just summarised it adequately. It is a problem and it is going to become more of a problem as Ugandans realise the value of land. The number of Ugandans continues to increase and definitely, we need to take the opportunity to set up issues right now so that in future, we do not have that problem.

As my friend correctly said, it is true that I did not visit Bunyoro. However, I have a network of security people; policemen at the police posts. In this particular area, there are security people and police who are accountable to me. Therefore, the only thing you could say is that they are lying to me, in which case you have to give me counter information. Otherwise, that is the correct information and I stand by it. 

Finally, I have not said, in my paper, that there are militias. If you read it very well, I said that the people who were referred to as militias are people who settled there many years ago; in the ‘40s and ‘50s. That does not qualify those people to be militias. 

What I said, however, is that other new elements from across the border in DRC – and I was specific – have been brought in by certain elements to support them in their cause. Legitimate or illegitimate is a different issue but this has resulted into a security situation, which our people had to come in to address. Therefore, I think this is a good beginning and a good statement, which I thought I should make. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE QUESTION ASKED BY HON. LYANDRO KOMAKECH ON THE DETERIORATING SECURITY SITUATION IN GULU DISTRICT

3.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your indulgence. This matter was raised on Thursday and you gave a directive that we should handle it today. We had kindly requested, through colleagues, that you give us till tomorrow. There are about six items on that issue; in Gulu, Ngora, Lamwo, Kyotera and so on. 

Instead of wasting Parliament’s time by coming with one statement at a time, since they have come as block, we request that you give us a chance to combine them. By tomorrow or Thursday, if you so wish, we should be able to present a comprehensive statement on those matters. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, let us use tomorrow because some of them have been quite frequent on the Order Paper. Therefore, we defer the items to tomorrow. 

3.57
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure in regard to the directive you gave last week that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should report to Parliament with a report regarding the payment of Ugandan traders in South Sudan and the criteria used. 

We passed a loan of US $41 billion to be paid to the 23 companies. However, as we speak, we have information that so far, out of the 23 companies, only 10 were paid. These 10 companies that were paid were selected without following the order of the lease of the company that was presented to Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, one wonders why Parliament must be taken for a ride and why a directive by the Speaker of Parliament is not adhered to. On Thursday, you gave a directive that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes here with a report showing us how they arrived at the 10 companies they compensated. Why didn’t they listen to the advice and resolution of Parliament, which was passed on 3 April 2018? 

That resolution was to the effect that Shs 41 million be paid pro rata, meaning that all the companies, however small, should share this money so that in case there is any balance, we get back to the drawing board and see how to sort out the balance of the other companies. 

Madam Speaker, I have a list of the 23 companies; ROKO Construction Company is the first on that list but on the list of the 10 companies paid, ROKO is not anywhere. Prima Commodities Uganda Limited is second on the list but it is not on the list of the 10 companies paid. I do not know what criteria they used to pay Aponye, which is the third on the list. Therefore, one begins to wonder the criteria used in selecting these companies to get the money, which was passed by a resolution of Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We will repeat our directive to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and bring the list of the companies that have been paid. He should also explain to us when the others will be paid and why he has defied the resolution of this House to pay the companies pro rata. I do not see him today but he should be informed.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON THE CLOSURE OF COMMERCIAL BANKS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you received the report last week and we agreed that you would take the weekend to peruse it. As I indicated, the same had been signed by the necessary Members required. Are there any comments? You will use three minutes each. 

4.01
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have about three issues to raise. First of all, I told hon. Katuntu that even if they had stopped at the hearing, I was already satisfied that we are dealing with a very big problem. 

My first issue is with the recommendation to compensate some of the closed banks for non-compliance with provisions of the law by Bank of Uganda. The committee reports that the National Bank of Commerce was closed and sold within one day. The one who bought this bank is Crane Bank whose proprietor is Sudhir Ruparelia. He benefited from the fraud of Bank of Uganda closing the National Bank of Commerce, which was sold to him within six hours. 

The moment you involve yourself in fraud, it is only a matter of time and it will catch up with you. Now, he is crying that his bank was sold to Dfcu in the same manner yet he is the one who bought the National Bank of Commerce, which was sold to him in the fashion being described in the report. 

Madam Speaker, my view is that this Parliament should not recommend that Sudhir Ruparelia, the proprietor of Crane Bank and a beneficiary of fraud, be compensated because he has already benefited. In any case, if you remember the investigations into the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM) scandals, this gentleman was given Shs 12.5 billion and he was supposed to issue Government with a share certificate because we invested in Munyonyo Commonwealth Resort. 

However, when he appeared before the parliamentary committee, he said no, he cannot and our money is still there. He is the one who has taken over Shimoni grounds and he also took over land in Mulago. I will be reluctant to recommend that a beneficiary of fraud, documented, be compensated when the same fraud is visited on him.

Secondly, the report has very good findings on what was not done by Bank of Uganda. The findings are very good and specific on a lot of crimes committed by Bank of Uganda officials. I would like to invite this Parliament to make very specific recommendations about these individuals because even regarding the payment, the report proposes that we pay but why should we pay if the people who committed the crimes are there? 

In fact, in my view, the Governor, Bank of Uganda and his entire team should, by now should be commuting from Luzira Prison to appear before any committee or tribunal because these individuals are the ones who have brought us where we are. There is no way we will recommend that we use taxpayers’ money to compensate their mistakes and we cannot even afford to relieve them of their duties – (Member timed out.)

4.05
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the report and I also took interest in monitoring what was happening during the investigation. What I watched is not entirely what is in this report. As such, it would be fair, if there is an opportunity, for us to reflect on what was recorded and Members can adequately compare this with what is in this report.

Secondly, I am also at a crossroads because I thought that we should have had an opportunity to see the list of the people who were customers to these banks and have not been paid so that we know who has been paid and who has not been paid.

Thirdly, I see that the report dwells much on the actions of Bank of Uganda and slightly delves into the actual rot in these banks. I thought it would have been fair to strike a balance and have clear details on the rot in these banks so that Bank of Uganda took them over. Once we understand that, we will be capable of appreciating the action taken.

Madam Speaker, I also feel that personalities should have been mentioned; the names of individuals because the titles –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute and stand up when you are speaking. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Titles are constant but individuals change. When you focus on the title of the person holding the portfolio at the time, you may lose track along the way because someone may focus on the title and fail to understand who the person was. For example, if my intention is to track an individual called James Bagyenda and you start with that, midway you say Bagyenda James and at the end, you only mention James, it does not flow chronologically.

Madam Speaker, I would have been comfortable if there was consistency in the names of those individuals versus their titles and stature. I, therefore, feel that what this Parliament can do is to have an opportunity where we clearly have the list of the Members who have not been paid and those who have been paid vis-à-vis the individuals and names of the people who the committee recommends must be disciplined. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.10
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this very important report. I would also like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, because you stood firm when some people in some circles were saying that there should not be any investigation. That is why I would like to thank you for standing firm and that is why I am very happy. 

Secondly, the committee has done a good job by identifying a disease. The disease was identified properly but when it came to prescription of the drugs to be applied to sort out the disease that was identified, Panadol was used and that is where there was a big problem. 

My friend, hon. William Nzoghu said that the people who are responsible for the closure of these banks must be named by the chairperson of the committee so that the whole world gets to know that so and so played the role A, B, C and D in the closure of bank A, B, C and D because they have brought more problems to the economy of this country.

Thirdly, it is surprising for a Central Bank like Bank of Uganda – unfortunately, they went against the laws in this country. They did not keep record of what was happening in the bank and yet these are PhD holders, well educated and are well placed. 

Like hon. Ssemujju said, some of these people should not be where they are. They should actually be on their way to Luzira Prison because they have suffocated this economy. They worked against the interests of this country and have destroyed this economy. If we are going to be silent on this matter, I am sure we shall have more problems.

In my view, those banks should be refunded their monies because the shareholders invested and they expected to get returns. Unfortunately, their banks were closed in a wrong way and they never followed the law –(Member timed out.) 

4.14
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, ‘doctor’ Abala for diagnosing the patient very well. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, this is what I think we can prescribe to the people who were responsible for the closure of these banks. One, I think we need to have legislative changes to the Financial Institutions Act on how to handle closed banks. When you read the report, you will find that there were some advocates who were misleading and practising double standards. I think they should be banned from representing the Central Bank and other Government institutions.

I find it very important to fire people like Kasekende, Justine Bagyenda, Mutebile, Ssekabila and Kasule. They should be handed over to the CID officers to investigate the matter immediately. 

The Board of Bank of Uganda should not be spared. They too should be fired immediately and the CID should take over for further investigations.

Lastly, I find it very important that the shareholders be refunded their money. I am not going to agree with hon. Ssemujju - yes, Sudhir is an investor. If he participated in fraud and you left him sometime back, he deserves to be paid his money back. Not only him but also the shareholders of banks like Teefe - much as it died. In Luganda “Teefe” means “it should not die” but this time, it died. Their money should be refunded immediately because the investors are doing well for this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done before the cameras. I managed to follow some of the proceedings. 

I would like to also agree that what is reflected in this report, especially the recommendations, do not match the findings that are written here and also what transpired before the cameras.

I will pick a few examples due to time constraints. It is indicated in the report that the Auditor-General is supposed to do an audit of all institutions and if the Auditor-General cannot be availed with key documents on the sale - for example, he asked for the inventory report, which he could not get. Even the committee, in the course of its own investigations, was not availed these reports. 

Madam Speaker, if you do not have an inventory of a bank, what are you selling? What is the other person buying? This clearly shows that there were some dealings between people within Bank of Uganda and the buyers of these banks.

Based on that, I find the recommendation by the committee that Bank of Uganda should strictly follow the Financial Institutions Act in future sales – really, after coming up with a finding that banks were being sold without following the law and without clear inventories, people should be held responsible. We cannot sit here, as Parliament and simply adopt such a report without bringing personalities in this report. 

If we were in a developed country, people would have resigned but this is Uganda where corruption seems to be the order of the day. 

There were other banks; I think Greenland Bank and Cooperative Bank, for which the report stated that their loan portfolios totalled about Shs 135 billion. Of this, Shs 34.5 billion were secured loans, which means these were not bad loans. 

However, the loans were sold to Nile River Acquisition Company at a discount of 93 per cent. The committee did not tell us who the directors of this Nile River Acquisition Company - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle. Allow whoever is on the Floor to speak. 

MS OPENDI: If the directors of this company are mentioned –(Interjection)- still, for you to come up and say that the Bank of Uganda officials who failed to properly execute their duties should be held responsible - who are these? Should we, as Parliament, sit and start digging and finding out who these people are? Why didn’t the committee name them? 

I find this report lacking. The IGG is mandated to investigate any acts of omission that could have occurred. I would like to recommend that further investigations be done. This House should refer this report to the Inspectorate of Government so that they can investigate and report to this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.21
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the committee - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let the Members express their views first. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: I also join my colleagues to congratulate the committee for a thorough job. However, I also shudder. The Bank of Uganda is supposed to be the custodian of all financial systems, laws, regulations and rules. Now that all the rules and financial systems have been abused by Bank of Uganda, where do we run to? 

When you observe irregular and shoddy procurement as well as lack of record keeping, where do we go? The post-mortem has been done. What is next? This is my biggest question. These people have been hiding within the law because of their independence. 

I would like to challenge Parliament to quickly amend and overhaul this law concerning Bank of Uganda so that we ensure that all these recommendations, as suggested by the committee, are put in place immediately. This is the only way we can save Bank of Uganda and our economic systems. Otherwise, if we allow time to go on, Bank of Uganda will continue the way it has been and there will be no remedy to save this situation. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will give you as much time as possible. (Applause)

4.23
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I rise to salute COSASE for unmasking the doctrine of checks and balances through this investigation on Bank of Uganda. It is on record that Parliament has never investigated Bank of Uganda because they have always hidden themselves under the law. As we speak, any Ugandan who followed this investigation knows that Bank of Uganda appears to be “naked”.

Madam Speaker, although I agree with Members to some extent, from my analysis of this investigation in the committee report; from the issue, the law applicable, management response, observation, findings and recommendations, I have picked about three issues that I would like to comment on before I can go to the recommendations.

The first one is that all these banks that were closed were closed without evaluation. One would ask a fundamental question: what was the basis of the closure if the assets and liabilities of the banks were not evaluated?

I remember that for six years, while I was a student at Lango College, I would pay the money given to me for school fees in the Cooperative Bank. When I joined Parliament as Youth MP, Crane Bank opened a branch in Lira. When I saw their branches in Gulu and Arua looking alike, I knew that this was a stable bank, only for the bank to be closed. I was a client of their Lira branch and the bank looked stable. Indeed, I think it was stable.

Madam Speaker, the second issue is about statutory management. You can imagine a situation where a statutory manager is not involved in the sale of the bank he manages. There was no formal handover. 

Moving on to the next issue, there is no report from Bank of Uganda on any closure. In 23 years, seven commercial banks were closed without any report. Even the officers who audited had no report availed to them. Whether we like it or not, the action of Bank of Uganda, in my opinion, is unfair to these commercial banks. 

I would like to support the recommendations of the committee. I followed the committee proceedings and if we are saying that names were not mentioned, I can mention names on the Floor of Parliament. I still remember the names of Bagyenda, Kasekende, Kasule and Ssekabira, subject to confirmation by the committee chairperson. If names are not mentioned, these names featured prominently from day one to the last day and some of them appeared from day one to the last day.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about the Central Bank of Uganda, which is the epitome of banking in this country. There is a problem with the Board and management. They are fused and I think the ministry responsible must introduce an amendment here so that we separate the Board from management. For now, they are fused and the same individuals are more or less performing the same roles.

Madam Speaker, private lawyers, who are directors of commercial banks, must not be brought on board to act for and on behalf of Bank of Uganda because there is going to be conflict of interest - (Member timed out.)

4.30
MR INNOCENT KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This has been the most awaited Parliament report in the recent past and Ugandans are very concerned due to the fact that we are talking about matters of our national bank. 

Madam Speaker, the socio-economic status of Ugandans is already ailing and Ugandans should not be taken for granted; to pay money for what they have not consumed. By the committee suggesting that the banks should be compensated without detailing the dos and don’ts that were supposed to be observed during the transaction would be putting a heavy loan on Ugandans.

This report should have been precise and strict to the dot to identify exactly who did what and where” so that we charge individual people. This time round, Parliament should send a very strong signal to the general public against corruption. 

In my opinion, this report still needs surgery to make it suitable for us to make tangible and justifiable conclusions about how to proceed with this matter. Otherwise we are going to lose money and people are going to benefit while Government loses and it will be the public to meet the cost. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What is the issue, hon. Franca Akello?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Quite a number of colleagues have mentioned the fact that this report should be referred elsewhere. For instance, the minister has mentioned that the report should be taken to the IGG and hon. Pentagon is suggesting that the report be taken - I do not know where. 

I wonder whether we are proceeding according to our Rules of Procedure because this is a report of Parliament. We only gave COSASE the mandate to dissect and scrutinise the report, which report can still be processed by this very House and I think this is the process we are carrying on. If there is any amendment, it can be proposed and resolved in this very proceeding. 

Is it, therefore, procedurally right for a Member to continue insisting that the report be referred elsewhere?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have not taken a vote on that matter. Let Members speak what they want. At the end, we shall handle each recommendation separately.

4.32
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to also thank the chairperson of the committee and the Members for unmasking Bank of Uganda.

I will start from where hon. Obua stopped. The problem with Bank of Uganda is with the Constitution under Article 161(4), which says that the Governor and the Deputy Governor should be the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson of the Board. In this era of corporate governance, which executive of an institution chairs the Board? Who oversees who? Can Mutebile oversee himself? That is where the problem is coming from.

The first bank was closed, the second one was closed but Mutebile, who was at the top, could not ask Mutebile who was the manager what the problem was.  

Madam Speaker, I will go straight to what the Opposition Chief Whip said about Crane Bank Limited. When Crane Bank Limited was taking over National Bank of Commerce, I do not know what they were thinking about. When growing up, my Mathematics teacher used to say, the system will always catch up with you. I think the system caught up with Crane Bank Limited and so, we need to compensate its customers.

If you followed those proceedings, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was clear. He said that he talked to Mr Sudhir Ruparelia and begged them to save the bank but he said, “Let the bank go.” If he said the bank should go, why are they asking for compensation?
	
Madam Speaker, Bank of Uganda can close a bank right now, sell it and call the auditors to come after some time. No valuation or stock taking is done; nothing is done at all. I rest my case but all is not well at Bank of Uganda. We need to take these people on, on individual basis. Thank you.

4.34
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will commence with a quote by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, when he appeared before the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) about Bank of Uganda giving enough attention to the defunct banks.

He said, “It is very unfortunate that you left a patient who was breathing and you and your doctor gave him something to finish him off.” I would like to salute the honourable minister for being very honest. I must say that this anointing of honesty and political will on the part of the Front Bench is flowing freely. That is why I see the Minister of State for Health, hon. Opendi, spitting friendly fire.

The report may have gaps but the truth is that the goodwill on the part of the Front Bench should be exploited as the silver bullet that may nip in the bud whatever loopholes or gaps there may be. It is the resolutions that we shall make here that will eventually matter.

Madam Speaker, there is a one Sudhir Ruparelia; I did not know the man but as a whistle-blower and the only dispossessed bank owner who never let go but fought back and whose fight helped expose the rot, the culture of impunity and criminality in Bank of Uganda – I must thank Sudhir Ruparelia for exposing this rot.

Madam Speaker, on pages 24 to 26 where there is a one Ben Ssekabira who played a role in the demise of Greenland Bank and other individuals - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have seen all of you. You will either speak today or tomorrow. Do not worry.

4.38
MR GODFREY WATEN§GA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the functions of a Central Bank and compare them with what has taken place in our country, it is a shame and an embarrassment to the Government of Uganda and Ugandans.

I followed the meetings of the committee with the culprits in Bank of Uganda. When you compare how the committee Members behaved and interacted with the members from Bank of Uganda in the meetings with what is in the report, you observe that the committee Members were harsher during the proceedings. I actually saw them pointing figures at individuals and yet in the report, they are shy. Honourable members, we need to find out what happened between the meetings and during report writing.
	
Madam Speaker, the public is looking at this august House. This is a big mess and a solution should be found by this House as a handrail to handle this problem. Otherwise, we are in problems. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I am writing all of you and you will all contribute. We have two days of debate on this matter. 

4.39
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (Independent, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to add my voice to those who have thanked you, Madam Speaker. If you had not insisted and agreed that Bank of Uganda should be investigated, we would not know all this.

I remember in 2003 when Government was privatising Uganda Commercial Bank, we insisted that Bank of Uganda had errors and omissions but they still gave out the bank to Stanbic Bank. The next thing we were doing was censoring Sendawula. It is very unfortunate that the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who are accountable to us, are not here. I do not think that since 2003, they have corrected the errors and omissions of the banks they closed. 

When you read this report, especially page 43, there was no accountability for the telegraphic transfers amounting to US $53.16 million. Actually, there was no confirmation of recipients of respective transfers from Crane Bank Limited to the recipient accounts because the account did not indicate the beneficiary. How can that happen today? Isn’t that collusion? 

That money could have been bounced and Bank of Uganda could have got it. You can see the corruption. I now know why Bank of Uganda never wanted to be audited; it is because they were part of this mess. How do you sell a bank without knowing its assets and liabilities? It has never been a benchmark.

I have been a banker and every month, you have to make a report to Bank of Uganda. They actually know the cash transactions. How come they were giving performance reports to these banks that they closed? I am reminded that they were giving reports every day. How come the books of accounts declared every year were not able to identify that these banks were not performing well? That means there was a deliberate effort to close these banks because they had a conflict of interest in the business. 

I would like to urge this Parliament to go into the details of why foreign banks are performing better than ours and yet they have the same supervisors. There must be a deliberate effort to fail local banks so that the foreign banks repatriate. We do not have anti-trust laws as we speak –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I join my colleagues in thanking you for standing firm in fighting corruption. I wish one of these days, when giving out medals to people, that you are one of the people on top as a fighter of corruption. We look forward to that and I hope we will be listened to. 

Madam Speaker, I worry. If a top institution of Government like Bank of Uganda can abet corruption in this manner and yet it is the overall supervisor of all financial institutions in this country, what are we left with as a country? If Bank of Uganda is part and partial of the people who are facilitating corruption in this way – 

We are talking about micro-stability and yet they have been duping the public that they are performing their roles. If this investigation had not taken place, maybe we would have had another three or four banks closed by now because closing banks had become a business. Therefore, I would like to thank the committee for doing whatever they did in their own way to expose this.

However, why is it that the names of the core people are not coming out clearly? By now, the special arm of fighting corruption in the Office of the President should have swung into action. Nakalema should have been with this report, running around and bringing these people behind bars as well as making recoveries.

For the first time, let us see properties of these people confiscated and money recovered and put back into the Consolidated Fund because they are doing this with impunity. During the investigations, they were responding to the committee members with arrogance as if to say, “What can you do?” 

This is unfair for this country. Something has to happen with this report -(Member timed out.) 

4.46
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Nwoya): Thank you for giving me this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating the work done by the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). I know that time is not our best ally in this debate. Therefore, let me go to the observations and give my recommendations. 

The committee observed that in the absence of proper valuation of all assets and liabilities, which contravene section 95(3) of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004, the whole exercise was not done in a prudent, transparent and fair way. If I am to summarise all this, I would describe it as thuggery. To me, the findings of the committee are a vote of no confidence on the Board of the Bank of Uganda. 

Therefore, I recommend that the Board should be fired immediately. Those who were mentioned should be held liable and personally accountable for the gross mistakes they made in causing financial loss to this country. People like Ssekabira, Kasule and the rest must be held liable. 

I also recommend that the bad books must be refunded to the shareholders of these banks. What these people were doing, from that time to when the Committee on COSASE was able to bring them to book, caused a lot of psychological and physical pain to many Ugandans. One of the directors of the closed banks - Greenland Bank - is no longer with us. He died a frustrated man and left behind widows and orphans because of the reckless and irresponsible behaviour of some of these officials.

I think if I were Prof. Mutebile, the Governor of Bank of Uganda, by now I would have walked away from that office because he failed to control the institution, which is not working. There are some people like Bagyenda who are more powerful than the institution. She would walk to the bank and steal documents as if they were her personal property. 

I further recommend that –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to also thank COSASE for the work they did. There is a saying by the Buganda people that, “If you change the way you look at things, the things will look at change.” That is what happened to the Committee on COSASE. They started very well in the beginning and everyone was appreciative. However, when it came to recommendations, they started sugar coating everything.

In the report, the auditors are not there. There cannot be transactions where there are no accountants and auditors. I would have loved to see the auditors who were concerned; I would have loved to see the accountants held culpable and punished. However, they are not there. 

Everything is generalised. We would have loved to see individuals because we know individual responsibility, individual crime. You cannot tell me that you have made recommendations whereby it is incumbent upon us to see who to punish. 

In conclusion, I take the recommendations to be null and void. The rest of the report is okay. Thank you.

4.51  
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have analysed this report and I would like to thank the COSASE for a job well done so far. It is the responsibility of this House to process this report and make recommendations or amendments where we deem fit. 

In my opinion, the law was flouted. Section 89(3) of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 was flouted by those who were responsible. Therefore, Article 164 of the Constitution holds them accountable not only in persona but also for their individual omissions and losses incurred as public servants due to the duties that they performed. 

This is where the process of liquidation was flouted. In the sale of all the banks, the liquidation process was marred by irregularities and infringement of the law. There was disclosure of information to - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute. Go to the issue.

MR NSEREKO: Host Member of Parliament -(Laughter)– Madam Speaker, I would like to run through what I feel was infringed in law; there was irregularity, there were no reports from the committee, the minutes were missing, there was a lapse in security as documents were being whisked out, the loan portfolios were not present, the inventories were absent, there was no proper evaluation and assets were sold at 97 per cent discount. That is Greenland Bank. 

All this was marred by intimidation, use of the media and personal incarceration and opening up criminal charges against shareholders in order to intimidate them. The Board was found asleep and there was no division of labour.

I am of the view that the loss incurred by the shareholders of these banks must be made good because when you lose something, the only redress you have is compensation. People like the Executive Director, Supervision should be held personally culpable. Liquidators like Mr Ssekabira, who created companies like SIL that do not exist and do not pay taxes, must be individually held liable and fraud cases brought against them.

Where was the head of security for documents to be whisked out of the Central Bank? The Head of Legal Services, a team of 11 lawyers that could not come up with recommendations and advise the Board and management on how to handle matters of the Central Bank are also wanting and they should be held culpable.

Where was the chairperson of management who is the Governor of the Central Bank when these decisions were being taken? The one in charge of transfers (TTs) - How do you transfer Shs 53 billion without knowing where it is going? They should be brought to book; so, we need the names, including those of the internal auditors. How could banks be sold without the auditing process being duly done?

Therefore, these should be the names that should be tagged to the losses created but all said and done, compensation should be given to the people and shareholders for the loss occasioned because they are waiting for redress. If we do not give them redress in this House, where will they go?

Mr Kiggundu died a pauper. Every one of you is aware that for all their assets - Shareholders in Cooperative Bank and Global trust Bank lost assets worth Shs 198 billion that were sold at 97 or 93 per cent discount. Where do you find such a discount in the world? Assuming a house cost US $1 million and you sell it for US $10,000, what discount is that in the world?

Therefore, the only redress we can give is compensation - (Member timed out.)

4.55
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the rigorous task done. I would like to invite the House to discuss this report with the calmness that it deserves because in being emotional, we can easily gloss over very serious commissions and omissions.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start with what I did not see being alluded to in the report. About October 2016, Bank of Uganda engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers to scrutinise Crane Bank. Part of the obligation in that scrutiny was a forensic audit to find out what caused undercapitalisation of Crane Bank. When you read that forensic report, it actually indicts individuals in Crane Bank for gross fraud. The Board is indicted for committing fraud and flouting anti-money laundering laws.

The big shareholder, Dr Sudhir Rupaleria was indicted for concealing his true shareholding, for insider dealing, for receiving stolen property and fraudulent transfer of funds. I do not see these issues coming through and I do not want us to be emotional and lose sight of the glaring - you see, you can catch a thief wrongly or highhandedly but it does not take away culpability of theft. I would like to invite this House to look at these issues very carefully. 

Madam Speaker, for instance, we are talking about sale of assets at a discount of 90 per cent. The report does not show whether the assets were performing or non-performing. We would like to clearly understand what these were. I do not see this in this report and it is a bit disappointing; maybe we can get more information.

Secondly, we are informed that Crane Bank –(Interjection)– I am talking about Crane Bank not for any reason but because it is has more information than other banks; we did not get much information about the others. It was sold while it was liquid. We are not informed that the liquidity therein was put there by the Central Bank and taxpayers’ money. That did not make Crane Bank properly capitalised.

The report does not tell us whether they wanted - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, if the Central Bank put taxpayers’ money in Crane Bank, it became liquid and it wanted to sell and the directors failed to capitalise the bank, how could the Central Bank wait and sell a shell?

Madam Speaker, we need better particulars of some of these issues. Shs 195 billion was transferred to an account of Crane Bank in New York. Is it that the Crane Bank owners do not know who received the money that we ask this from the Central Bank? I am not defending the omissions of the Central Bank but I would like us to be very careful and find individuals and agencies culpable.

In the forensic report of PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 12 agencies and individuals are mentioned and indicted for fraud. Where are they? Therefore, we need to be careful while thinking through what happened. Otherwise, we might fail if we do not move carefully to catch the real culprits in these omissions and commissions.

With more time, when we go to the recommendations, I will make my suggestions. 

5.00
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to appreciate the committee for igniting this discussion because if they did not leave room for us to discuss, we would only be appreciating.

Madam Speaker, as a country, we are shy about taking disciplinary action and that is why there is continuous moral decay. As colleagues have mentioned, if names have been listed, as an institution we should, for once, take a stand for disciplinary action for people and our children to learn. We are not doing it for the sake of correcting the past but we should do something for the people coming after us to know that this is wrong and it should be put right. Taxpayers lost money in this deal and we are asking them to pay again without the people who did this making good. 

For the short time I have been around, we have approved a lot of loans and if the highest institution that manages finances in this country is going to the dogs, how shall we pay these loans? 

Finally, when you look at the recommendations of COSASE on the Board, I will read the last statement: “The appointing authority may, in the event of any failure on the part of the Board in effective supervision of the management of the bank, consider reviewing the appointments.” It should have been clear to say that they have already failed by what we are seeing and so, it should take disciplinary action and review the appointment instead of saying, “May.” That is being too kind. The Bible says, “Spare the rod and spoil the child.” We are spoiling our own country and children for tomorrow. Thank you.

5.02
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. From the report findings, there needs to have been administrative reforms in the Bank of Uganda, especially pertaining to the separation of powers between management and the Board.

Secondly, the closure of banks was not done in the right way. If banks do not meet the criteria, as an economist, it was proper for them to be closed. The question we ask here is in regard to the procedure of closure of the banks. Was the process properly managed? That is where the question sets in because from the findings of the report, we learn that they flouted the procedure in closure and timing. 

We also see that there was no proper inventory assessment. I am surprised that even the buyers would take on the bank without requesting for the report of the inventory. As a buyer, you could be cheated. Why would a buyer just take on without knowing the assets and the liabilities of the property they were taking over? That way, they flouted Section 89 of the Financial Institutions Act.

It is upon that point that I would like to say that we need to have new regulations in regard to insolvent banks; we need to be guided in terms of how they should be managed. We need to revisit it as law makers.

The report recommends that Bank of Uganda officials who failed to properly execute their duties in accordance with the law be held liable for commission or omission during their work in this process. However, the committee does not come out specifically to mention names. We needed to get the names of those particular officials. Even when the committee says that the other institutions should take over, those institutions should have somewhere to start from, in terms of the names of these persons and the offices – (Member timed out.)

5.05
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.

When you look at some of these banks, which were closed, particularly Cooperative Bank, which was owned by the common man, as well as the cooperative societies, many people lost money in these banks. It is unfortunate that when some countries were taking privatisation as a serious move to see how they can direct their development, as Ugandans we were looking at making money. 

When you look at the privatisation situation of many of the countries that have taken wide strides in development, particularly, the East Asian tigers, they looked at the banking sector as one of the major areas that should not have been handled in a careless manner. The high cost of financing in Uganda is as a result of some of these reckless actions. 

When we looked at the process of investigation and interrogation, as Members had said, many people had high hopes in this report. We expected recommendations that should touch the individuals and also give a direction. We know that we have three arms of Government, so we cannot implement some of these issues ourselves. We refer to the second arm of the Government but this report does not come out clearly on them. 

Some of the recommendations at page 22 are just advisory, - “Bank of Uganda should do this; Bank of Uganda should have done this…” Now that they have made a mistake, what should be the course of action? I suggest that we should look at these recommendations one by one in order to come up with more formidable ones. In my opinion, they are hanging.

All of us have been talking about corruption in Uganda. Therefore, where there are problems, we should be seen taking serious action other than trying to massage. This report does not match the issues that - (Member timed out.)

5.08
MS ANN NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for opening up the eyes of Parliament and Ugandans but more so, you, the Speaker, for remaining calm and firm on these issues. However, I also do not agree with many of the recommendations given the findings that were treated to the eyes of Ugandans. There is a discrepancy. 

Today, this brings to an end the so-called practice of ignoring institutions, especially the so-called autonomous ones. I call upon Parliament, as the oversight organ, not to close our eyes but to do our oversight part. Perhaps we shall save the country.

When the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development appeared before the committee to give evidence, he confirmed that the Bank of Uganda flouted the law in closing some banks. Despite doing so, when you read the report, you also look at an issue that I would like us to treat as important. 

When two thieves steal together, sometimes they kill each other at the point of theft. Not all is well with Crane Bank. True, by the alarm made by Crane Bank, the country has understood what goes on in Bank of Uganda. Not all was well with the bank.

In the previous years, Bank of Uganda had announced that Crane Bank had emerged as one of the best banks. What happened in so short a time? That needs to be further re-investigated and examined by this House.

That now takes me to an issue of conflict of interest by the bank. Bank of Uganda Board, from today, must learn that they should always do due diligence to the Supervision Department of Bank of Uganda to avoid any more conflict of interest and to save the country. In so doing, I also accept that maybe some of the banks that were closed without proper due diligence need – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring it to the attention of this House - banks like Co-operative Bank that were closed -  As we talk about Crane Bank today, I would like us to bring out Cooperative Bank. Our parents owned shares there. This must be the day when we should revive it and agree to put in more money to save the agricultural sector. Thank you, very much.

5.12
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work they did. They opened our eyes by putting everything on television and every one watched the proceedings. However, my worry is, like the Members are saying, when one reads this report and compares what was televised, honestly speaking, these things do not look alike; they do not have any similarities.

Madam Speaker, we were all eager to listen to this report and felt this report would carry a very big thing in it. However, to my surprise, one Member said, this report might have been sugar-coated; praying that Members were not sugar-coated too. Otherwise, it is wanting.

The committee recommends that they should pay some of the banks, and their main recommendation is that it is up to Bank of Uganda. The question that comes to my mind is: Who is Bank of Uganda? From the little economics that I studied, Bank of Uganda is the custodian of the taxpayers’ money; the loans that we table here every day - leaving the stinking rich individuals using the taxpayers’ money. Our people are going to pay twice. I am worried, Madam Speaker.

We are here as a Parliament to protect and help our people. I cry to this Parliament that our people should not pay twice for the money they have not eaten. People are crying in hospitals, in schools and villages. The situation is bad. Thank you for the opportunity but I pray that we stand as a Parliament, to defend our people. Thank you very much. (Applause)

5.14
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me also echo my voice with those who have supported this report. In my opinion, it is a very good report. The committee tried to follow terms of reference but they could have gone deeper.

The report states that seven banks were closed in a period of 20 years without following laws and regulations in place. It also quotes the special audit report that states that there were no guidelines, no regulations in place to guide on these issues. My question is: we know all Government organisations have internal auditors. The purpose of having an internal auditor every year is for them to audit the processes and procedures of that organisation and note those ones, which are not in place. What was the Internal Audit Department of Bank of Uganda doing for 20 years, for all this to happen? You see them trying to blame the commercial banks when the loopholes are with the supervisor; they are not doing much.

This now brings me to the question whether this is a running organisation. Is it likely to propel us forward or it is an organisation that is going to annihilate the whole banking system? I think we need to look deeper because what they have pointed out is a tip of the iceberg. If you audited that organisation, because of the way they concealed information for 20 years, it means there is a very big problem. There is nothing that has been going on in Bank of Uganda. 

Where the board of directors really doing corporate governance? One cannot identify any policy that was not there for 20 years and you are sitting in, year in, year out. Are we really satisfied with this? Is this the state of - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Make proposals very fast.

MR SABIITI: In conclusion, I am of the opinion that the whole industry be looked into and overhauled in order for us to go forward. In addition to that, anybody culpable must be punished to serve as a deterrent to any other person in that office. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.18 
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee despite some loopholes, they did a lot.
 
When we are in the villages, we always create stories such as one which says that there is a robot that was made to stop corruption. When it reached Nigeria, they took off one arm, and when it went to other countries they removed ears and when it reached Uganda, instead of arresting the corrupt people, it was itself stolen.

Madam Speaker, we are in a dilemma. When I recall the Economics I studied, the major role of Bank of Uganda is implementing monetary policies, which I think they have not done to the dot. They have failed in fixing interest rates and every other function, which are clear.

I did not read that Bank of Uganda is supposed to go down and close banks. Therefore, when they did it, I did not question too much. I thought the reason was that it would cause inflation. Now, if it has reached the extent of saying that they sold their assets at 90 per cent discount - if it were your house, can you do that?

Madam Speaker, we should recommend strongly to the Government of Uganda, to swing in and protect the head of the fish from rotting. Let them go to Bank of Uganda, uproot those people and come down to compensate individuals who lost their property. Thank you very much.

5.21
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my honourable colleagues in thanking the committee for the work well done. Nevertheless, when we were in secondary school, we used to read a book entitled, “Cry, the Beloved Country.” There is a lot that we must think of and join those people in crying for our beloved country, Uganda.

We are talking about Bank of Uganda, the only institution that should handle and run – if it was a body, this would be the heart of the body. On page 1, the Auditor-General states that Shs 195 billion was transferred, yet we cannot see who received it, where it was sent. Nevertheless, there are individuals still leaving home and going to work in Bank of Uganda as supervisor and so forth. 

There is someone who gave the committee information that they had used Shs 504 billion to prevent a run-off in Internal Credit Bank and Greenland Bank as liquidity support yet, all the documents in the committee’s possession showed it was only Shs 25.6 billion out of Shs 504 billion was injected for liquidity purposes and yet, we still have individuals moving and claiming to be the Governor of Bank of Uganda; Prof. Mutebile and Executive Director (Supervision), Ms Justine Bagyenda.  

We saw my senior colleague, hon. Katuntu, putting Bagyenda to task. We saw the body guard escorting her with a heap of documents. She came out and claimed that she was carrying notes for someone who studied from abroad. Were the notes in Bank of Uganda? We cannot move like this. 

For once, to restore faith and hope in this country, we should have these people brought to book. Let us take action. When we move to the recommendations, we should say that as we discuss other reports that could be investigated, we must see some action, as far as this report is concerned. Unless we do some – (Member timed out.)

5.24
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee of COSASE for the work they have done.
 
I had the time to go through the report and one of the things that I observed was on the conflict of interest. We were told in the report that the liquidators would disclose information to the prospective buyers on the banks that were financially distressed; for example, the Nile River Acquisition Company. No wonder, some of the transactions happened in just a day. It is unfortunate that the Nile River Acquisition Company bought ICB, Greenland and Cooperative Bank at a discount of 93 per cent, yet the loans and the book value of those banks in total was worth 160 billion. They were sold at Shs 8 billion. What a loss to the country. 

Like everybody else has said, we need to have these persons held individually liable for their omissions, other than us generalising them. We know the liquidators that did this. We know the persons that passed the information onto the persons who bought these banks. Other than us generalising them, we would be able to name them and make them individually liable and to pay so that Ugandans do not experience a loss. 

Honestly, even for us to just make recommendations of compensating these banks, I would want to also say – like one of the honourable members said – we need to critically look at this report, its recommendations and if we see that the recommendations are wanting, then  as a Parliament, we have a right to make our recommendations as a way forward. I beg to move. Thank you. 

5.26
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee but to note that whatever recommendations have come from the committee, it is the responsibility of this House to process and also make amendments to the report. Therefore, I think whatever they have done is okay. 

We are discussing the Central Bank of Uganda and how it has been operating in managing the commercial banks, among its other responsibilities. However, from the report of the committee, you realise that the officials at the Central Bank really put the law aside and operated as if there were no laws. For example, they did not rely on the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 to guide them on their operations. 

I would like to focus on the banks that have been closed, most of them local. They included Gold Trust Bank, Greenland Bank, Cooperative Bank, Crane Bank among others yet, the foreign banks are operational. It would have been the role of the Central Bank to help these local banks that are struggling so that they also remain in the market helping the country. 

Madam Speaker, for the case of Crane Bank, for example, the Central Bank injected over Shs 487 billion. At a certain point, they said the bank was stabilising and then overnight, they came and said the bank could not operate normally. Then, it was closed. 

As if that was not enough, even the loans that were there – they gave out about Shs 500 billion to Dfcu Bank. Therefore, the whole operation is not clear; making calls to sell a bank or to transact. This shows you that something is happening; the local banks are being undermined. We must look into them very seriously. 

Madam Speaker, I think Bank of Uganda is suffering. First of all, the head, Prof. Mutebile is a person of advanced age and poor health. People around him could have taken advantage of him, yet, he could be an innocent person. 

I think the Governor should have actually relieved himself from his stress. Government must move in to over hold the whole team at Bank of Uganda because their operations are not fair to this country. We are only looking at what has been investigated and what has been brought by the Auditor-General but if you recall, Bank of Uganda is the same institution that procured pens at –(Member timed out.) 

5.29
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to pick right away from where the previous speaker stopped. What was happening in Bank of Uganda was just a looting spree. The officials of the bank deliberately did all those things because they wanted to loot from the economy. This is very unfair. For example, look at a case where two banks, Global Trust Bank and National Bank of Commerce, were closed and sold on the same day. How do you close a bank and sell it on that same day, without having preconceived arrangements? This is very unfair to the country. 

Madam Speaker, there were other people who lost property because according to the report of the committee, there were some complaints that were registered, especially from those who had deposited their securities in the bank. These securities were being mismanaged and sold irregularly. Up to date, according to the report, some of the certificates and properties are still with Bank of Uganda indicating that this is something sinister. 

Justice should prevail in this country. What we have been seeing is that sometimes, chicken thieves have been harassed by the justice system. Here is a serious case where people have openly stolen money. They have amassed billions of shillings and the evidence is all there. This is a test for us as a country. What is going to happen to this Bank of Uganda saga? We are waiting for the outcome. 

For that reason, Parliament should pronounce itself appropriately. The recommendations that Members have been suggesting here, for example, of holding these persons responsible, should be implemented to the dot. Names should be listed and such persons must face the courts of law. Justice should prevail in this country to teach a lesson to the thieves that corruption is a risky affair. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.31
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank COSASE for presenting to this House such an elaborate report that is succinctly bringing together many issues and coming up with recommendations. I find the report good and the recommendations therein fair. There is a difference between a report being shy and civil. 

I find the report making very strong recommendations like when you open page 35, on the sale of Greenland Bank, you realise that the committee recommends that the bank should take full responsibility for any probable loss to Greenland Bank. I think this is a very strong recommendation. Yes, some Members are saying that the recommendations seem academic but I think there is being polite and being very strong. They have made strong recommendations but in a polite way. 

As a Parliament, I suggest that we take on these recommendations one by one. We should consider them strongly and have them implemented. Some people may think that if you want to appear strong, you come up with very crude recommendations. I think the recommendations are good and strong but they were only civil and polite.

I beg to submit that we support COSASE’s commendations. Also, taking personal responsibility of particular individuals who are culpable must be something to done by this House. I support mentioning of names. 

On the issue of recommendations, I am very comfortable with the recommendations and with what the Chairperson of COSASE, hon. Abdu Katuntu and others did in this report. I thank them for coming up with such civil recommendations that look good and –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank COSASE and all the members, especially the leadership. This report is timely and I am not shocked. The Bible says that wise people come from the east. The chairperson and your vice chairperson have generated a very good report. I am not shocked because you are wise by birth. 

Bank of Uganda has 11 lawyers with PhDs but they hire law firms. These lawyers should just leave office. How can you sell a bank fraudulently without doing an evaluation? For example, they sold Crane Bank to Dfcu Bank, which got profits five times in just six months. There must have been some inner syndicate. 

The Bible says that stealing is bad, especially when you steal money from a poor person, a widow and an orphan. Cooperatives were villagers but their money was stolen. The orphans and widows of the Hajjis who died - their property was sold. I would like to request this House - if we say that the individuals pay - what if they do not pay? It means these people will lose their money. Whoever was there, let them go to prison. Government should pay the owners of these banks including Crane Bank.

Madam Speaker, I was District Engineer in Butaleja District. Crane Bank opened a branch in Butaleja but this bank did not rent office premises; they just built. How can you just sell such a bank without assessment? 

We should fire the board. I am here but honourable members, especially those from the Opposition, no one has come onto the Floor. Usually, they say NRM hides thieves. I am here as a yellow cadre. You see this tie - as a Government, we shall make everyone accountable here. (Interjections) I am a senior cadre of the party.

Madam Speaker, people like Mr Kasekende – (Member timed out.)

5.38
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. First of all, allow me to appreciate this House before I say that there is a fundamental problem. Most people have failed to know that we realise an issue based on the gap in our unity. Before we went in for this investigation, there were fights between Parliament and Bank of Uganda. They were saying that they should not be investigated. We said, “Who are you?” These people never wanted to be investigated –(Interruption)

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. We are discussing a very important matter regarding the Government’s bank; the bankers’ bank; the one in charge of the currency and the one in charge of macroeconomic stability. At a point when this important debate is going on, I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. (Laughter) Hon. Silwany has been sitting in as Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; I have the Prime Minister now in the yellow necktie; I have hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa as – Madam Speaker, my procedural matter is: Are we not talking to ourselves? 

Without you taking your stamina and insisting that we investigate this rot, we would even have had no chance to know that there were these problems. Is it procedurally right for us to continue when this important matter is not being given attention by the Government side? 

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To begin with, the Government is fully represented in this House - (Interjections) - I have heard –(Interruption)

MR MULINDWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the frontbench, we have hon. Mbwatekamwa seated there as a minister. I would like to know; is he in order? When was he appointed as a minister? The bench is clearly empty. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is taking advantage of the vacuum to sit comfortably. (Laughter)

MR MUSUMBA: I have been granted the mandate to participate in the proceedings in this House. I have the credentials to represent the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development in this House because for a long time, I was a minister in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I have taken notes and we shall ensure that the recommendations of the House – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from where I sit, I can see that there are not enough ministers but I wanted Members to speak at the same time. This is a House of record. The Hansard is going to be there but when we are taking a decision, I shall demand the Prime Minister to be present. For now, let us just debate. When we go to the resolutions and recommendations, they will have to be here.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I was interrupted as I was just starting. Please, consider the time I have lost. 

First of all, I would like to thank you for the strong stance that you took to make sure this investigation took place. That was very strong of you. Without that, Parliament would have lost her face. The whole country was looking around wondering, “who is there for us to run to?” You stood firm; that was magnificent.

Let Members not forget to thank the committee, especially the leadership. Yes, you can say this and that but if you were the one in the chair, what would you have brought to this House? That is the question. We must learn to ask questions as a team. We must learn to track our strengths and put them together if we are to manage this country properly. Otherwise, as a country we are lost. 

There are gaps but we have a debate here. This debate needs people who have the brains to make recommendations, not to lament. This is the platform for us to say what we want to see. What the committee did was just a draft. They drafted and it is upon you to say, “This is what we want to see happening.” That is why you are called honourable. This is the time for us.

I know that the whole of Bank of Uganda is morally and ethically squatting. Part of the bank is morally squatting and the other part is morally seated. Therefore, the whole thing should be disbanded. They should resign. Clear the whole of it and start afresh. That is what I think and that is my recommendation. I represent the people of this country. They should resign and all of them. People should go to courts of law. We are talking about the Governor of Bank of Uganda and his assistants. Whoever is mentioned here should come down. 

The shareholders of Crane Bank lost money through dubious dealings of closing banks. They should be refunded. I am even aware of somebody who lost his academic documents. He has not got them back up to now. What are we doing about this? It is this honourable House to take a stand.

We debated about the golden handshake. Where is this report? What happened? We made resolutions but to date, there is no serious action against the people who ate money. What are we here for? I am not ready to take salary for doing nothing. I am here to make recommendations and Government must act.

The Treasury Memorandum that we talk about, what is it for? Or we are just here to – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in this debate, there is a group of people who have not been mentioned - the workers in all these banks. They woke up one morning and they had no jobs to go to. When they closed the banks, where did the staff go?

5.46
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI SSEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have had the report of COSASE, which points to glaring fraud by Bank of Uganda whose officials acted with dishonesty, double dealing, deceit, corruption and foul play. What we are looking at is a national disaster.

National disasters are not only earthquakes or floods. The financial tremor and misdeeds of Bank of Uganda have affected this country and are still affecting it. When we look at the proceeds of fraud, no wonder we have a lot of inflation. Some people look at Shs 1 billion as pocket change. That is why you wonder where some people live in this country. The mismatch between what some people can afford in this country should make Parliament see national disasters. 

When there is a flood, you see His Excellency the President going to the place which has been affected by the flood. We need to hear the President make a statement because when ministers are here – no wonder they are running away – they feel they are not in charge or they are not the ones to make themselves clear and make a statement on this Bank of Uganda saga. It is the President who appoints the Governor. 

Madam Speaker, these recommendations that we make and the frontbench jokingly says, “Ours is just advisory”, makes us look foolish. The frontbench is here. You sit in Cabinet. We want the President to pronounce himself on this saga. Thank God there has not been change of Government for 23 years. All this has happened in this same regime. So, we cannot say that they cannot trace ministers. The appointing authority is still here. This is a very important –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee members for the elaborate report. 

The report is a pact of gross impunity into the governance of financial systems in Uganda. Some of the banks were closed and sold in one day, meaning there was no proper auditing taking place. There was no consideration of Section 89 (3) of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004. This is a very big shame to the country. This section of the Act must be amended because right now, it is very open to include a time frame within which Bank of Uganda appoints an auditor to make inventory assessments. 

On record, Shs 1.6 trillion in liabilities has been reported and within 17 years, only 68 per cent has been settled. Bank of Uganda, through its agents, must be compelled to settle the creditors and all the claims due. The questions to the whole House now are: Does Bank of Uganda have a fully constituted board? If the board exists, how effective is it? Three, the report shows elements of misappropriation of funds meant for liquidation. What should be done to the statutory managers and officers who misappropriated the funds for liquidation if they are not to be reprimanded? 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, in future, those who will read the Hansard, the report and all the information we are getting about Bank of Uganda, will ask: “Where was Government when all this was happening?” 

This country has a Chief Executive Officer who has an assistant in the name of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. All this has been taking place, yet, the politicians who are supposed to be the supervisors of the civil servants did not do anything until this Parliament came in.

Madam Speaker, records will have it that during those days, when banks were being closed, only one director, Suleiman Kiggundu, was taken to prison and one driver and a policewoman were also briefly taken to prison but that everyone else walked scot-free and that will be terrible. We are walking a very slippery road. If we are to get up today and sack all the officials in Bank of Uganda, I do not know where our economy will go, yet, if keep quiet about these people, again, we would be breeding impunity.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that many people who would have loved to interact with the committee were never given an opportunity. One of those people is the dead man, Suleiman Kiggundu, who wanted to address this committee through his lawyers. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that you receive the documents that came from the late Suleiman Kiggundu’s lawyers. It would be very unfair if this Parliament denied these lawyers an opportunity to represent the late Kiggundu, who is no longer with us. In his testimony and the documents that were attached, we shall be able to trace more culprits connected to this matter.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I have read that the Governor Bank of Uganda is due for retirement in 2021 and his deputy is due in 2020. I would like to ask Parliament, are we going to wait for 2020 and 2021? Where is that spirit where people can say, “I have been found wanting and it is time for me to resign because I have failed in my duty?” Should we really go and push anybody?

As we collect taxpayers’ money to compensate those banks that lost money, are these people who cheated Ugandans going to remain with their riches?

Madam Speaker, I beg that we adopt all the –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I join my honourable colleagues in contributing to this very important debate. When we were in high school, we thought Bank of Uganda was a very important subject to study in Commerce. However, we are beginning to see that actually, Parliament is the last resort; it should take a very firm decision on Bank of Uganda. 

We are now also aware that thieves have entered our national granary and these thieves are eating with impunity. They have all our pin codes and are doing everything inside there. We do not only need to fumigate but to destroy them. They are eating with 10 fingers. I have never seen this level of gluttony in this country.

The committee chairperson gave a very clear report and this report actually comes to one thing, that overstaying is the systematic cause of this disease. I, therefore, proceed to say the following:

    1. The commercial banks that were killed are still clinically alive and they must be economically resuscitated back to real economic life; 

    2. There is need to amend the Financial Institutions Act to ensure we restrict the Board and top management of Bank of Uganda to two terms of five years each because overstaying is the real cause of this problem;

    3. Bank of Uganda’s primary role should be restricted to management of monitory policy and we take away the responsibility of commercial banks supervision. We should create a financial services authority that will directly concentrate on supervising financial institutions like commercial banks – (Member timed out.)

6.02
MR DEOGATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for delivering this report to the House and on time. There are very many reports we have been waiting for but have not appeared like the one on the fires that burnt Kasubi Tombs.

I have some reservations with the committee’s work. The mandate of COSASE is to peruse, examine and analyse critically the Auditor-General’s report and report to Parliament thereon. Most of us who are here are products of the former cooperative unions. In one way or another, everybody in this House must have touched money from a cooperative union. On Saturday, 16 February 2019, I went to the bank, at around midday but I found the bank closed. It was a normal closure but I was disappointed because it had escaped my mind that that day was a public holiday; the Janani Luwum Day.

Madam Speaker, imagine one waking up in the morning to go to their bank only to find it closed indefinitely. The trend at which these banks were closed - we are almost going to remain with only the Central Bank, where people will go, line up for banking and withdrawals, which is against the mandate of the Central Bank. 

It is very painful for someone to be mandated to supervise an institution but that person does not do the work properly. For example, Teffe Trust Bank, International Credit Bank, Crane Bank Limited, National Bank of Commerce and Global Trust –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Closing a bank is not like selling tomatoes or chapatis on the road side.

Reading through this report, you see hawkers at Bank of Uganda.  People hawking banks, making phone calls to buyers and in less than one hour, they have a buyer; in less than two hours, they have already sold. 

It is very clear that the officers at Bank of Uganda used their offices and took advantage to sell banks to benefit from their sale. That is why they could call whichever bank they thought they would sell the banks to and automatically they sold these banks and took away money.

Considering the terms of reference of the committee, we may have to recommend that more investigations be done to find out issues regarding certain banks. I saw two cooperative banks - one of 1964 and another of 1997. Even when they closed the Cooperative Bank of 1997, the co-operators are still asking for their assets. Therefore, we need to help the co-operators get their assets.

Finally, where was Ms Bagyenda getting all these powers? You hear someone telling you that Ms Bagyenda compelled them - Crane Bank Limited said, Ms Bagyenda compelled them to buy - who is Bagyenda? It is reported that she could come with black mambas. Where was she getting all these powers?  Actually, it is reported that at some time, she could order a bank to bring Shs 7 billion. When they took Shs 7 billion, she again ordered for another Shs 300 million –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Do you mean they could carry it in sacks?

6.05
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report, which captured the facts and the observations. However, I would like to take exception to some of the stale recommendations like those which specifically say they should follow the law because following the law is the only option. So, for the committee to inform us that they should follow the law; they actually had nothing else to follow.

On the recommendations of the committee, the mind and the will of Bank of Uganda is in the Board. We expected that the top management would be reporting to the Board. If the Board did not receive any report from the top management, that would show that there was a problem. Otherwise, we are dealing with a situation where they are telling us that there were no minutes but saying that there was a decision. 

Under no circumstances can we rely on such information. If there are officers who had not been picked at random to become governors and supervisors in Bank of Uganda - we cannot proceed that way. 

I would like to put notice to Parliament that at the stage of adopting this recommendation, I will seek the indulgence of the Speaker that the office of the Clerk directs the clerk who attended these hearings to get the names of these particular people who participated in causing financial loss to Government such that in line with Article 164 (2) - future leaders must know in the Hansard the supervisor of a bank who did not do their work. This should go on the record.

Are our recommendations advisory or binding? I submit that the Speaker may have to make a ruling that all recommendations arising out of the Appropriations Act should be binding to Government. Recommendations, which are advisory in nature should be on issues, which come to Parliament through motions. 

I would like to invite colleagues that recommendations on a special audit should also be binding to Government. For example, when you look at Rule 217, you realise that it talks about a cabinet minister to make a report to Parliament. However, while we are dealing with a very serious matter – hon. Musumba is my friend but all of you here are junior ministers - Rule 217 talks about a cabinet minister. Otherwise, it would have categorically stated that a minister or minister of state will make a report to Parliament. We are dealing with serious matters.
	
Without seeming to undermine my colleagues – hon. Baryomunsi is my friend - they came from - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think Rule 217 deals with Treasury Memorandum - when they are reporting. I do not think they are reporting today.

MR MWIRU: The point I am making is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should make Treasury Memorandum to this House but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, yet, people who have taken up the responsibility of representing that ministry are the ones present here. Thank you.

6.08
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to appreciate the chairperson of the committee and the committee members for doing a good job. In special way, allow me to thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing this very important role to be undertaken by Parliament. During the cross examination by the committee, the committee was very specific and bold. Actually, they were interviewing individuals, one at a time.

However, Madam Speaker, the committee gave general recommendations when it came to drawing them. This is why some people are wondering. We are saying some of the recommendations are somewhat soft because during cross examination, the committee looked at individuals and Ugandans were very happy. We actually thought that very strong recommendations would come out of this. 
	
If you look at the recommendation on page 22, recommendation number three in which the committee says “all officials who flouted the law here and above indicated, should take personal responsibility.” We feel that the recommendations are very soft; we need very specific, bold and clear recommendations.

Madam Speaker, you put it rightly that we are going to consider each of these recommendations, one by one, and that when considering each of the recommendations, Parliament should come out with its clear opinion. I am happy about that. The Speaker mentioned very clearly that we shall consider all these recommendations one by one.

As I wind up, the Members may ask the chairperson of the committee that, "What went wrong during the report writing and the compilation of these resolutions?" Maybe, there was something that went wrong that we are not aware of. It is because if during cross-examination, you were so specific, and you took individual by individual, why did you generalise the recommendations? Thank you.

6.11
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. This is a very important report for Parliament and the whole country. A lot has been said in respect to this report in as far as the affairs of Bank of Uganda are concerned.  

My submission will be on lack of making an inventory for the assets and liabilities of the banks, failure to carry out evaluation reports to be able to determine the value of the assets they were selling and the discounting of the loans. For example, if the loans were Shs 164 billion, they were sold at a mere Shs 8.3 billion. Lastly, I will also comment on the supervision function of the Central Bank.

Honourable colleagues, I would like to draw your attention to page 14; the recommendation that was made by the committee, which says, “Whereas the resolution of financial institutions in distress has been under the Bank of Uganda Supervision Department, it is recommended that the mandate of resolving financial institutions in distress be independent of the bank supervision functions. This would mitigate the risk of conflict of interest.”

Madam Speaker, Members have been asking, “When all this was taking place, where was the board? Where was the legal department, which has more than 12 lawyers at the level of a master’s degree? Where were the external lawyers?” 

The conflict of interest we are referring to here in the supervision function, the chairman of the board is the Governor of Bank of Uganda and the deputy chairperson of the board is the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda. So, if an error is made through the executive arm, there is nobody who would ask the question from the board because he is the chairperson. 

This is not a new thing. In the US, after the late 1990s crisis, the legislative arm created an independent supervisory department of the Reserve Bank of America. The same applies to the UK. In November, I had a proposal on the Floor of this Parliament that I would prepare a Private Member’s Bill to remove the supervision function of the department in the Bank of Uganda to make it independent. This now motivates me. I would like –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Are you putting us on notice? 

MR MAWANDA: I will go ahead and prepare a Private Member’s Bill to deal with the supervision function of Bank of Uganda.

Secondly, on this issue of discounting the loans, first, the company they sold the loans to is non-existent. The agent of the liquidator and the consultant of the bank are agents of the debt collection company. Instead of Mr Ssekabira appreciating the mistake made by Bank of Uganda, he is writing blackmailing letters. So, Members, when it comes to making recommendations, we should be able to make stringent recommendations so that these people who faulted in their duties learn a lesson. 

Therefore, I will make amendments in as far as recommendations are concerned.  Because of time, I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Those who will not speak today will speak tomorrow. We are not completing the debate today. We would like to extract the recommendations so that we debate them separately.

6.15
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise guidance when you extended the mandate of the leadership of Committee on COSASE then to wind up their investigation on Bank of Uganda. We appreciate you for that good decision so that nobody says, “If we had completed or if they had given us time”. 

The report has been produced by the committee that started the investigation. When we look at what has gone on – We are extremely grateful to various electronics and press media especially NTV and NBS because they were covering all these investigations live. 

What has come out from this report and what has transpired was a clear signal that the Bank of Uganda has done a great disservice to the financial sector. Doesn't it ring a bell that seven local banks were closed in just a few years? The reason is that it had become a lucrative business. So, you close one bank, you get billions of shillings. You close another bank, you get billions of shillings. The business continued as if nobody was there to put a stop to it. 

As we talk now, we have focused our attention to only the supervision function of Bank of Uganda on commercial banks. However, Bank of Uganda also has the mandate to look after our Consolidate Fund, treasury bills and reserves. So, are we safe? Given what we have seen, I believe we are not safe. 

Madam Speaker, I believe we should now remove the veil and have a report that we can critique in – (Member timed out.)

6.18
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also applaud you for the decision to keep the leadership of the committee on COSASE that time that was doing this investigation. I also would like to thank them for the report they have made. Surprisingly, I do not know whether it was because of the charisma of the leadership of the committee - on a contentious issue like this, for a committee not to have a minority report is, in one way, to express its solidarity in dealing with the issue in another maybe –(Interjections)- let me take it that it is a decision of the committee to express strength on their recommendations on the issue we are dealing with because it is sensitive and contentious. Perhaps that is why we do not have a minority committee. 

However, Madam Speaker, let me say this. This committee or the investigation has undressed bare the Bank of Uganda. It has exposed the level of lack of professionalism that they have been operating with. In the transactions investigated, Rules of Procedures and the Financial Institutions Act were flouted, the management and the leadership neglected their duties and responsibilities, they negated on their obligations; there is evidence of connivance and conspiracy.

Madam Speaker, one asks a question, why do these officers of Government that work for the bank think that they are untouchable; that they can act with such impunity without even imagining that at one time they will be undressed bare to be seen and known by the public on what they have been doing?

Madam Speaker, banks were closed but specifically, Greenland Bank and others- we just mentioned that the owners/directors lost money, workers lost jobs, their families lost income etc. All these inconveniences for suffering meted out to individuals because of negligence and failure to follow rules by individuals. I agree with the rest that they must take responsibility personally for their failures to follow the law and for the mistakes they made in selling off these banks irregularly.

It is unimaginable that assets of the bank are sold at 93 per cent discount. I am even surprised we continue to discuss it; they must be arrested - 93 per cent discount! It is unimaginable that decisions of a bank were taken and enforced without minutes of meetings.

There is a trend in the recent past that was well captioned on a WhatsApp forum; that during investigations, Parliament and the public is glittery and up in arms like a dog that is barking and cannot calm down; during presentation of findings, the dog barks but is seated on its tail and during enforcement of decisions, the dog’s mouth is closed and finally it lies down sleeping.

I would like to urge us to be different now that this report is with us. We must take action because the public is over expectant on what comes from this report especially given the history that many of the investigations have raised all this steam but finally have come down to nothing; especially in as far as the public is concerned. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have been talking at different radio stations. However, the bank officials were misinterpreting Article 162(2) which says, “In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to this Constitution but shall not be subject to direction or control….” This House was not directing or controlling, we were inquiring. Therefore, this is not a cover for them. This is what they have been using.

6.24
MR ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the leadership of COSASE with the team for the work well done. However, I would like to refute the allegation that overstaying causes a lot of problems.

Madam Speaker, having been around for some time, maybe, you were the reason that you managed to see these things. Otherwise-(Interjection)- Madam Speaker has been around as a Member of Parliament and as we blame the managers and governors, also previous parliaments could have also seen this and maybe the situation could have been rectified. I, therefore, congratulate the Tenth Parliament for having insight and managed to come up with the recommendations that Bank of Uganda should be investigated and that is why you have these results.

I was a victim of Teefe and Greenland banks where I was a client. I do not know whether I was the cause of the closures but wherever I went, they were closing. We would like to even advise the appointing authority because –(Interjection)- do not disturb.

Madam Speaker, it seems that when people are appointed to be leaders in Bank of Uganda, their appetites are raised because it was not even overstaying but there have been a series of leaders in Bank of Uganda on the closures of all these banks right from the 90s; it is not one person or a few.

Right from the time Teefe Bank closure in the 90s, it was a different governor. Then we came in as co-operative and it was another governor. Therefore, it looks like those who go to Bank of Uganda open their appetites for eating money. Therefore, the appointing authority must be very careful.

Madam Speaker, we should also supervise these banks because, at the time Greenland Bank was closed, many of us would go there and sit for hours without money. They said they were waiting for Bank of Uganda to bring in some money because it was already becoming insolvent.

6.27
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank COSASE for the report and I would like to retaliate the saying that the fish gets rotten from the head downwards. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in Article 161(4) says that the Governor Bank of Uganda and the Deputy Governor are the chairperson and vice for the board respectively and both have to play their role. 

Mine is just a way forward, the dual, governor and deputy governor must perform their roles and follow all the principles of good corporate governance. What does that mean? That they are supposed to be men or women of integrity and of probity, must enforce transparency, accountability and must be faithful and sincere in whatever they are doing and of course not forgetting the fact that they should follow the laws in the pursuit of their responsibility.

Madam Speaker, mine is a way forward that the governor should not be appointed on a political basis but should be on merit, professional and a person of integrity as I said before. He or she must be a highly learned person, a professor for that matter and one who understands rules and regulations regarding corporate governance. This issue should not be swept under the carpet as said by most of the Members here. All that has been recommended should be implemented to the dot.

Lastly, we have about four ministers of State in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; hon. Ajedra, hon. Bahati, hon. Anite and hon. Kyeyune. They are supposed to be able to supervise the Governor and Deputy Governor so that they can –

THE SPEAKER: And hon. Kasolo.

MR ALERO: Yes, hon. Kasolo. They are about five of them in that docket, yet they cannot play their supervisory roles. All in – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have got all your names. Those who will not contribute today will do so tomorrow.

6.30
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for the good work done. At the same time, I wish to sympathise with some of the shareholders and the people who were transacting business in the closed banks.

I am one of those who cannot believe that the Central Bank officials were ignorant about the law. They knew what they were doing and when you look at the committee report on page 11, National Bank of Commerce and Global Trust Bank were closed and sold the same day; within six hours, which is not applicable.

When you look at page 16 of the report under Management Response, the same people stated that the process of selecting a purchaser commences by identifying prospective purchasers within the industry and sharing with them preliminary information of the institution in distress. Once the potential buyer expresses credible interest to purchase the bank, they are required to sign a non-disclosure agreement in order to access information on the targeted institution, which is true. When you go back and look at the time spent to close and sell the bank, you wonder what was being done. 

My prayer is that what is lacking in the recommendations are the names of the affected persons and the amount involved that should be known. Thank you.

6.33
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for uncovering the rot in an institution, which is supposed to preside over the monetary policy and for that matter guide this economy to the next level.

When you look at the report, you will establish that there was a gross breach of the statutory duties of the officers of the Bank of Uganda. When you consider all the people that oversee the Bank of Uganda, they have some of the richest resumes in this country. In no way can we assume that their actions can be construed for incompetence. It was either deliberate negligence, the malice of these institutions or fraud intended to bring this country down. For that reason, all these people have job descriptions, they appreciate the tasks that each of them was supposed to perform.
 
I have looked at some of the findings of the committee and I need to recommend serious actions, which may involve prosecution or even administrative procedures for these people: One, those who were responsible for evaluating the assets and liability of all the banks in order to derive the appropriate values should be seriously dealt with either through prosecution or whatever administrative arrangements that are required.

Two, there are clear elements of fraud. Resources were mobilised to pay the depositors when these banks were closed. There is some 104 billion that was paid yet what was assessed was 101 billion. We need to establish where the three billion went and whoever is responsible for it should be prosecuted.

Three, there was that ridiculous valuation of assets worth 135 billion – (Interjections) – which were sold at Shs 8.0 billion (Member timed out_)

6.36
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the time you have accorded Parliament to discuss this matter and the time you accorded the committee even though it was not enough.

Madam Speaker, I always applaud you for the effort that you put in to fight corruption in this country. When I look at this scenario, this is a syndicate of dealers in this country – thank you for that additional word – a syndicate of mafias who connive in the selling and buying of banks. It looks like this is their business.

It cannot be a mistake that you lawfully close Greenland Bank, come to another bank and then another. The same mistakes are done that within a few hours and days, a bank is sold. Auditors and Valuers come in at a later stage.

I have something that pains me a lot. We are here discussing this matter, but the officials are in office seated watching us. They are thinking of the repercussions and now playing with figures of how they are going to compensate these bank owners. I see it improper for us to discuss such matters.
 
Money that is in the Bank of Uganda is taxpayers' money. We always complain that we want health centres, roads, and other service delivery but look at a scenario where a person or two people sit and plan how they are going to steal money and plan for their family. At the end of the day, a recommendation is made that Government should compensate people.

Government is not a building somewhere, but it means our people, us and the innocent person out there who is not accessing service delivery. A poor person who is there crying is going to compensate the person who stole money intentionally for his or her family –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS EGUNYU: Madam Speaker, in this, I would like to recommend strongly. Let the culprits mentioned, the Bagyendas and the rest, be put to book, they pay this money but not the taxpayer or Government. They are alive, have all the resources and they know where they are going to get this money to pay. It should not be our people out there. Thank you.

6.39
MR ISAAC SSOZI (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and the committee team for exposing this cancer.

First, I am disappointed as a business person that such findings happened and are being done by what would be our professionals at the Central Bank to protect our interests.

I would like to cite the Constitution Article 162 (1) (c) it reads, "The Bank of Uganda shall encourage and promote economic development and the efficient utilisation of the resources of Uganda through effective and efficient operation of a banking and credit system.” This is what our Central Bank is supposed to do. I am disappointed that it is working to the contrary.

Madam Speaker, the closure would not be an issue, but the procedure was entirely illegal- absence of records, violation of the Financial Institutions Act, Companies’ Act, PPDA, and Contracts Act. It makes the entire process of closing and selling banks illegal.

I would like to also cite the Constitution Article 164 (2) that reads, “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from that use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” Madam Speaker, taxpayers’ money should be protected, and perpetrators would be individually held responsible.

I also want to proceed with Article 162 (2) which you cited. It says, “In performing its functions, the Bank of Uganda shall conform to this Constitution but shall not be subject to the direction or control of any person or authority.” It is not that we have subdued the Central Bank as Parliament.  It is a misinterpretation of this. 

In other words, they allowed themselves to be used by the individual. I would like to quote the Governor, Central Bank when appearing before the committee. He said, "My juniors are hiding reports from, they are denying me access to information." Therefore, he allowed himself to be subjected to the control of these people in his jurisdiction.

Let me propose that future investigations on institutions like the Central Bank that have a grave impact on the economy and the investor confidence should be done under closed doors. We can amend and agree that these investigations be done under closed doors because we lose investor confidence. Any investor who would like to invest in a financial sector listening to this would simply run away from our country and go to another one.  I so propose. Thank you.

6.42
MR STEPHEN BIRAAHWA MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, it is over a year since you directed the Auditor-General to make for us this very good audit. To date, the Executive has not taken any action in terms of interim remedies- nobody has been interdicted.

Madam Speaker, the constitutional minister of finance is the President. The committee, unfortunately, did not interface with the President. We are now discussing repeating the recommendations and the findings we saw very vividly without any interim action from the Government side as if we are speaking to ourselves.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance to the House. Wouldn't it be appropriate before we continue to the next stage where you said the ministers will be here, that at least- because you are talking of investors' confidence, the risk of currency and issues of our reserves?

Wouldn’t it be proper that you direct that as we discuss this, the Minister of Defence, or through the Leader of Government Business, presents a report of comfort to the country and the world that something is being done? Because as per now our citizens who have been watching these glaring problems of Bank of Uganda are wondering - if they have failed on the supervisory mandate, what of the other eight mandates which are very critical?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would seek your indulgence that now, as the former chairman of Committee on National Economy, I am not comfortable that I belong to a country where the Government's bank and the bankers' bank in charge of the currency can continued doing this. Moreover, after the Speaker who was the whistle-blower told Auditor-General that please find out for us at least about the bank closure. What about all other sectors? We need to be informed that there is still somebody in charge and some corrective measure has been made.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will give a response to that one tomorrow, but it is a very interesting point that you have raised. Honourable members, let us speak then I will give you my proposal of how we move tomorrow.

6.47
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report though the recommendations are wanting. A lot has been said but allow me to add my voice.

When you read the recommendations, they say that the Bank of Uganda shall fully be responsible. I totally disagree with that because who is Bank of Uganda?

Madam Speaker, when you read the Constitution Article 164(3) it says, “Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds.” Madam Speaker, I wanted to see the committee recommending that those people leave office as early as possible because we cannot entrust such people with our finances anymore. I pray that our recommendation be implemented. Thank you.

6.48
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the committee for the work well done. However, I have been around, and amongst the banks which were closed; I happened to have been in three banks when all this was happening. Mr first account was in Greenland Bank. The public alarmed and the business community really cried but nobody was coming to their rescue.

Madam Speaker, I commend the committee, but it left out several issues. Under Greenland Bank, there was an issue where it invested in Green Milling in Jinja. I happened to be one of the shareholders, but we did not get that money and we do not know where that money is. In your report, it is not reflected anywhere but it would have been one of the issues that you should have brought to our attention.

The Co-operative Bank paid some people money, but they paid to the threshold of Shs 3 million which was insured below which, nobody got the money. You have not put that in your report, what happened to that money? Unlike Global Trust Bank where accounts were carried forward and new accounts given to the depositors, the rest where I belonged, Greenland and Co-operative Bank, it was a very big issue. Therefore, the committee did not bring up those issues. 

Madam Speaker, much as the committee has highlighted several issues, it is a humble beginning that for the first time in the history of Uganda, the business committee, which has been “crying” about the moneylender – Parliament of Uganda, under your stewardship has managed to bring it to the attention of the country.  

That is not enough. We need sanctions. I believe the Bank of Uganda is a cave of wrongdoers and a sanctuary for wrongdoers for all the people working there. Many people lost their money. Businesses collapsed in Kampala. I remember one company - the Crusader. The day they closed Greenland Bank is the very day it was not on the streets of Kampala, meaning many people were affected. That takes me to a ground to recommend –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just tell us your recommendation. 

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, I recommend that all people that lost money under that process be compensated. The government should pay them because it never acted while people were being defrauded. I recommend that Government feels the pain and compensates whoever lost money in the closure of those banks.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 51 members have contributed. As I indicated, we shall continue the debate tomorrow; so in no particular order, I call the following names: hon. Franca Akello, hon. Nsamba, hon. Frederick Angura, hon. Gorreti Ajilo, hon. Joy Ongom, hon. Emmanuel Kalule-Ssengo, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, hon. Robert Centenary, hon. Herbert Ariko, hon. Francis Gonahasa, hon. Emmanuel Ongiertho, hon. Muhammad Kivumbi, hon. Gordon Arinda, hon. Benard Atiku and hon. Stephen Mukitale. 

Hon. Katuntu would like to clarify one or two issues.  

6.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues, the members of the committee, and I, have sat here listening very carefully to the contribution and submissions of our colleagues. We would like to thank all of you for your contribution and take your submission in good faith. Our view is that this was our proposal and as the rules say, the right is with this House to reject all of them, amend or adopt all of them without amendment. 

We worked under very difficult circumstances, especially the last one and half months. Colleagues, as you may be aware, so many controversies arose, including the membership and leadership of the committee. It took the courage of the Speaker to guide for us to be able to complete this assignment. (Applause)

We reviewed thousands of documents and only had four days to write a report. You do not know what it means to review thousands of documents and only have four days to write a report.

Madam Speaker, we did our best under very difficult circumstances. However, we had the debate that we are having today. Do not think we just came out of the blue with recommendations. We had that very debate of do we name, or we do not name the members? Some of the members of the committee were very strong on it that we name and shame. Hon. Moses Nagwomu and hon. Abraham Byandala were among those who advocated for naming and shaming. Therefore, we had this debate. 

However, we had another view, without naming and shaming, which eventually won the day. Let me tell you why. As we go and sleep over this, tomorrow, I am going to give you those names, if you need them, because we have them. We did not in any way intend to hide any of those names. Somebody would be asking – there was a colleague who said that we sugar-coated – some of those things discourage people who have spent months investigating this issue. By the way, we have made more enemies than friends. At one time, Madam Speaker, even security suggested that we get guards. Therefore, it is as bad as that. It is not a party.

Madam Speaker, as I give these names, can I remind this House to be conscious of the case of Fox Odoi v. the Attorney-General because this House did the same in that and the court has already taken a decision.

Together with my colleagues, we have been conscious of one thing; the integrity of this report. Will it pass the legal test? If we do not keep that in mind, it is work down the drain. Therefore, will this report, and process pass the legal test? That was what formed our decision. If you think it will pass the legal test, go ahead. I am not going to give you the legal test because we have attorneys-general on both sides of the House and we also have a legal department here. I think they should sit and guide us tomorrow when we are reviewing the recommendations. 

Let me respond to a few things specifically. About names, as you read this report, colleagues, you will realise that there are no minutes. During the proceedings, we asked who attended these meetings and we got answers like, “me and Sekabira here; I do not remember others.” No minute no record. How do you name people when they have said they do not remember who attended meetings? Were they sincere? I do not think they were. Were they hiding the names? I think they were. What do you do? The only names we have are from the Bank Supervision Department and they are only two: Mrs Justine Bagyenda, who was the Executive Director, Bank Supervision and Mr Ben Sekabira who was Director, Commercial Banking. Those are the only two whom we could identify during the proceedings. 

If you were following these proceedings, you would have seen that there is not any other person, except that there are people – because when you read this report, we talk about commissions and omissions.  There are people, for example – what was the role of Prof. Emmanuel Mutebile, who is the Governor, Bank of Uganda? He is the chief executive of the bank. What is the role of Dr Kasekende who is the Deputy Governor? Those are the ones we could hold responsible for non-supervision. You can clearly get those we could get but for the rest, it will take some professional institution to investigate and come up with the names. Why do we bring names which we did not – they either hid the document or not? If there are minutes, you will say X, Y, and Z but those minutes are not there and we have put it in the report. 

Can you imagine the Central Bank holding a meeting and selling a bank and you do not have any minute? You people, you do not see that. For us, it was like a movie. We were angry and that is why somebody said they could see us very angry and barking. Yes, we were because we were seeing it live. However, as they leave, you sober up and again, do not transfer the anger in the report.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this report is not a judgment and I would not like us to think that it is a judgment because we are not a court of law. This is a probe, meaning bringing the facts on the table. This is not a court of law or judgment where we are going to write and convict people in the report. Therefore, we will have that anger, but it must be measured –(Interjection)- Let me finish and I will answer the clarification because there are so many points that I need to respond to. 

Another issue which I think has been raised is in most of the recommendations – by the way, we have 43 recommendations here. Hon. Paul Mwiru said that following the law is not a recommendation because it is a given. Yes, it is a given, but did they follow the law? This report is about not following the law. The first thing you must do is to remind them to follow the law. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson, I do not know whether you should respond because tomorrow there will be other issues. 

MR KATUNTU: I thought that these which have come can be clarified such that tomorrow maybe those very issues may not arise. If they arise, I will always be here to respond to them.

The issue of following the law is the first before you go into anything. If they had followed the law, would we be here? Wasn’t the law in place? The law was there but they refused to follow it. Therefore, the priority for anybody is to remind them that this is the law, you infringed on them and you must follow the law.

Secondly, there was also an issue that arose about the lawyers. The worst about it, Madam Speaker, is that the external lawyers are directors of commercial banks. How do you get a director of a commercial bank to be the principal legal adviser of the Central Bank against another bank? In economics, for those who have read, we call that “regulatory capture” where you capture the regulator. These are the commercial banks that are supposed to be supervised but now the directors are having insider knowledge of the regulator but against their rivals.

Madam Speaker, Bank of Uganda has 11 lawyers and all of them hold master’s degrees yet even for simple things like drafting agreements they have gone to these directors of commercial banks who are their lawyers and they are the ones drafting the agreements and are being paid. 

What have we recommended, Madam Speaker? We have recommended here that the issue of Bank of Uganda hiring external lawyers should be done in the rarest of circumstances and only on approval of the board. This is because in the whole process – as you realised – the board is not involved at all and the reason is what you people have been debating here, that the chairman of the board is the governor. Therefore, he sits here as the governor and makes reports to the board and he chairs the same board to investigate his own reports. His vice-chairperson in the board is his deputy in the bank. 

It defeats not only corporate governance but common sense. The Kenyan Central Bank has since moved away from that sort of embarrassing scenario and there are good practices around the world which we read, and they are many.

Madam Speaker, on whether what happened during the hearing is what is in the report, I can assure you that what happened during the hearing is what is in the report. Where you have a point of agreement – and I agree – is on the recommendations and the recommendations could not have happened during the hearing. The recommendations happened when we were compiling the report and I have given you the reasons why we reached those conclusions the way we did.

On lawyers of Kiggundu, it is true that about two days before we closed the hearing, I got a letter from Lukwago & Company Advocates, the lawyers for the late Dr Kiggundu. Dr Kiggundu was a shareholder and director. We invited all shareholders and directors by letter. We did not stop there but also put an advert in both Daily Monitor and New Vision, calling upon all shareholders and directors to come and appear before the committee. 

On the day we asked, they all came, and we almost had a whole day of conversation with them. However, it is after that when we received a letter from the late Dr Kiggundu’s lawyer, Lukwago & Company Advocates. 

I do not want an impression here that there is some evidence we shut out. If the lawyers – whom I know – were vigilant, they would have come with the team of the shareholders because we put an advert in the papers calling them and they did not come. What possible alternative options did the committee have after calling everybody, even in the newspapers? We invited everybody whom we thought needed to be given an opportunity. However, we looked at the letter because they had also written and raised those very issues.

THE SPEAKER: I sent you my copy.

MR KATUNTU: Yes, you did, Madam Speaker. 

I can also say – because I have also heard a colleague speaking on the radio saying, “Why isn’t Uganda Commercial Bank (UCB) there”? Let me tell you that during the Seventh Parliament, Prof. Kamuntu was the chairman of the Committee on Finance. We investigated the sale of UCB and I was the lead counsel to that committee and this House has a report on the sale of UCB. 

We investigated the case in detail and for some of the issues that Lukwago & Company Advocates were raising, we considered them during the investigation of UCB – the case of Westmont for those of you who are well versed with it. It is there in our proceedings during the investigation of the sale of UCB.

Lastly, colleagues, we have opened the door which was never opened. Nobody has ever done this. (Applause) Yesterday, I met a director of one of the commercial banks. He said, “Thank you very much. What you have done to the sector, nobody has ever done it”. The commercial banks have been terrorised but they had no way – they had no forum to raise their complaints. 

The bank supervision department was a semi-god and the executive director was a superhuman being. It is only now that even in future any committee can summon these people and go into details.

Madam Speaker, yes, if you hadn’t stood firm, the thing would not have happened. (Applause) Maybe you are not aware, I can tell you this, I do not know if I will be breaching anything, but H.E. the President wrote objecting to this inquiry. (Interjection) Not public; the whole process. The public came later. It took the courage of this institution to say, “Yes, Sir, but the Constitution provides like this”. 

If we had failed that day, I do not think anybody would have looked into the Central Bank anymore (Applause). Nobody would have.

I, therefore, end on this note. I hear some Members saying that these banks were criminals, they did this and that. I imagine they were. But let us, as we further debate tomorrow, look at the specific audit objectives. If we had gone into what was not in the objectives, we would be accused of violating the terms of reference. The lawyers call it ultra vires. We would be acting out of what we set out to do. So what do you do? 

When you criticise the committee, look at the terms of reference. They are clearly set out. They are called audit objectives on page 6. When you read them; the first was to establish whether the proper inventory of assets and liabilities of the banks was undertaken. The second was to establish whether the liquidator apparently managed the sale of assets and accounted for the funds. The third was to ascertain whether the liabilities and all the creditor claims after closure were properly ascertained, recorded and settled. The other was to ascertain whether the funds of DPF/DIS were properly used. The fifth was to establish the total cost of liquidation of defunct banks. And the sixth was about statutory management. 

The reason we could not go into why the banks were closed was that it was not our term of reference. (Applause) It wasn’t! It is like this - I will give a case: If you are investigating how prisoners are being treated in prison because they have rights, do not say that they also committed crimes. The issue of committing a crime is actually why they are in prison.

What we are looking at is how you are treating these people who committed crimes in prison. Are you starving them? You cannot say, “You know, this man we are starving murdered.” Yes, he is a murderer but there is a law process regarding how you should handle this murderer.

Therefore, do not go into this one did this and that. Yes, they did and when they did that, their banks were closed. After you have closed these banks, did you manage them properly? We want to hold Bank of Uganda to prudential standards because those are the standards by which they hold commercial banks.

Madam Speaker, I will end on this note. I will give more clarification tomorrow. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu and your committee. I just wanted to add that Members already went to the radios to bash the report. I told these media people that they are bashing the report there but it is of no effect. You must come to the House, record your objections here where decisions are made –(Applause)– instead of bringing this House into disrepute. There is a habit of holding press conferences. Please, honourable members, no.

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 

