Wednesday, 4 February 2015

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to the afternoon sitting. As I indicated yesterday, the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session started yesterday and it will be concluded on 15 May 2015. There are many activities both on the legislative and the representation areas that will have to be handled during the course of that time, including reports on indicative and revenue expenditure framework, micro-economic plan and programmes and so forth. So, we all need to apply ourselves. 

As you might be aware, the Fifth and final session of the ninth Parliament will commence on 4 June 2015.

I wanted to also talk about registration for members. As we have commenced modernisation of this Parliament, we have started receiving documents online and we will continue to digitise the operations for which I request for your cooperation. 

The commission would like to create a data base concerning the members. This integrated electronic system has been installed and will facilitate members to access Parliament, recording of attendance of members in plenary and in committees online and when necessary to facilitate electronic voting in the House. 

So, we are requesting that members commence registration. It will be conducted at the desk near the entrance of the Chamber; I think it is the other one out there. Members are expected to fill in the forms providing personal details as well as passport size photographs and thumb prints. This exercise should be done and completed by Tuesday, 17 February 2015. So please honourable members, expedite that process.

I want to again call on you, members, to be present in the plenary and in the committees to which you have been assigned. I get tired of reminding members that we should be doing our work. Please, let us be committed and focused on that issue.

I indicated yesterday that the IGG has sent declaration forms for you. So, please go to the South entrance of the IGG’s office. There is a place where forms can be collected and you will be able to fill them. 

You will go to the South wing reception of the Inspectorate of Government. Okay, so it is here opposite Parliament. Fill, submit and return the forms so that they will go to the Inspectorate. Yes, you will have to declare your poverty or wealth, whichever will be applicable at the material time. 

Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. There are some guests but I do not know who they are. When I am told, I will let you know who is in the gallery.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure, in good faith, pursuant to Rule 69(2) of our Rules of Procedure.


Madam Speaker, should this House proceed to debate any matter on the Floor before you clear a report, which was published in The Red Pepper on 10th January this year on page 4? It states that the President of Uganda, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni has given you Shs 2.3 billion to neutralise hon. Amama Mbabazi’s political ambitions in Busoga region and to renovate your hotel in Kamuli.

A statement of that kind annoyed me, Madam Speaker. I experienced sleepless nights because we hold you in very high esteem and such a statement should not be left hanging. It creates a very bad impression because after getting that money, it would be doubtful whether you would continue to chair and deliberate this House impartially. I beg you, Madam Speaker, with humility to clarify that story.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is obviously absolute rubbish. Let us do our business. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know very well that we operate the Westminster model of Parliament and that we are in a multi-party dispensation.

Madam Speaker, this House is not fully constituted. Yes, we have the Speaker chairing, but we also have the side of the Opposition, which is fully constituted. However, the side of Government is not represented; there is nobody there. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to proceed in the event that there is no Government side with us in this House. I would like your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, part of the work we are doing has nothing to do with Government. Let us proceed.

3.09
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Madam Speaker, on the 16 January 2015, it so happened that mercenaries were hired by a company called Birus Property Services in the company of Police of the Republic of Uganda. They proceeded to plots 60-62 Alidina Road in Jinja without a court order. They demolished the property on that plot without the due process of the law. They demolished the structures, including people’s property and merchandise.

The property was vandalised by the hired mercenaries. The property, which I am talking about, is where these people have lived for over 40 years as sitting tenants. This is a property, which under the law, is under the Privatisation Unit in the Ministry of Finance and this so-called company obtained a lease fraudulently. The tenants complained to the IGG, which investigated and issued a report, directing the Commissioner of Land Registration to cancel that certificate of title. The commissioner obliged and cancelled that certificate of title and there is documentary evidence to that effect. However despite the fact that the certificate of title was cancelled, this company proceeded and demolished that building thereby destroying people’s property worth millions of money.

As result of that demolition, we took trouble as leaders. I approached the IGG who issued a stop order, stopping any development on those premises. However as we talk, the property is being developed. The implication is that whereas the President took oath to defend people and their property, there seems to be a lot of impunity in this country that the poor can no longer access justice. 

Madam Speaker, this was at a time when the owners of those shops had stopped selling stationary, which is their sales item. The school term was starting and these people were closed yet they have bank loans. As I talk, they have no source of income as a result of that.

Madam Speaker, the prayers of these people are that the Ministry of Internal Affairs tells this country whether it is fashionable for the Government of the Republic of Uganda to supervise banditry of that nature. These people in the gallery want an explanation from Government. What actually happened to the laws? And where are the laws? Why are they not being applied anymore?

Madam Speaker, if in the opinion of this House, all orders issued by relevant organs have been ignored, what is the next step? My people have actually been telling me that they thought that leaders of this Government went to the bush to fight injustice. They have gone to every office and exhausted their options and there is nowhere else to go. That is why they are in this House. Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, I beg to lay copies of these documents on the Table. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, while the member is stating – and I am happy now that the Executive is represented - while the member is stating that these people descended onto the property and demolished without a court order, it has been an administrative practice that even when you have a court order, the Police will not allow you to carry out an execution unless they have cleared that court order.

In other words, the Police have given themselves the responsibility of auditing and approving or disapproving these court orders. So I just want to give information to my colleague that actually the Police have taken over the role of executions and demolitions with or without a court order. It is something they have conferred unto themselves.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence to lay copies of these documents to show that all the relevant legal processes were exhausted and the last resort is this House.

Madam Speaker, when the demolition took place at 3.00 a.m., this followed the IGG investigation and reports, which I beg to lay on the Table. The IGG investigated and directed the cancellation of that certificate of title in question and I beg to lay the document on Table. 

I also beg to lay on Table the communication from the Commissioner, Land Registration, which shows that she actually obeyed the orders of IGG and cancelled the said certificate of title. 

I also beg to lay on Table a letter from the Ministry of Finance complaining to the IGG that the property belongs to Government and not to the so called investor who actually went and demolish the property. I beg to lay. 

I also beg to lay on Table a letter to the Attorney-General by the Minister of Finance. He wrote requesting him to intervene because the property belongs to Government. I beg to lay. 

Finally, I beg to lay on Table a stop order by IGG, which directed the IGG to stop the construction, which was taking place at the site and up to date, nothing has happened. I beg to lay. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to say that in this country now, Office of the IGG has issued a stop order to the IGP but as we talk, the construction is taking place and these Ugandans are watching on and looking for a solution from this House. Thank you, Madam Speaker and may God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am glad His Excellency the Vice President is here. It is very distressing when one sees almost every day on television, evictions and displacements and life goes on. I think it is incumbent on this House to direct the Ministry of Internal Affairs to come here and explain the circumstances under which the orders of the IGG have been ignored. I think that is what we demand now from the Minister of Internal Affairs to do in this House tomorrow.  

3.18
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the matter of national importance. This matter goes to Government, particularly to ministries of Internal Affairs, Foreign Affairs and Trade and Industry.

Madam Speaker, West Nile is bordered by two countries; the Democratic Republic of Congo and the Republic of South Sudan. The people of West Nile, particularly those from Arua, have been engaged in trade and commerce across the two borders of the two neighbouring countries, notwithstanding our ethnic trans-border belonging. 

We have of recent experienced a wave of brutality and mistreatment from our brothers across borders. The issue of South Sudan was recently debated here and is still under discussion.  However on the 31st of January, just five days ago, in one of the Eastern towns bordering Arua, that is in Aruu, there was an indiscriminate killing of people in a night club owned by a Ugandan woman. The target of the gun attack was actually the owner of the night club, who unfortunately was killed on spot, with two other Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I have Ugandans who have also been forced out of Ariwara border town. These Ugandans have been in the DRC for the last 28 years and they had settled there, with the hope of becoming citizens but because they are involved in lucrative business, the business community ganged up against  them and evicted them without any single property. All the property they had accumulated over the 28 years was left behind; they came back empty handed. That was after an attempt on their lives. 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this matter to this august House and particularly Government because we have opened our borders to our neighbors; the Congolese access our country any time, be it at night or day time and even travel up to Kampala and do shopping. Their children have registered in our schools; we consume the drugs that you send to our hospitals together with them; some of them have even invested and acquired property in Uganda and particularly, in Arua. This mistreatment has reached another level where we think, we need to also invoke our legal relationships, whether relationships with these neighbors has any legal backing. (Interruption)

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you hon. Atiku for giving way. Actually, when the Chief Opposition Whip led a team to visit the borders of DR Congo and South Sudan, part of the information we established was that a large portion of our land has been taken over officially by these two governments. Whereas we know where our border stretches between Uganda and South Sudan, the South Sudanese Government has made establishments including a police detache and a school within a radius of 10 kilometers inside Uganda. 

We also agreed with the Government of DR Congo to leave a buffer of 3 kilometers and Ugandans are not allowed to access that piece of land without the permission of the Congolese Police guarding the border. Actually, during our visit, one of our staff narrowly survived arrest. On the other hand, the Congolese Government has even undertaken construction within that buffer zone. 

Therefore, I think to them it is officially policy that they can take over our land; whereas on the other hand we must keep waiting for the resolution of the border conflict.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable colleague for this information.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, the prayers of people of West Nile are; that Government quickly comes in to create awareness on the legal relationship between our neighbors and us, because seeing these people access our country freely and enjoying this hospitality and our infrastructure; yet on the other side, we face harassment. I think it is important and it is a recipe for violence as a reciprocate result of this mistreatment.

The business that used to thrive along the border particularly on the Ugandan side has now gone down to the extent that even on the Congo side, they are using our money; they are driving Ugandan registration number plates. So, really we call upon Government particularly the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Internal Affairs and Foreign Affairs to come to our rescue. Otherwise, you know the people of West Nile in terms of responding to violence. We can easily reorganise ourselves as a Government within the region and respond.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue raised by hon. Atiku, is quite important. We had debate here on the issue of South Sudan, so, the Minister of Regional Corporation should come and brief us on why these things continue to happen to us and our citizens on these border countries.  

3.27
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE: (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning an issue that I read in The Monitor yesterday. It says that the Minister without Portfolio, in charge of Political Mobilisation, hon. Richard Todwong made a statement that baffled me and it was quite unfortunate. He is reported to have said that civil servants without ideological clarity will be sacked. Civil servants who are affecting their space are going to lose their jobs. 

Madam Speaker, this should raise concern to all of us; we know that civil servants in this country, according to their code of conduct are not allowed to participate in partisan politics. While they are there to implement Government policies, they should not be threatened because they lack ideological clarity. I do not know which ideology is necessary for a civil servant; if it is not clarity of morals, honesty, and doing their job with competence. Would the Minster like to clarify to us whether we can ask civil servants to do what we want as parties?

MS KIIZA: Thank you, hon. Osegge, for giving way. Madam Speaker, on 1 May 2014, during the celebration of the International Labor Day, the RDC in Kasese was a Chief Guest. While addressing the labourers, he pointed accusing fingers to the District Service Commission for recruiting non-subscribers to the National Resistance Movement party. He said whoever gets a job should first of all confirm whether they are a party holding member and whether they are ready to subscribe to the National Resistance Movement and that would be part of the CV. As you present your CV, you should even be able to attach a card to indicate that you are a real citizen who is patriotic and ready to give service to the people of Uganda. That is the information I wanted to give my sister in relation to what she is putting across. 

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you for that information. Madam Speaker, this is very unfortunate in a country that is trying to grow democracy and that is promoting separation of powers, ensuring that civil servants perform their duties without due influence. I think we need to get clarity whether he was speaking -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we have heard something called RDC mentioned. The name is not mentioned and I want to think that if I were the other side on your right, I would have investigated this particular civil servant who is displaying partisanship. However without disclosing the name of this particular person, the government will not be in position to know who to investigate, especially since in most of the districts we have an RDC, a deputy RDC, I do not know whether there are even assistant RDCs without disclosing the name. Was the member therefore proceeding correctly by giving half of the information to this House? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I do not think we should spend too much time. Let us focus on what hon. Osegge has said that the minister said, unless you are ideologically clear, you should not get the job. So we will ask the minister to come and explain whether that is really what he said. 

3.32
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have just been from a long recess and we reported yesterday and the House was full. As you started, the Front Bench was literally empty. The Minister of State for Lands who was there before the Vice President came in and went out. 

Madam Speaker, we have been on recess and we have a number of issues we have gotten from our constituencies. We are all here to raise those concerns to the government and to find that the whole Front Bench of the government side is empty when we have issues we are raising and we need immediate responses is demoralising.

Madam Speaker, I would pray that you help us and this country and direct these executives to be here to listen to the voices, which have come from the constituencies. They need to be reminded that they earn salaries to be here. Are they going to attend this House selectively or are they supposed to be here and stand for the government? Are they out to do double business other than to attend to the work of this House? 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that you direct the executives to have the ministers here to listen to the voices, which we are bringing? We all want responses and we all want to raise those concerns. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I issued notice for recall of the House, I did not only recall the back benchers. I invited all the members and some of them are ministers. So I want the government to adhere to our earlier arrangement that if they have business outside this House, each ministry should send a minister here. So in the next 10 minutes, I want to see the ministers back in this House because we are talking to ourselves. 

3.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me this opportunity. For the last one or two months, I have been following at international levels, the movement of prices of petroleum. The petroleum price per barrel has dropped by more than 50 per cent from $ 110 per barrel to $ 40 per barrel but it is surprising that today in Uganda, the petroleum companies have not reduced the prices, not even by 20 per cent. The excuse some are giving is that it is because it derives from the value of the dollar but it is not even right by more than Shs 100. 

So Madam Speaker, I would want the Minister of Energy to come and explain to this House and to the people of Uganda why the drop in the price per barrel in the world market has not been translated into the drop of prices per litre in Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the minister I think gave some answer in December but the minister should come and update us again on that issue of the failure to reduce the prices when on the world market they have really come down. 

Honourable members, I have my work here which I want to do.

3.37
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and as a result, I have been issued with an invitation from the Ministry of Defence to go to Kotido to mark 34 years of UPDF. 

As far as the Constitution of Uganda is concerned, UPDF is a creature of the 1995 Constitution. What was created or born 34 years ago was an illegal outfit called the National Resistance Army that went to Luweero, killed people and came and captured power. Madam Speaker, can the government - (Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, first of all I wanted to restrain myself but I could not continue when hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju starts telling lies here. First of all, there are no celebrations in Kotido. 

Secondly, it is not true that the army there came and killed people. I come from Luweero and the army did not come and kill people. There were other people who killed but not the UPDF. Is hon. Ssemujju in order to come here and start telling lies?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is an army called UPDF, which protects everybody. They do protect Opposition and NRM so if you are invited, you should go. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is, can Government tell this country whether we can celebrate formation of illegal outfits even if that formation results into capturing of Government? I have no problem with going to Kotido or Moroto to celebrate formation of UPDF, which is a national army but I have a problem as a legislator going to mark and celebrate the formation of a rebel group that went and killed people. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am restrained to stand up when my Chairman of COSASE is contributing but the point of order I want to raise is that when NRA captured power in 1986, Legal Notice No. 1 of the National Resistance Council by then legalised the National Resistance Movement and the National Resistance Army. 

Is the honourable member in order to continue calling NRA an illegal outfit when the NRC, the Parliament by then, legalised the NRA and NRM under Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986?

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. 

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO STANDING AND SECTORAL COMMITTEES 
IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE RULES 148 AND 175 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Lucy Akello has not been assigned a committee since she was elected. So, her whip has assigned her to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for the sessional committee and for the standing committee, she will serve on the Committee on Local Government Accounts. So if you have no objection, I put the question that hon. Akello is assigned to those two committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: As we lay the papers honourable members, the team out there as the victims of the acts which hon. Mwiru was talking about are from Alidina Twesase Traders Association, Jinja Municipality. 

3.47
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with a report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General for the following sub-counties:

    i. Bushika Sub-County, Bududa District
    ii. Bulucheke Sub-County, Bududa District
    iii. Bukigai Sub-County, Bududa District
    iv. Bukibokolo Sub-County, Bududa District
    v. Bududa Sub-County, Bududa District
    vi. Bumayoka Sub-County, Bududa District
    vii. Wattuba Sub-County, Kyankwanzi District
    viii. Ntwetwe Sub-County, Kyankwanzi District
    ix. Mulagi Sub-County, Kyankwanzi District
    x. Chesower Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xi. Riwo Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xii. Suam Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xiii. Kortek Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xiv. Senendet Sub-County, Bukwo District
    xv. Khabutoola Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xvi. Kaato Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xvii. Ssabagabo Makindye Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xviii. Mende Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xix. Masulita Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xx. Kakiri Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxi. Nangabo Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxii. Nabweru Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxiii. Bussi Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxiv. Kasanje Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxv. Namayumba Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxvi. Gombe Sub-County, Wakiso District
    xxvii. Gogonyo Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxviii. Kabwangasi Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxix. Butebo Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxx. Kibale Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxxi. Agule Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxxii. Bulangira Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxiii. Kasasira Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxiv. Kabweri Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxv. Tirinyi Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxvi. Kagumu Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxvii. Buseta Sub-County, Kibuku District
    xxxviii. Kyamuswa Sub-County, Kalangala District
    xxxix. Bufumira Sub-County, Kalangala District
    xl. Bujjumba Sub-County, Kalangala District
    xli. Seeta Sub-County, Mukono District
    xlii. Pakanyi Sub-County, Masindi District
    xliii. Budongo Sub-County, Masindi District
    xliv. Bugongi Sub-County, Sheema District
    xlv. Kagarama Sub-County, Sheema District
    xlvi. Kyangyenyi Sub-County, Sheema District 
    xlvii. Kitagata Sub-County, Sheema District 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Commissioner Akol. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

3.48
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The entire country depends on the media for information and of recent, there have been a number of reports about the NRM as a ruling party in this country. Some of this information indicated that people who had been appointed to various offices in the party; that is the Secretary General, the deputy, the treasurer and the deputy treasurer will cease to be Government ministers and even members of Parliament. 

The country needs to be clarified if this is really true because as my colleague here, hon. Osegge was talking about hon. Todwong, I did not know in what capacity hon. Todwong was speaking at a ceremony. Either he was presiding over that ceremony as a Secretary General who ceased to be our minister or he is still holding the portfolio.

Madam Speaker, it is my humble request that the country gets clarified so that we can be able to know the exact people who are occupying the ministerial posts as they stand in the country at the moment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.50
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true some changes in the National Resistance Movement structure have taken place. A secretary general, treasurer and deputy treasurer, electoral commission members and so forth have been appointed. When you read this in the newspapers, it was true. It is also true that those people appointed are still members of Parliament. They are still ministers until the authority removes them and the authority is the President. 

We moved from the Movement to the Executive. Yes, when these people were made as secretary general and so forth, this is the work of the Movement but at the same time, the Executive is now to take action again to remove them from the earlier appointments and we have to wait. So, you should not be in a hurry. Otherwise, everything is true. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Prime Minister, we have finished with that issue.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

GEN. (RTD). ALI: Madam Speaker, this is the second time the Prime Minister’s time finds me in the House when the substantive Prime Minister is away. I am going to say the same thing I said last time and that is I am not yet briefed. (Laughter) So, I ask that we defer this matter until next time.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, this Parliament is the political cream of this country and our duty is to offer oversight service and function to Government. Among others, we are supposed to provide oversight over the quality of performance of the Executive.

We approved the post of the Prime Minister in this House because it is a constitutional position. We went ahead and approved two deputies to deputise the Prime Minister. The Deputy Leader of Government Business is also the second deputy Prime Minister. 

He has also been in this Parliament for as long as I have known him. On top of that, he is my learned friend. I do not want to say junior as some people are proposing, but facts speak for themselves.

He knows the practises of this Parliament and even before hearing the questions the members want to ask the Prime Minister, he is saying he has not been briefed. Is the Deputy Prime Minister therefore in order? I thought the brief is a standing brief that you stand in when your boss is not here. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether our Rules of Procedure enable us to substitute the substantive. No, the rule says Prime Minster. I do not think we have the power to say today it is hon. Kajura and tomorrow it is the other one.

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you again, Madam Speaker, because for the time you have chaired this House, at least you have not shied away from your responsibility particularly in guiding this House. 

The Prime Minister’s position is a constitutional position provided for in the Constitution. Fortunately or otherwise, we approved deputies. May I be guided on the purpose of approving and paying deputies to the Prime Minister?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us separate the ordinary duties of a Deputy Prime Minister of sitting here and answering questions. Those are ordinary duties. But regarding Prime Minister’s time, I do not think I have the power to direct that we should delegate it to so and so. 

You want Dr Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda here, that is the one you want. We cannot say, hon. Kajura please go and - I do not think that is right. The are other duties they can do, but that one, no. So, he is quite in order. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your wise ruling. Our Constitution talks of the Prime Minister and our rules also talk about the Prime Minister. I am sure that is now Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, but where do the first, second and third deputy prime ministers derive their mandates? This is because the Constitution talks of the Prime Minister and Cabinet ministers. 

So Madam Speaker, would it be procedurally right for these three deputies to claim to be deputy Prime Ministers yet there is no rule that stipulates they should exist?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they were brought to the Appointments Committee of this House, verified and approved. That is how they took oath so there is no problem. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INQUIRE INTO THE DEMOLITION OF NABAGEREKA PRIMARY SCHOOL AND OTHER PUBLIC SCHOOLS/INSTITUTIONS

3.58
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker and members. [Honourable members: “Order!”]

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members. He is a Member who can speak from either side. Proceed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I rise to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to inquire into the demolition of Nabagereka Primary School and other public schools and institutions. Honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR SSEKIKUBO: “WHEREAS the Constitution in Article 30 provides that every person shall have a right to education; 

ANDWHEREAS the Constitution mandates the State to promote free and compulsory basic education and further take appropriate measures to afford every citizen equal opportunity to attain the highest educational standard possible; 

AWARE THAT on Friday 23 January 2015, court bailiffs razed down Nabagereka Primary School located in Kisenyi on the basis that the land thereon had been leased to a private investor by the names of Boost Investments 

FURTHER AWARE THAT Nabagereka Primary School was established in 1966 as one of the schools under the Universal Primary Education scheme. The school serves a significant proportion of the urban poor children numbering 1,143 who are currently stranded because of their inability to afford private schools in the city;

NOTING THAT in a letter to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Education and Sports dated 19 February 19 2014, the Executive Director of KCCA warned of the impending eviction stating that Government stood to lose huge investments it had made in the school over years and that urgent attention was needed to protect Government interests by maintaining the then status quo;

ALSO NOTING that the fate of young pupils is being sealed as they may not be able to trek the inevitable long distances in search of their inherent/constitutional rights to education hence drop out of school without any probable opportunity of ever getting back;

AWARE THAT other than Nabagereka Primary School other public schools like Shimoni Demonstration School, Kyagwe road primary school, Nakasero Primary School, Katwe Primary School, Kansanga Primary School, Buganda Road Primary School, City High School and Kitante Primary School, amongst others, have either suffered a similar fate or are on the verge of a forceful take over;

NOTING THAT there is deep concern that there is urgent need to address the plight of 1443 stranded pupils and 23 teachers

NOW, THEREFORE, let it be resolved by this august House that:

    1. Government suspends all allocations and takeovers of lands belonging to public schools, public health facilities and other Government installations.
    2. Government suspends all evictions on public land without going through the due process of the law.
    3. Government expedites all investigations relating to the allocation and eviction on public land.
    4. Government takes immediate steps to hold all development on land housing Nabagereka Primary Schools and suspend all plans approved on the said land.
    5. Government puts in place emergency education facilities as an interim provision to accommodate the 1443 stranded pupils and 23 former teachers of the school.
    6. Lastly that Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate the takeover of lands formerly belonging to public schools and make appropriate recommendation to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Rt Hon. Speaker and members, the issue on our hands is a tragedy particularly to the poor of the poor. The matter on our hands needs an immediate inquest and intervention into the life, the opportunities and the future of the 1443 pupils who have been pupils of Nabagereka Primary School, a school where Government had invested heavily.

As you might have seen and read in the papers, this was not demolition because in a demolition the owners and occupants are always afforded opportunity to remove their belongings. What was done was total destruction where Government lost vital equipment and teaching materials that had been put in place since 1966.

It is a matter of serious concern that the said developer obtained the lease from the Uganda Land Commission a government entity which is well versed with the laws pertaining to land particularly to land belonging to persons. The fact that Nabagereka Primary was the current occupant and in possession of this land, any option to give a lease ought to have been given to the sitting occupants as per the land Act.

There is a communication dated 23 December 2014, where the Permanent Secretary from the Ministry of Education wrote to the Inspector General of Police appealing for Police protection of the Government institutions serving the public as redress was being sought from court.

The Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Education further indicated that the Nabagereka Primary School as the current occupant of this land could only be evicted under the law for non-payment of annual nominal ground rent and that was the only condition and ground under which a school ought to have been demolished, but this is not on record. So the question goes begging, how come that Police that was deployed to protect a Government facility like this could be withdrawn under mysterious circumstances? Far from protecting the Government facility escorted and accompanied those who came to vandalise and demolish the school. To that extent, it is a pity that those who are supposed to be protected by the law and the machinery of the state end up betrayed and left on their own. 

A survey conducted yesterday, out of the 1443 former pupils of Nabagereka Primary School, only 23 had been relocated to Nakivubo Blue Primary School, the only school in that vicinity. There was also Kyagwe Primary School but this has also since been demolished. The other school would have been Bat Valley Primary School which is nowhere now. Yet these poor people cannot afford to go to Sir Apollo Kagwa Primary School, Kampala Parents, City Parents and Lohana, and they are really stranded. Particularly, the younger pupils of the school cannot find their way to these high end schools because of two reasons; one, the distance is too long; two, they cannot afford them. There is no way young pupils of 5,6 or 7 years can trek the long distances to the far away Primary Schools under the UPE scheme. And if this problem is not nipped in the bud, other schools are in the pipeline.

As you may have read, Nakasero Primary School has lost most of its property including the playground, yet it used to be a cardinal policy by Government that before a school is given a license, it must have a playground where pupils can have physical education. But now, all this has gone to waste. It is from that perspective that if we are serious about the future of this country; if this Government minds about the poor of the poor, the peasant and the down trodden, this is the time to move in.

The first measure and intervention we would expect from Government is to set up makeshift facilities to accommodate these stranded pupils. Long term measures of reconstructing the school can be undertaken later, but what we need now is to salvage the plight of 1443 pupils who are stranded.

It used to be a policy right from the colonial Government that education is one of the interventions to bridge the income inequality. As long as the children of the poor could afford education, they could rise through the ranks and bridge the historical imbalances. If members of this Parliament had not been given opportunity to study, not many would have made it to this august House. 

Twenty-nine years ago, this Government forced itself into power on the shoulders and blood of the peasants of this country, but the policies being pursued by Government now are devoid of any remorse - the poor must remain poor and the rich are getting richer. This is a situation that is unacceptable. It will cause and breed violence. The children of the rich are not safe either. You cannot have disparities where the poor get poorer and poorer and the rich get richer and richer at the expense of the masses. 

In this particular case, how do you put a facility that has the destiny of 1,443 pupils in the hands of one investor? Whatever investment that could be, there is no moral or economic justification whatsoever for the lives of 1,443 children to be sacrificed at the altar of an investor. It is for that matter that I call on members of this august House and I call for the indulgence of Government to look back; a lot of developments could have taken place but let us arrest the situation. 

Enough is enough and I know wherever he is, the President of this Republic, President Yoweri Museveni, knows that he rode with the peasants, himself being chief of them, and now he is in power but he is forgetting the people he came to power with. This should be the greatest shame. It must be put on record that enough is enough; we cannot continue in a situation where the rich get richer and the downtrodden get deeper into the sewers and gutters and yet there is a parliament in this country. Honourable members, I beg to move and I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are the other movers here?

4.12
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, to save time, I must associate myself entirely with hon. Theodore Ssekikubo for the following reasons, in addition: 

As the honourable member has articulated, there are no alternative facilities for these children, and you are talking about the biggest population in the country being Kampala, the capital city of this country. 

Secondly, we have heard that the city authorities protested, the ministry concerned protested and sought protection from the ministry responsible for protection, that is, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and particularly the Police. The Police instead withdrew as if to indicate that there was connivance with the group that was about to come in and do the eviction. 

Madam Speaker, this is not the first time Government institutions are evicted. Just last year, we were informed in this House that the building housing the Meteorology Department in Entebbe had been brought down and government sensitive property and installations were left in the open. I pleaded, standing in the same place where I am now, for the deputy minister in charge of lands at the time, who was rendering a good service to this country, to run and reinstate the government facility, and that was in the presence of her senior colleague. That was not done.

Madam Speaker, the minister responsible for education was on the Floor of this House yesterday and she washed herself clean by saying “I do not know where this title is”. The minister responsible for titles was seated right there, a few metres away from where he has just taken his seat, and he did not give us an answer. 

I stood on this Floor of Parliament last year and stated that under our Constitution, particularly Article 237, Uganda Land Commission does not have the mandate to trade in our land, to trade in peoples’ land. The mandate of Uganda Land Commission is to acquire land for public function, to hold land in trust for the people of Uganda. The only reason Uganda Land Commission can continue holding onto our land is to keep and preserve the little we have for us. 

Under Article 237(1), land belongs to the people – to the citizens, by the way, not even to the people. Land in Uganda belongs to the citizens of Uganda and shall vest in them in accordance with the land tenure systems enunciated in this provision, that is, in clause 3 of that Article. 

Clause (2)(a) of that Article says, “the Government or a local government may, subject to article 26 of this Constitution, acquire land in the public interest; and the conditions governing such acquisition shall be as prescribed by Parliament.” Now, what is more public interest than education in this country? What is the function of Government? Is it not a core function for the Government to provide education to the citizens? 

In previous parliaments, we enacted the Land Act and among other provisions I remember, under section 32 of the Land Act, a lawful occupant and a bona fide occupant, one, cannot be evicted without a court order; two, can only be evicted for failure to pay ground rent - nominal like my brother has said; three, there must be procedures - you must go to court and afford the bona fide occupant the due process of the law. This was not done.

I stated earlier that it has become an administration practice of the Police that even where you have a court order, they must clear it. On the one hand, they were protecting the school, they withdrew and immediately they evicted. I would not be wrong to imagine that the Uganda Police actually evicted a Ugandan school; why? They participated, they had no court order, they participated by watching -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think time has come for us to offer these schools the land they occupy. You have management committees which are bodies corporate. Why should Uganda Land Commission continue to hold onto these land titles which they are selling left, right and centre and the Government does not have an answer? I can challenge my colleague, the Minister for Lands, to give me one single reason why Uganda Land Commission would insist on these land titles when there are bodies corporate which can keep and protect this land. 

Lastly, the lack of political supervision in Kampala Capital City Authority is partly, if not largely, responsible for what we are witnessing. Just the same way Parliament, a political body, is now protecting these people, no elected government in Kampala Capital City Authority would allow this to happen if it was properly functioning. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go straight into the debate now. You will get three minutes each. 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssekikubo for the motion. This issue was raised yesterday as an issue of national importance and the Deputy Leader of Government Business gave a directive; he directed the Minister of Lands to come up with a comprehensive report about the same issue. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, if we first heard or listened to the comprehensive report of the minister so that we can move on with the debate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, time is of essence. We want to address the plight of the children- where the children will go. If the answer does not come today, what will happen?

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. We all want to discuss this matter because it is so important to all of us. However, the immediate issue, like you have said, is the plight of the pupils who are now stranded. Can we receive, first, the communication from the Minister of Education about what she has done so far to ensure that these children who are not yet relocated are getting shelter before we go into the details of the motion, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education, have there been arrangements made for these children to study?

4.21
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Maj. Jessica Alupo): Rt Hon. Speaker, I spoke my mind yesterday. However, in line with the arrangements to have the children relocated, the Permanent Secretary and her team have not yet come up with an authentic report about it. This is because, ultimately, you know that the parents have a bigger responsibility of moving the children from one school to another. The ministry has the responsibility, of course, of ensuring that the parents have been notified about the time of opening of the term. 

For those who were not here yesterday, I do not know of any arrangements that led to the demolition of the school. I thought, Madam Speaker, yesterday we agreed that because there was a claim that the school does not own the title where the school is, we shall look deeply into the circumstances under which the title was changed, if it was changed, or the circumstances under which the school, overnight, does not own the land title. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.23
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. For us to take a decision, we need to be informed that this land is mailo land and the holder of the mailo land is Buganda. If the mailo land belongs to Buganda, Uganda Land Commission does not hold any lease on that land neither does KCCA hold a lease on that land. So, the legal owners of the land have leased the land to a developer. 

The question to Government is: Have you been planning? Did you know Nabagereka Primary School was there and who the owner of that land is? Does that school land have any land title? It does not have! So, if the rightful and legal owner of the land leases the land to someone else and the leaseholder comes and removes the school or develops the land - The issue we should now find out is: who is the holder of the title? This is because that school does not hold a lease -(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. When you talk of land ownership and you invoke the question of mailo land and all those other tenures, remember we have a history that this school was begun on these same premises as far back as 1966. When you look into our Constitution, particularly Objective XXV, which is rarely quoted, it stipulates that, “The State and the citizens shall endeavour to preserve and protect and generally promote the culture of preservation of public property…” 

You know very well that one of the forms of land tenure systems in our Constitution is what has been legislated on as lawful or bona fide occupancy. That lawful or bona fide occupancy has a timeline on which it can be gained. If a school has been on that land since 1966, whether Government owns, through the Uganda Land Commission, a freehold or mailo land title, wouldn’t Government or the school or whoever controls the school as an institution have an interest in that land, which interest is protected under the law?

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for that information. What we are looking at is the owner of the land and if Government should have compensated the owner of the land for the continued existence of the primary school. I wish to inform the honourable member that this is one piece of land that was returned to the Buganda Kingdom in 1993. So, Government should have tried to find out if it could compensate. That is what we are saying. 

Is it a planning problem? Is it an institution that is not working? Is it KCCA? When they were demolishing the building, KCCA was there and was assisted by the Police. So, is it an institutional problem? Madam Speaker, what we should find out is who the owner of the land is. I thank you.

4.27
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know very well that there is no single piece of land in this country which has no owner, and we are talking about land under use by a public institution. Even if it was vested in the hands of Uganda Land Commission, Uganda Land Commission is represented in this House by the Minister of Lands. For someone to establish the owner of a certain piece of land, if we have the Minister of Lands here we do not need a comprehensive report; you simply go to the registry, maybe of titles and so on - Actually, for an ordinary person it takes one day but for a minister –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I wish to thank my honourable colleague. In 1991, I was the regional officer for central region under Ministry of Relief and Social Rehabilitation. If you go to that place, you will find Mwanga II Court has been fenced off with permanent blocks. I was the one who fenced that place with support from Save the Children’s Fund UK. 

At that time, the ministry went into a written agreement with the owner of that land, and at that time it was Buganda Land Board. The office of the treasurer, Muwanika, was also within that vicinity which was fenced. I do not know whether Buganda Land Board sold their interest because for all I know, and I am cocksure the records are still there, we entered into agreement to fence that place off for usage with Buganda Land Board. That is the information I want to give you.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much for that information. Madam Speaker, the contradiction here is that normally, the practice is that before you demolish, you actually cordon off the place and for you to do so, you have to get permission. This permission is supposed to be granted, in case of Kampala, by Kampala Capital City Authority. My question, therefore, is: was this place cordoned off before demolition? There is a reason as to why you cordon off the place, even when there is a court order. 

We have the Minister of Lands here, why do we continue to debate from an uninformed point of view yet he could be of great help by answering one question: who owns the land? It is as simple as that. The other issues can follow as to how they got the land. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. My sympathy goes to the people of Nabagereka Primary School that was demolished.

Madam Speaker, if you look at all of us here, I think none of us, if I may say, went to a private school. At least personally, I went to a public school in Tororo, Rock View Primary School, and for my HSC I went through City High Secondary School in Kololo. Today, as I speak, even the school that I went to is being threatened by a group of individuals. Every day the headmaster is running up and down over the same piece of land. Because it is a prime piece of land, there are so many people trying to grab it. 

What is my point this afternoon, Madam Speaker? There is an organised group of people in Kampala - at least I have a bit of information about them - who are in direct connivance with the people working at Uganda Land Commission. They make deals and big amounts of money exchanges hands. The officials are the ones who help them from within to acquire titles of public pieces of land.

Madam Speaker, as you know, I am the vice chairperson of the Committee on Science and Technology. Last year, we were invited to NALIRRI in Tororo and certain “investors” were struggling for that vast land. Government institutions, schools, forests, swamps, name it, as long as it is a public piece of land they have become threatened pieces of property.

Madam Speaker, it is not just about us sitting here and lamenting; let us come up with a way forward on how to protect these public pieces of land. If possible, I would suggest -(Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I think the lasting solution lies with this Parliament. It appears we have granted a lot of power to Uganda Land Commission without checks and balances on public land. A constitutional amendment may come to this Parliament on electoral reforms; why don’t we put some checks and balances especially on Uganda Land Commission on the issue of giving out and apportioning public land as and when they wish? Look at the land title of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; how many years did it take us to acquire that land title? I was a parliamentary commissioner by that time we acquired the land title. 

So, Uganda Land Commission must have checks and balances within the provisions in the Constitution. Otherwise, we shall continue losing public land year in, year out while this Parliament is watching and yet it is our cardinal responsibility under Article 79. Thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, my brother, for that information. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, this country puts all the trust in Uganda Land Commission -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I also wanted to remind honourable members that my school is an abandoned construction site near here. (Laughter)

4.35
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with the stakeholders of Nabagereka Primary School. Apparently, there are people who have more information than we do. Some are talking about the Uganda Land Commission while some are talking about the Buganda Land Board; which is which? 

Madam Speaker, we are becoming victims of our own policies and the double standards of these policies. If I remember correctly, after the Ministry of Education was evicted in Mbarara by a church, Government said that if they are to invest in any school, there must be evidence of ownership and that is a title. I am wondering how Government is continuing to invest in schools and institutions without evidence, like it is turns out today; they do not know where the land title of Nabagereka Primary School is yet huge investments have been made in that school. 

Madam Speaker, if the ministers come and lament here that they do not know the circumstances that led to the eviction and destruction of Nabagereka Primary School and the Minister of Lands says “I do not know where the title is”, who is supposed to know? Is it only Parliament that can see these bad things that are happening? Fortunately, the ministers are part of this Parliament and they see some wrong things happening. When they get out of Parliament, do they cease to see that there are things that are not running or going on well? (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I am really saying this with a lot of pain. Parliament has made so many resolutions, including those following the recently concluded UMEME report; we made very many good recommendations. They were totally ignored. Now, I am wondering, we are moving a very good motion, and I will be making amendments to the motion, but what is the import of this motion and the recommendations that we are going to make vis-à-vis what is happening in this country and what has happened to Nabagereka Primary School? Will it be that this time round -(Interruption) ­

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, hon. Kabakumba, for giving way. I remember last year, Government itself was evicted in Entebbe. The government structures were demolished and we tasked the minister to see how that could be rectified. If Government itself can be evicted - (Interjection)- I do not know whether by itself -(Laughter)- but, if private developers can evict Government, then who are we to talk about this subject at this point in time? 

What sense are we going to make when we are seeing all these policies? First of all, there is the Land Policy and there are all these laws in place, but why is it that each time we are seeing all these anomalies go unquestioned and unabated?

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to propose - because it is clear that there is a conspiracy -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Clearly, there is a conspiracy in this country and unless we break it, we are going to see more of these evictions. 

I want to propose that we clearly investigate the Uganda Land Commission. However, even if it was Buganda Land Board, the law is clear; the bona fide and lawful occupants cannot just be evicted. Therefore, they cannot hide under any law or rule because the law is clearly stated.

MR SSEGGONA: I want to thank my colleague, Princess Kabakumba Masiko, for giving way. The information that I need to give is that whereas this land was returned to Buganda Land Board, before the return, the lease was offered by Uganda Land Commission in the year 2007. The return of all these properties carries a condition – you must accept and respect the existing offers given by Uganda Land Commission. 

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.41
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkinzi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am reading here in one of the media reports that on 23 December 2014, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, wrote to the Inspector General of Police. In her letter, she said that the Solicitor-General advised that the school, that is, Nabagereka Primary School, has rights as a bona fide occupant since they have occupied the said land for more than 40 years. The Permanent Secretary was also requesting police to deploy and protect this school. 

The question we are asking is: is there a functional Government? If a Permanent Secretary can seek the advice of the Government legal advisor and the advice is given, and then the ministry writes to the Police to help in protecting the school but a private individual comes and demolishes the school, where is the Government then? 

When this matter was raised yesterday, we knew today there would be a Cabinet meeting and our expectation was that maybe you would discuss it in Cabinet, harmonise a position and then come and let us know. This is because the assurance we were given by the Deputy Leader of Government Business was that Government would come up with a response. I think -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much to my colleague. Madam Speaker, this is a paradox; much as the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education, wrote to the IGP asking for protection, when Mr Muwonge was demolishing Nabagereka Primary School the Police helped him to demolish it.
 
My problem is: who is that relative of Muwonge, or very close friend, who is connected to the Police? Let us know that person who can cause the Uganda Police to go and evict children from a school that has existed since 1944. It is only then that we shall have removed the jigger; the jigger is still there. Thank you very much.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, it is very painful. We want to insist that Government tells us whether it knows what has been happening or not. I also want to agree with the hon. Kabakumba Masiko that –(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, Dr Baryomunsi, for giving way. Yesterday this matter came up and I was directed to make sure that I dig up all the information concerning what happened to Nabagereka Primary School. I have also been holding consultations with the Deputy Leader of Government Business. He had said that he would need to chair a meeting where all of us, ministers and government agencies that happened to have any dealings on land matters and on what happened in the area, can be able to come up with a comprehensive statement on this matter.

I therefore want to assure the honourable Dr Baryomunsi that as Government, we have been working on this. I have already obtained documentation on what happened and we should be able to provide a comprehensive statement on this matter soon. The assurance I want to give to the House, therefore, is that we are not letting this matter go unattended to or unpunished. I thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Why then were you waiting for me to raise this matter before you respond? I think the answers should have come yesterday rather than you promising to bring it to us next time; you should tell us when your report will be ready for this House.

I want to support the proposition by hon. Kabakumba-Masiko that the activities of Uganda Land Commission should be investigated. I also have information that they are trying to sell land around Mulago Hospital and many other areas. We should expand the investigation beyond Nabagereka Primary school to other forms of public land. I can take the information.

MS KIIZA: Thank you so much, honourable colleague, for accepting me to use some of your time. 

Madam Speaker, there are two things perturbing me right now as I give the information. I get the impression that the land in question is supposed to have been under the stewardship of Buganda Land Board; they must have had the title. I want to be guided as to how the Uganda Land Commission comes into question then. This is because the matter should be between Buganda Land Board and the investor.

As for now, the person who should actually be lamenting the way we are doing is the Minister of Education. She should be crying foul over how her children have been misplaced but she seems to be comfortable.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, yesterday the minister said she is in very serious pain and she is in agreement with the position of this House. 

MS KIIZA: I take that, Madam Speaker. Last month, you sent me to Nairobi to represent this Parliament in the 5th ordinary session of the Great Lakes Region parliaments. A similar scenario happened to one of the schools in Nairobi City, where children reported for school and they found their playground fenced off by a developer. That was on the 19th of January. By the 21st of January, a tripartite committee of the Cabinet had already sat. They had already gotten to the root of the matter as far as the investor was concerned. They actually got to the marrow of who the persons behind these investors were. 

I am wondering how long it takes Ugandans to get to understand who this John Bosco Muwonge is and what his intentions are in evicting over 1000 pupils of Uganda. These are pupils who are supposed to be the presidents, the ministers and maybe the teachers of this country, the doctors -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you have really smuggled in your contribution. I thought you rose on a point of information. Doctor, please conclude and do not allow any more information.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the lengthy information from Kasese. Finally, Madam Speaker, can we ask the minister to come with the comprehensive report tomorrow, as he has promised; otherwise, Parliament wants our Nabagereka back and we also want the activities of Uganda Land Commission investigated. They appear to be going beyond their constitutional mandate and are now trading in public land. As Parliament, we must stop that practice. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.50
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues who are recommending that the Uganda Land Commission needs to be investigated. 

I was one of the Members in the Eighth Parliament who did not support the giveaway of Shimoni land. I did not support the demolition of that school before pupils were relocated and settled in another school. An investor came and took Shimoni land but when you pass there, I think you can see what is there - nothing is taking place; actually, that building has been abandoned.

The children suffered and some of them were taken to Bugisu, to hon. Werikhe’s constituency; that is where Shimoni TTC went to. I am surprised and disturbed as to why we are giving land in Kampala to investors. Is it only Kampala that deserves to be invested in? Uganda is so big; if these investors come, can’t we allocate them land somewhere else? Why should it be Kampala? Take them to Manafawa, Mbale, Gulu, or any other town. 

Let us protect the schools and other public institutions that are in Kampala. Some of these old public institutions in some countries are actually used as tourist attractions. For us here, we want to demolish them and forget all about them.

I agree that my sister, Jessica Alupo, and hon. Migereko could also be in pain like us, but I want to say that they are the political heads of these ministries; I know that before these so called investors came to demolish schools, there were publications here and there which they read. They knew that these demolitions were going to take place; why come here and lament with us? Why didn’t they stop the eviction from taking place? We need to hear them come and speak out. We need to see them come out and protect Ugandans. We need to hear them on radio and in the press trying to protect some of these institutions. 

They wait until one of the Members comes out and then they come and look for the statement. What if the honourable member had not raised this issue; would we just watch it go? We have got children who are going to sit for P.7, which school is now going to accommodate them? Most of the schools close out other children because they do not want to mix them together with theirs before exams.

4.54
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for allowing this matter to be debated today. Yesterday, when the matter came up, you thought that it would be good if we debated this matter in detail. Much as we have been experiencing and seeing a lot of demolition of primary schools and government assets in the cities, allow me also to talk about those that happen in the rural areas.

In the year 2013, we got a very big problem in Agago, in Paimol Sub County. A primary school called Wipolo Soloti, which is near where we had two martyrs, Daudi Okello and Jildo Irwa – those of you who are Catholic and subscribers to that faith will know this. A primary school was been built there about 20 years ago but to our surprise, one man called Mr Etyangu  just started claiming that the land belongs to him and he got a court order to demolish the school.

When the matter came to my attention, I took the initiative to talk to the community and see how we could resolve the matter. I thank the DEO so much because he tried his best to have the problem solved. However, according to the policy in this country, the school management committee is the one responsible for issues regarding school property, but I think it should go beyond them. If somebody decided to drag the school to court, the school management committee may not have the ability to defend themselves and then at the end of the day, somebody gets a court order to demolish the school, a property that serves the whole community. It has been a very painful moment and up to now, the school is just in balance. Any moment that school can be demolished. 

We also have Apar in Amuru District that has an issue regarding UWA. A district counsellor of Adjumani made a resolution to give that land away to UWA. In the end, Government wants to demolish a school that has been constructed to help the community. 

Madam Speaker, I have a few questions to raise: why doesn’t the Government come up before permanent structures are put up to help the community on land that does not have proper land documents that can help to defend the occupants in case somebody came to demolish the structures – (Member timed out.) 

4.58
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the proposal that we should investigate the activities of Uganda Land Commission. 

Secondly, there is an immediate problem at hand - the 1,400 students. Since yesterday, the Minister for Education is noncommittal on this matter. I therefore would like to propose that we get a clear statement from the Minister of 	Education not later than tomorrow on the steps that Government has taken on this matter to ensure that these students get their education. I think it is not something for next week or for further discussion; 1400 of our children are out stranded and we need an answer from the Minister of Education on what will happen.

Thirdly, I am looking at Vision 2040 and under urban development the plan is to have five regional cities: Gulu, Mbale, Mbarara, Kampala and Arua and five strategic cities: Hoima, Nakasongola, Fort Portal, Moroto and Jinja. The plan is to ensure that by 2040, Uganda has hi-tech ICT world-class cities. 

For anybody who has visited a modern city, schools, health units and recreation centres are part and parcel of the city. When you look at Uganda now, let us just take Kampala as an example, in terms of public schools I think we are left with Nakasero Primary School only. The health centre that was at Uganda railways down there was sold last year by Uganda Land Commission. So, you wonder – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: I thank my honourable colleagues for giving way. The information I would like to give my colleague and the House is that even the school you are talking about, Nakasero, part of it has been leased out and part of its playground is under contention. So, we are likely to lose part of the school.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa. You can see policy reversals and inconsistencies. We want to move towards a world-class city and here we are giving away all schools, health centres. To me, whether the minister’s statement comes next week or the other day after Cabinet discussions, please help give policy direction to this country. 

In terms of urbanisation, where are we heading to? Are you telling us that in Uganda we shall ensure that all cities do not have public facilities in the city centre? Is this your policy decision, so that we can move with you? Are you telling us that to acquire public land in the city, I just move quietly to the Uganda Land Commission? Is there any procedure? (Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the whole House here that as you enter Mbarara Town, before you reach the barracks in Makenke, there is a market called Koranorya, which has got more than 800 persons. That land has been given to one person who is dead. The man died but he has got the title and now the children have come and said they want everybody in Koranorya, with permanent structures since the 1970’s, to get away from that land. 

I have mobilised the people in Mbarara to say if these rich men come to pick those fellows to evict them, if Government does not want to help us, we shall help ourselves. I thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rest my case.

5.02 
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I want to associate myself fully with the contribution of hon. Netalisire and hon. Magyezi. 

It was disturbing to see and hear the Minister of Education and Sports lamenting and claiming that she did not know what was happening and does not know the reasons why the school was demolished and yet, as hon. Baryomunsi has pointed out, notice was given. So, one would want to know what the Ministry of Education has done to try and assist the pupils who are in this school, most especially the pupils that are in P.7 and P.6.  

At least for Shimoni, we know that an arrangement was made to transfer the school to a different location so that the pupils had an alternative -(Mr Sseggona rose_)- I will not allow the clarification; you are eating into my time. For Shimoni, an alternative was given although it was distant. For this school, we would have expected that the ministry would also do something. When the permanent secretary wrote and nothing was done, what did the Ministry of Education do? It does not help for the ministers to come here and lament.

There is also the issue raised by hon. Magyezi about Kampala. In the Kampala Master Plan, are there no schools, no recreation centres, so that we know whether these facilities are in place in those areas where land is being held by Buganda and where land is being held by KCCA? 

Madam Speaker, it is also disturbing to hear KCCA claim that they did not have the powers to stop the eviction when KCCA is the one that has been harassing Ugandans and evicting them. How come that in this case, they were helpless? I think there is connivance and conspiracy; indeed, the Uganda Land Commission and the Buganda Land Commission should be investigated.

5.04 
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am disappointed because the ministers responsible are not here; I do not know whether they are hearing in camera, but we shall go ahead. 

As much as we are asking the Minister of Lands about the ownership of this land and that he should give us an answer immediately, the most important thing now is the plight of the 1,443 children. Can the Minister of Education, please, not be adamant about this because it is her role? 

When they were going to demolish the school, by all means, information must have gone to the Ministry of Education about the demolition. Please, let her not shy away from her responsibility and tell us what she is going to do about the 1,443 children. Schools have already started and we cannot look on and lament when these children have nowhere to go. Please, honourable Minister of Education, come back to the House and tell us what your plan is. 

Secondly, thorough investigations about public land - We talk, investigations are done but as Parliament, if we elect a selected committee to investigate and a report is made, what is the Executive going to do about it? Can the Prime Minister also tell us what you are going to do about the report? This is because we have come up with very many reports and nothing has come out? 

So, two issues: Minister of Education, please tell us what you have done, and the Minister of Lands should come back to the House and tell us what you are going to do about it.

MR BESISIRA: Madam Speaker, when we started debating, both ministers we are referring to were present but in the middle of the debate, when we really expected them to respond, they all disappeared. Is it procedurally right for us to continue deliberating when the Minister of Education and Minister of Lands are not here? It is as if they have decided that what we are talking about is not important. They have gone away when we need them most. So, procedurally, are we moving well?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us concentrate on our debate. We will make resolutions that will guide them whether they are here or not.

5.08 
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the responsibility of Government, through various agencies, to protect the interests of Ugandans and their property. Irrespective of who owns this land, it is incumbent upon Government to protect these children. 

Yesterday, I advised KCCA in our meeting; I told them, “Look, you should be humane in whatever you are doing as long as you are handling human beings” and I want to repeat it here. They do not give sufficient notification. Therefore, it is important that whoever handled the eviction of those buildings should be brought to book. I told them, “Please, involve all stakeholders before you take any drastic action.” 

Whoever was involved, be it Buganda Land Board, KCCA or whatever authority, should be called to order. When you are dealing with human beings, with Ugandans, you should be humane; you should not be so brutal and mechanical. This is the advice you should give these people who are handling human beings. 

I told them that it is bad for our politics as a ruling party because we expect these people to vote for us but if you go on harassing them - I want to believe that maybe these people are subversive elements, sabotaging the good politics of the NRM. That was my concern and I think it should be the concern of all members. Therefore, my humble request, Madam Speaker, is that if you are a custodian of government assets or property, you must be very careful when handling human affairs. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.11
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion by saying that the Uganda Land Commission needs to be investigated. 

The only thing that Uganda Land Commission is doing is to dish out all the government land. It is not only here; I remember last year, I raised an issue to the minister that the Uganda Land Commission must first have all titles of government land. They are not doing that; the best they are doing is simply dishing out all the government land, with or without titles. So, they need to be investigated or even their powers should be trimmed. 

Their powers should be trimmed. Any land they issue out should be done with the approval of Cabinet. Cabinet should be involved. Here the minister is lamenting, they do not even know what the Uganda Land Commission is doing. All of a sudden, the land is going and the minister is not aware and everybody is not aware.

Secondly, soon Kampala City will be rid of all the poor people. It seems there is a policy where all the poor should be cleared out of the city. It is the children of the poor living in urban areas and providing for us good services that are studying in such public schools, but now if they are all being demolished -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I never wanted to come in but I would like to give the member some information. When you evaluate what the Uganda Land Commission is doing, it is really dangerous. One time, the Ministry of Health rehabilitated a health centre III on Nkrumah Road and all of a sudden, one investor came in and they demolished the health centre III. I remember in the Seventh Parliament, Lukwago came here and inquired but it ended there.

Today, go to Naguru; Naguru Hospital was constructed with partners to decongest Mulago but because of the circus there, it is a sad story. Kampala Capital City Authority is fighting for ownership, the Uganda Land Commission is fighting for ownership, the Ministry of Health is fighting for ownership and the whole building and infrastructure is dilapidated because they want to give out that public land.

MS LILLY ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want Government to tell us if they do not have plans to develop Uganda. If they want to develop Uganda, is Kampala the only place where all the development must take place? Can’t they take all these other investors to other parts of the country? 

We need Jinja to become a city and also other parts of the country. We need to take development to other areas. Why can’t we leave Kampala the way it is, to be a historical city, and we develop other cities where we can take all these developments and balance development in the country? I submit.

5.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWDs Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas we are talking about land and we do not know the owner of the land, whether it is the Uganda Land Commission or Buganda, I am more worried about the learners and the teachers. I am sitting here wondering where the teachers are going to get their salaries from. They had accommodation in the same school and now they have been displaced. 

I do not know whether we look at the human rights of the people before we act because the evictions, especially in Kampala, are becoming horrible. People are evicted at 3.00 a.m.! Somebody comes with a tractor and razes the home and does not mind whether property is destroyed and they do the work because they have the power. 

I think we represent the people -(Interjection)- I have information that I want to pass and then I will give way. Madam Speaker, this thing is beyond the Ministry of Lands and even the Ministry of Education. It really needs to be checked because people only think of money. These are individuals against over 1,000 young people and against many teachers - I do not know how many teachers because the motion has not brought out the fate of the teachers. Ministry of Public Service, where are you going to send the next salary of these teachers? There is always a ceiling in schools and these teachers are going to suffer with their children and they are also going to be frustrated. 

Madam Speaker, the other day I was listening to the news and again over 1,000 people were thrown out of the railways land, very early in the morning. People were crying. What human face do we have in Uganda? Even if somebody goes to a radio - I heard one director saying that when you want to give a child an injection, you give it when the child is sleeping so that by the time it wakes up the pain from the injection has already gone. Yes, I heard that over the radio.  How do you come to evict people in a painful manner? We shall answer for the tears of these people because they cry and talk a lot of issues. (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Mama, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give was hinted on by hon. Sseggona hinted and I just want to emphasize it. 

The problem we have in Kampala is absence of political leadership, which has actually led to absence of political supervision. The other day, His Excellency the President was approving a plan to demolish Nakivubo and no councillor, mayor of any urban council, not even the Lord Mayor, was aware, not even us, the MPs of Kampala. Thank you very much.

MS ASAMO: Thank you, honourable colleague. The worst part is that KCCA says they did not know about the eviction. When we come to the House, nobody knows about the eviction. Where did these people come from? Was it from heaven or -(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I really appreciate that the current debate is about the eviction of the pupils of Nabagereka Primary School. However, Madam Speaker, you must have witnessed that the debate has moved so much into the way we handle our land matters.

The issues I am going to mention here point so much to how much danger I fear is coming ahead of us because of the way Uganda handles its land cases. One, before any title is secured, there must be procedures that should be followed. I may not go through these procedures but the title should be secured by people; when the application is made, the local land board visits the sub counties in the local councils, the districts give them minutes and even the occupants - the tenants - should be able to sign and consent that they are going to be compensated. 

However, I have witnessed a problem. I am the chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we also handle land matters. What you find is that the land commission here in Kampala offers titles minus anybody’s involvement from the grassroots. The case in Mbale is a reference point. We went to Mbarara and the chairman LCV and the land board do not know where the titles come from. So, we need to move very quickly as Parliament to deter the Uganda Land Commission from issuing titles to whoever comes. 

Secondly, on the concern about land for government institutions, we have got a lot of cases in our hands. We have a lot of information; a lot of institutions like part of Makerere, Kawanda Research Station and many police stations are going to be evicted because they do not have titles. 

What you find is that the Uganda Land Commission here in Kampala offers titles minus anybody’s involvement from the grassroots. The case in Mbale is a reference point. We went to Mbarara to the Chairman LCV and the land board does not know where the tittles come from. So, we need to move very quickly as Parliament to deter the Uganda Land Commission from issuing titles to whoever comes. 

Secondly, the concern about land for government institutions; we have got a lot of cases in our hands. We have a lot of information; a lot of institutions like part of Makerere, Kawanda Research Station and many police stations are going to be evicted because they do not have titles or if they are sitting on rented land or leases, they have not been paid for because in the Uganda Land Commission, there is not much enough land fund.

My proposal, Madam Speaker, is that we should provide enough money for all the land going to government entities to be titled immediately. That will clear out all these things because Nabagereka Primary School has been there for many years. No one of us cared whether it had a title or not. We are simply lamenting now when we are faced with this predicament. So, we need to do much more because land is becoming a civil war issue now. It is very big, uncontrolled and people are coming to grab land all the time -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give hon. Biraaro and members is that irrespective of the ownership of this land - because members have been carried away by who owns this land; once a case like this we have on our hands, Nabagereka Primary School started way back in 1966. So, even if you are a titled owner, you have no right to evict a bona fide or lawful occupant of land. So this question does not go to whether the land now has reverted to the Buganda Land Board or was under the Uganda Land Commission. The people we protect in our areas do not have titles but they are entitled to stay on the land. Particularly, the 2010 Land (Amendment) Act empowers occupants both lawful and bona fide and that is why as hon. Biraaro has said, even if you are going to obtain a lease by the investor, there must be conditions you must satisfy. Are there tenants or occupants on the land? Have they been compensated? It is then that you can be issued with a lease. But whether you have a title or not, you have no right or power to evict a lawful and bona fide occupant on the land!

5.22
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Public land is for the public; what motivates the Uganda Land Commission or the district land boards to allocate public land which is being used for public purpose? That is the question we should put across. And the answer is simply that the people entrusted with those offices are using them to benefit themselves. By the time you give away public land being used for public purpose, you must get something in return and that is why it is quicker that we start investigating the Uganda Land Board and the district land boards. (Applause) 

I heard the President say “we want to reclaim swamps” before we got for the swamps, we must get the people who gave away the swamps because we cannot get taxpayer’s money to reclaim when the thugs who gave them away are available. Once we take them to Luzira, then we will deal with this. 

You will remember when Mayanja Nkangi, the then Minister for Finance, lost the job he said, “I wish I had taken the money of sugar.” Somebody brought him money for taxes for sugar and he refused to take it when he was Minister of Finance and when he lost, he wished he had taken that money because he was suffering with poverty. When he became the Chairman of the Uganda Land Commission, he became younger -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala Mafabi, I do not think you should say those things about someone who cannot explain how he looks today and how he will look tomorrow. Please withdraw it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I withdraw it. But I want to say that anybody who works with the Uganda Land Commission and in district land boards are the happiest people. They do not have stress because they get public asset and utilise them for their own benefit.

In 2004, I remember before Ruhindi became the minister, whoever was here in Parliament may recall when he raised the issue of Butabika land; he almost shed tears. And he said that the law is clear, the land is invested in the Uganda Land Board in the interest of the people – the owners at that time like Butabika Hospital, like the school. Now, those who took the Nabagereka School, surely even squatters are compensated. I got land in Namugongo here but I had to pay squatters. I am an individual; that one who took the Nabagereka School, we want to assume the children and the school were squatters. Before you compensate them, you cannot evict them. 

The land valuers must be there but quickly, I want to propose that we need to have an updated list of all public land titles in Kampala and even districts. The reason is to know where our public land is.

Secondly, for any land which has been given away, they must also categorically state it why that land was given. And what was the benefit which accrued to Government to the public as a result of giving way that land - not for sale purposes.

Thirdly, the committee to investigate should have been set by the other week but unfortunately, Parliament was I recess. It should be set immediately with clear terms to investigate the allocation of public land to private people.

Madam Speaker, Shimoni is down here; Parliament is fighting to expand every minute. In fact, if Shimoni was given to Parliament to expand, which is a public duty, it would have been better - (Interruption)

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much for giving way and I thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give is very crucial. On the drive to my home, there used to be a very big forest called Nonve; home where I was born in Kakiri. It has all been divided into plots. We used to have land for the Ministry of Information here in Bugolobi, it is gone. The land at the Coffee Marketing Board is gone; there is the place where the poor people used to sell their goods - park yard - it is gone.

Then I heard that they have been clearing houses in the road reserve; there is one house in Makerere near the main gate. It is in the road reserve and it is not cleared. So there are the equals and the non-equals. This is animal farm -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, and as I end my information these children of Nabagereka - I love education, I struggled for education; but for us to be here and not condemn whoever put down the school, it is very unfair and I condemn that person.

Secondly, for us to sit here and just debate about the land board, we should immediately investigate and tell that person who put down the school to immediately compensate. This is a school for the future of Ugandans to be here and if over 1,000 children have nowhere to go, I feel ashamed and I think the government should act very quickly.

This is the right information, Madam Speaker, that I wanted to give.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: He has given me very good information, Madam Speaker, and I am sure the House has also benefited. I want to say that if we do not take action now, then we have no other day to do it because the future of Uganda is in education and whoever did this act, we must act. 

I thank the movers of the motion. It is timely, the quicker we act as Parliament, the better for us. As hon. Moses Ali said, the House has merged and I can tell you that on this, we have merged. I thank you.

5.32
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What happened to Nabagereka Primary School is rather unfortunate to both the pupils as well as the teachers. 

I believe this point in question is an eye opener for a number of cases, some that have never reached the ears or eyes of this august House. It is very unfortunate that a number of cases have been aired where residents have been evicted by similar people who have managed to acquire leases of this kind. 

In my constituency, it is very unfortunate that people are acquiring these same leases to take over swamps, to mine sand and some are actually going ahead to get this same resource from Lake Victoria because they have the leases. They believe they now have the ownership to take this up and I do support the movers of this motion to institute an investigation into this matter not only the leases here in Kampala, but also at the district level because a lot is being done -(Interruption)   

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give to this House is that when we talk about the Nabagereka Primary School, Government had an interest and every financial year, we were appropriating money for capital development in the school. So, to say that the ministers will discuss it at Cabinet and inform us of what has happened, I think it raises a very big concern. Actually, we need to know how much we have invested in terms of capital development in the school and how much we received in return before we accept a demolition. Thank you.

MR KIYINGI KENNETH: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. One thing that really interested me is the timeliness of these people in the Uganda Land Commission. I think they had it in mind that in the shortest time possible the leases would be transferred to the Buganda Land Board. It is very unfortunate because even in Mpigi District, a number of transactions were done just before Government surrendered the titles back to Buganda government. So, it is very unfortunate and I do call upon the relevant authorities to carry out the investigation as soon as possible -(Interruption) 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I am giving to this august House as one of the representatives of Kampala is that if we do not do something very urgently in a way of ensuring that the few remaining public schools are protected, because right now we are talking about the Nabagereka Primary School but you remember the Shimoni, Kyaggwe Road Primary School, East Kololo and others. So, we had many public schools in the city but it is a deliberate policy and unless we check on those ones who are trying to grab this public land, even the remaining few like Nakivubo Blue, Nakasero and Kitante are under threat and unless the government comes out and tells us whether it is a policy that we do not want any public school in the city. Otherwise, the people are there eyeing them and sooner than later, they will be taken.

MR KIYINGI KENNETH: As I conclude, the future of Uganda lies in our schools. We need to fight very hard to see that we protect the schools that we have for the future of the next -(Member timed out.)   

5.36       
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hear the endless list of schools that are affected and that will soon lose their land and it will probably help this House if we also add the regional referral hospitals, prisons and many other government institutions.
The only challenge I have this afternoon is I think I am rather lost. I support the motion and all the prayers in it but I find myself in an awkward position that I kind of almost differ from the entire House. That makes me really terrible this afternoon because, Madam Speaker, I have heard colleagues talking about a powerless government in the face of land grabbing. I have heard the words conspiracy, powerful individuals, I have heard of a government that does not know what is happening and I ask, is that the true position? Is that what we have in Uganda? 

And I find this really disturbing because all of us know - there is this story we were told in primary four of all the animals going to visit the sick lion and no foot marks getting out. All the animals, all the schools and hospitals you are talking about are pointing to either a powerless government or to a government that has just left it to be or is part of this. And I think we need to focus back and ask Government; we cannot pretend that Government does not know, no, Government knows!

Tell me of any individual in this country – I, Alaso as I am, whether I can walk out from here and begin grabbing land from Shimoni; is it possible? Can the police ignore me if I said today that I am walking to work or I am carrying a yellow pig in my bag, can the police ignore me? I think we have to be honest as a country, Government you have let us down -(Applause)- you are part of the conspiracy to take away public land, no individual is more powerful than the Government of Uganda.

So, the grabbing of land is by the authorisation of the Executive. Yes, this land is getting a way when the Executive is part and partial of the decision to have it taken away. But I shudder - hon. Nyanzi, you will ask for space and you will talk. It is my considered opinion that as Government, you are part of this conspiracy. It is Government policy and I shudder to think about public services in this country. What will happen about the children of the poor who need public education, what will happen for the people who need public hospitals and the inmates who anyway will be taken to prison?

Madam Speaker, I think it is important even in the meantime, how can the Minister of Education say she is powerless and that she cannot do anything? Let her go and call the staff of the Ministry of Education tomorrow and go and do an audit of the records of those schools wherever they are or call a public meeting and find out whether children have been placed somewhere. Otherwise, the goings-on here are legitimised by -(Member timed out.)

5.54
MS LILLY AKELLO (Independent, Woman representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me way. I also want to add my voice to the unfortunate events that happened at Nabagereka Primary School. Listening to the response of the Minister of Education yesterday, I was very disappointed at the level of lack of coordination among the ministries or between the ministries concerned. Where are we headed? My question is that as a country, what is our priority? Is it investment or education? What is the use of investors coming into our country if our children are not educated? Who will be employed in such investments?

So, let us rethink very strongly about this and I urge the Minister of Education not to just cry foul but do something; take action and ensure that these children who do not have where to go actually have a chance, a right to education. I would not expect that the future of our children will lie in their own hands like my sister Winnie put it, the Nairobi scenario. I wouldn’t want it to reach that level. We are here and I think we can do something about this. So, I urge the ministries to take this House very seriously, to take Uganda seriously and next time when you come, come very prepared to give a very concrete answer to this House and to Uganda as a whole. I thank you.

5.42
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speake. Indeed the school in question lies at the edge of the constituency that borders the constituency that I represent and due to the ease of access, it has happened that the majority of the pupils that are being affected come from Rubaga North. So, I am speaking under that spirit. I am a beneficiary of the former school; I am now a victim as a parent being their representative to this Parliament.

As it has been noted by several speakers, Kampala is the most affected by what is not going well in the whole country. The list of eight schools that were mentioned by the mover of this motion all lie within Kampala, I don’t intend to mention them again. The Government of Uganda owns all that belongs to it. There have been questions about who owns this land but because the school was a public school, the Government of Uganda was the sitting tenant on the land no matter who owned the same. The sitting tenant had all it would take to negotiate the first deal even if the land lord was putting the same land on sale. 

Madam Speaker, I have examples, particularly in my constituency, where the Government of Uganda is becoming very irresponsible to the schools that it owns. I have a school called Kigobe Namungoona Primary School in my constituency, the head teacher was recently sued and she was being accused of trespassing on the land belonging to the school and the school belongs to the Government.

The Ministry of Education was put on notice, the teacher was summoned to the court and no official from the ministry attended. Up to now, the case is still lying with the Chief Magistrates Court in Mengo, I think lacking prosecution. No one has ever gone to check on this head teacher apart from me as the area MP. 

That is why, Madam Speaker, I would like to support the motion that the conduct of the Uganda Land Commission should be investigated. The conduct of the Ministry of Education in the instant case and that of KCCA should also be investigated -(Interruption)

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that, we need to investigate the Ministry of Education because they don’t know the ownership of the land of the various schools in this country. When we were investigating the issue relating to the payment of teachers, the PS told us openly that she even did not know the problem which was in her own ministry.
It is a very serious issue that we investigate this ministry about what they are up to as they see government schools being grabbed by the so-called investors.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you honourable colleague for that information. As I conclude, Uganda has one of the lowest primary school completion rates. I was checking and Kenya stands at 84 percent primary school completion rate while Uganda has only 18 percent – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. As he stresses the point of investigating KCCA, in 2009 the land where Kansanga Primary School sits was under threat of being grabbed by one of the investors in Kampala. Since that time, we have tried to force KCCA to acquire a land title for that school and up to today we have failed. So, I support hon. Kasibante when he says that KCCA and the Ministry of Education should be investigated because many of the schools in Kampala do not have land titles. All land titles are not there and we have tried to ensure that these schools get titles but all in vain.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, Kitante Hill School today, the playground is on sale. I think it is waiting for bidders. Nakasero, the playground has already been mentioned that it is on sale. I think it waiting for bidders and the minister is here and not bothered.

5.49
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I got to know that this matter was coming this afternoon, I took time to read the Hansard, particularly the Hansard that was produced on 14 December 2006. It was a Thursday. 

Madam Speaker, it so happened that on that very day, you were the one presiding over this House as the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. On that day, the MP for Kampala Central, hon. Erias Lukwago moved a motion in this House similar to the one being moved by hon. Ssekikubo now, to preserve Shimon Demonstration School. That day as the debate was concluded, 59 of the members of Parliament in the Eighth Parliament did support the demolition of Shimon Demonstration School. Only 29 members stood for the preservation of that school. 

And that day, Madam Speaker, a precedent was set that in Uganda you can demolish a school to construct a hotel or a mall. I remember reading in the Hansard, hon. Obua stood for Shimon Demonstration School -(Laughter)– and, Madam Speaker, you were one of those people who pleaded for the school but we lost the debate. 

It has become very common now that institutions holding land in trust for Ugandans, either churches, districts, the Uganda Land Commission have decided to sell off school land, market land, play grounds, hospitals to the so-called investors. The doctrine of public trust is no longer respected that people think that because ‘we are chairmen at districts, we can dispose of land any how because we are holding it for the public.’ 

If Shimon Demonstration School was demolished under the disguise that they were going to offer this land to a prince called Al-Waleed to construct a hotel - Kingdom Hotel - and we are now aware that another company, Kingdom Hotel Uganda has come up and they are sharing that land there just next to this place - how can we then stop the sale of Nabagereka land? The poor in Uganda have lost everything they have been holding on to and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, because you recently raised this question; that ‘don’t the poor have the right to live in this country Uganda?’ Who is going to stand for the poor when even the government, which is supposed to protect their interests, can connive with mafias to grab land?

It is true, with due respect, that the honourable Minister for Education here has said that she is in much pain but what pain is that? When the school was demolished on 23rd January, it took a member from Sembabule to come here and raise the matter and this is when the minister came up to tell this House that she was also in big pain. Madam Speaker, can we rule out connivance in this matter?

Lastly, we cannot run away from the problems that bedevil Kampala at the moment. We are supposed to have a metropolitan physical planning authority. This is an authority which is supposed to indicate where we should have a school and why we should have a school there, where we should have a market, but up to now the minister has refused to constitute this authority -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Just half a minute for you to conclude. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was saying is that we are supposed to have a Greater Kampala Metropolitan Physical Planning Authority under section 21 of the Kampala Capital City Act. This is the authority which is supposed to undertake all planning of the city and the neighbouring districts of Mukono, Wakiso and Mpigi. 

This authority has not been constituted up to now. Kampala was last planned as a city majorly in 1972. So let me be told, who this person is now, which authority did authorise the removal of a school from a certain plot of land and the construction of say a mall or a hotel in the same place - (Interruption)

CAPT. MUKULA: I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my colleague and the House is on the metropolitan physical planning authority of Kampala city. It is critical that the House, particularly the Leader of Government Business, takes note of this. Why? Lack of planning is going to cause a disaster to this city. If you are driving all the way to Mukono on the right, you will see a big depot of fuel near a residential and housing centres and schools - even on your way to Kyambogo. I want to say that that particular station or that depot has over four million litres of fuel. Should there be a disaster in that particular unit, we can have Kampala burning and those surrounding areas. You also have a long Bombo road one of the major petrol stations that has lost the specifications of a petrol station. It is also a station where you can keep as much fuel as you want and they have up to one million litres of fuel. 

The purpose of putting together a physical planning authority is very critical, crucial and the time is now. If not, we are in for a disaster, no wonder such actions are taking place. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: No, your time is gone. I just wanted to add that the most prestigious address on Kampala road, plot No. 1, is also a petrol station -(Laughter)- yes plot No. 1 Kampala is a petrol station.

5.57
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank hon. Ssekikubo for raising this motion. Government has a lot of mafias operating behind the scenes. These people who are conniving to take all this land - see what happened to Shimoni even after we struggled so hard for it. It is there lying idle. You remember how we cried with those who were evicted from Naguru, up to today that land is lying vacant and I am told the tycoons are looking for money and ways of selling it out to those who can and the list is endless. So, Madam Speaker, it is really with a lot of pain that we look at all these scenarios. 

Bobi Wine sang a song telling Jennifer Musisi that Kampala City should develop together with the people. If you see the harassment being meted on the lowly of the lowly, they have been harassed, now even where there are taking their children, they are being inconvenienced, they are being chased; where do they go? What do they do? So, it is incumbent upon Government that you protect those who cannot fend for themselves. Develop the city and allow the poor to be there. The rich would not wash, scrub and sweep the roads and do all that work, carry the garbage if the poor are not there. And some of those poor are your relatives; let us not pretend. We need people who are going to those schools and people who are using those facilities. So, we should not pretend that we do not have poor people who need us to be their advocates. 

Madam Speaker, on the plight of Government facilities, the Permanent Secretary wrote to the Police and that showed some concern. However, these people are bigger than these ministers. In Lubigi, are the wetlands – Hon. Maria Kiwanuka, it was only her legs that saved her. They were going for her neck. They cannot handle; these people here are pretending. These tycoons are bigger than them. This country is being run by mafias.

Hon. Mukula is there; he was Minister of State for Health. Butabika land was taken, and he wrote letters; they are there in the files of the Public Accounts Committee – when he was protesting, to try to defend the land. When the AYA company was coming to construct, the Minister of State for Information - it was only his legs that saved him. They were razing down the house when the minister was in office, here in Nakasero. So, what are we talking about? 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that there is a lot at stake. Uganda Land Commission should really be investigated. These people own land titles of wetlands, of central forest reserves, of our schools. One time we said they are about to buy the lakes. So, what is safe in Uganda? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, there should be a serious investigation on the Uganda Land Commission and even the Ministry of Lands. When hon. Nantaba said there were mafias –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Hon. Ibi. Madam Speaker, if I had the powers, we would just dissolve the Land Commission. The level of corruption in the Land Commission is unprecedented. No wonder, you see all these here. I had a personal experience when I was trying to get the extension or a variation of the lease for my land in Ntinda. I went through a lot until I threatened to fight in the office. After two years that is when I got the approval -(Interjections)- Yes, sometimes you also have to become wild.

Madam Speaker, your PPS went for one house, which was advertised in Tororo. He was given but they told him they could not give him a land title until he pays Shs 10 million. Yet, the land next to it, which was about half an acre, was costing Shs 12 million. Now, if I give you Shs 10 million, I rather buy the other land title. Ask your PPS – from that office of the Land Commission here.

So, we should not be hiding our heads in the sand and pretend. If hon. Migereko does not sort that place, he will be regarded as part and parcel of that Land Commission.

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, we should give hon. Nantaba’s allegation a chance - she said there are powerful people even in the Ministry of Lands who ought to be investigated. Therefore, the Ministry of Lands should not go unabated. They are part of this problem here that we are facing -(Member timed out.)

6.04
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said about this issue. But, I remember, even before I joined Parliament, I used to watch parliamentary proceedings about the issue of Shimoni. I believe it was even hotter than this. But, at the end of the day, nothing was done. 

I want to say that this is a very serious deliberate move by all the concerned ministries. A lot of blame has been put on the Ministry of Lands headed by hon. Migereko but I can equally say that this deliberate move was conspired by a number of ministries. For example, the Ministry of Internal Affairs headed by one of our colleagues, who is not here right now. But, the IGP in that ministry is a trusted friend of mine and he is very tough. But, how could Police escort the goons to Nabagereka Primary School and to protect the demolition of that place? The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, how could a normal human judge issue a court order when that judge has children, who are going to better schools, to clear the demolition of a school like Nabagereka Primary School?

As I was consulting hon. Fox Odoi about the issue of powers, I believe we have given a lot of powers to the Ministry of Lands. I believe as Parliament, we can come up with a very serious resolution that no other public institution should be demolished before Parliament is consulted. Otherwise, the situation will just move on like that and I believe this one also will end up the same way Shimoni went and some other public institutions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.06
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This has been a very painful afternoon for all of us; painful because our place in the world, in future will depend on the quality of the education that we give our children. It will also depend on the number of the children we take to school. So, if any authority in Uganda thinks that you can undermine the education of our children, you are only putting the entire future of Uganda in jeopardy.

And, for that matter, we must all speak with one voice. We must all condemn this action in the strongest terms possible. I stand up to support the motion moved by the hon. Ssekikubo. 

Madam Speaker, the framers of the 1995 Constitution were very farsighted ladies and gentlemen; very farsighted honourable citizens of Uganda. In the Objective Principles of State Policy, Objective XVIII, they stated very specifically that the State of Uganda has a duty to provide free and compulsory basic education to all the children of Uganda. This was way back in 1995. They also stated that the state must ensure that Ugandans acquire the highest level of education. 

Now, I would like to ask, are we going to provide compulsory, free basic education under trees in 2015? Are we going to provide this education on the streets of Kampala? Shall we conduct classes in swamps or on top of trees? If you lose all the infrastructure necessary for the provision of education, you are acting unconstitutionally, you are killing all of us as a country. And, that can never be acceptable.

Madam Speaker, we all know that land is a very scarce resource and I think the problem was created by God; I think He created land for only one day and He stopped. He stopped manufacturing land on the very first day and then, He created potent men and very fertile women. So, our population keeps on increasing while land is static. So, there will always be pressure on land but when you are determining what use you put your land resources to, you must be guided by cost -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ababiku, then we should go to the recommendations.

6.10
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the mover of this motion because you have really helped this country to know what exactly is happening. Even those who did not know are now aware. 

I have listened carefully. I am in wonder because I got to know that this school was established in 1966. Government invested in this school, only for it to be demolished last month! So, my concern is; what was by then the rightful thing in that school and what came to be wrong in January 2015? (Applause)

Secondly, Madam Speaker, many people have raised concern about how government is failing. I condemn the ministers -(Laughter)- because this thing happened and up to now, we do not have a report from that side. At least, if they fail to take charge of their ministries, they should have brought a report here to say that they failed. Then we would have known what was happening.

Madam Speaker, I have realised the hope of those in abject poverty only lies in this House and not in Cabinet. This is because we have discussed in this House many of the things affecting the people who are in abject poverty. Therefore, honourable ministers, when you fail and get compromised, bring it here. (Laughter) if you do not bring issues here, then we condemn you and take it that you are part of the connivance.

As we have these laws and policies, today we are talking about the public institutions but even in our villages, the rich are evicting poor people. People have been evicted from a whole village. I have cases in Adjumani, people are wondering where they are going because the rich have the money and the connivance lineage of people whom to contact.

Therefore, as we sit here, Madam Speaker, those who cannot afford to follow the process of acquiring land titles are going to be landless. Are these laws for the rich? I, therefore, strongly support the investigation in the Land Commission -(Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you hon. Ababiku. The information I would like to give you is that even where there is a land title, like in Makerere University Business School, the land has been taken by the mafias under the Uganda Land Commission. You saw that in Public Accounts Committee. 
Thank you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, as I wind up -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, hon. Ababiku, for giving me way. I believe this Land Commission is a custodian of government property, especially the land titles. I would like clarity from the front bench, whether they have the mandate to continue negotiating and selling government property. This is because all the indicators show that wherever they are, the custodians of public land are the ones who are giving it out. 

I think there is a big problem in that and I wonder who should take charge. Is it the Minister of Land that should take charge of the Land Commission or they are on their own to do anything they want with regards to giving away government property? I thank you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you for that information. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, there is need to even review the provision of the existing laws in relation to land so that we are able to have provisions to protect those who do not have the capacity to help themselves.

Then also, Madam Speaker -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the resolutions. Yes, acting Leader of Opposition.

6.16
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe that in the absence of the Leader of the Opposition, it will not be like we had the absence of the Prime Minister not allowing Prime Minister’s Question Time. I hope I am allowed to conclude. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Ogwal, I do not think you should mislead the House on what transpired. I said that under our rules, no one can substitute the Prime Minister, for Question Time.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I am being conscious that I hope I am not substituting the Leader of the Opposition. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think first of all, I want to congratulate you and the House for giving plenty of time for us to debate this matter of land grabbing, particularly in and around the city. 

The issue of land is very hot in Uganda and you know that right from the debate in the Constituency Assembly up to now, the issue of land has been hot. I would want to urge members, particularly the young ones, to take trouble to read the Hansard of what transpired in the Constituency Assembly when we were debating the issue of land. Every year, what we discussed in the Constituency Assembly has been proved to be true. I think we were really prophesying for the future of this country. 

But I thank God that there are nationalists in this country who can stand up to defend the rights of the helpless. I thank God that there are still people in this Parliament who speak about the power that be, because they are defending the ordinary people who sent them here in Parliament. They are defending the future of Uganda who will judge them on the right side of history.

I would like members to read the Hansard of the debate that was held in this Parliament on the 14 December 2006. It is very interesting what the late Dr Okullo Epak said about Shimoni Demonstration Primary School. And it is also very interesting to reflect on what our mother and dear sister, Mrs Museveni said about that same issue. And today, we are talking about more or less the same thing, but different years. 

I am very happy that my friend and sister - I prefer to call her daughter - Princess Kabakumba, is here in the House. I used to colonise that corner and Princess Kabakumba was one of my nearest neighbours. The moment the princess became serious about the land in Bunyoro, it did not take long for her to become a minister. (Laughter) Sitting near me was another sister, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, who comes from the same clan with me. She used to sit right there near me. The moment she became hot about land in Buganda, particularly from her area, it did not take long for her to become a minister. (Laughter)These are facts! As for Ssekikubo I do not know, since I am still investigating. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, what I am trying to say is that it is high time we as members of Parliament became conscious of our role as leaders. It is really very important that we defend those who are helpless. We have talked about the helpless people of Bunyoro, where oil is being mined right now, the unfair compensation of those people, direct grabbing of land while  the owners are seeing and we are here in Parliament talking in a circle as if we are not aware.

We are aware that government land is being encroached on and being given away. I have personally requested the Minister of Land to give us the database or the record of those who have bought land in Bunyoro, where oil has been discovered in the last five years. 

We have not got that list up to now. We have asked for the list of all the land that the government owns in this country. This is so that each one of us can begin to look for those pieces of land in our respective areas and we can find a way of protecting them. Up to now, the minister has not come up with that list. 

He is here in front of me and he knows it. Every time he is called to the Committee on Infrastructure, we have demanded to know the title deeds and the pieces of land government owns but we cannot get them.

Madam Speaker, you were here. I read your contribution on the issue of land. It is very touching but you are still presiding over the same kind of debate. It is high time we told this government if really Parliament is an institution that can audit the actions of government. It is important that we ask the government to come to this Parliament with a clear well-defined policy on land. The government should come to Parliament with clear identification of land that it uses. 

Right now, we are not sure whether Butabika will not be grabbed in the next few months. This is because it starts as a rumour. The land has already been taken almost right up to the gate and very soon, the hospital will be taken over. In case it happens in the future and some of us are not here, whether on earth or in Parliament, look at the Hansard. It will happen, if we do not take a decisive decision on land. 

So, it is not about political parties or supporting any government or any individual. It is about identifying those evil forces in our midst. I thank God I am a Christian. We said that we do not fight against plagues and flood. We are not fighting a minister or the President but we are fighting the evil forces that are using the individuals, the ministry and our country to grab the pieces of land; the only thing that God has given us free is the land. 

I claim to be a Ugandan because I have a piece of land in Lango. When I die, I will be buried there. You all claim to come from Uganda because of land and now, you are freely giving it away. It is being grabbed as you are watching.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for making this contribution.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Leader of Opposition.

6.25
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the problem of land is very serious even outside this House. We have even started feeling it very seriously in Cabinet. Many government properties have been taken over by people who claim to be the owners of the land.

Last week, Cabinet decided to form a sub-committee to look into these problems. The threat under which government land is being sold or already sold and this Cabinet sub-committee is under hon. Adolf Mwesige, the Ministry of Local Government.

Secondly, the same Cabinet decided that the Prime Minister suspends the exercise in the Ministry of Lands, which is called re-entry involving land leased by the government. People will come and claim that this land is already expired and they want to re-own it. 

So, this person who is given that issue of re-entry is issued with land deeds. Immediately, that land becomes his or hers. Maybe, you can give us more information.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It is true that we have had a problem involving re-entry on those pieces of land. They have been leased by government for many years from religious institutions and individuals. The problem we have had is that there is an agreement between government and the land owner or the land lord with clear terms.

We have had a problem due to budgetary constraints to pay up ground rent and meet other obligations that are of a financial nature. One of the remedies where there has been a violation of the covenant is normally re-entry.

As a ministry, we have been resisting this but often times, the land lords have ended up in court and it has ruled in their favour. 

We are trying to find a solution to this. It will entail coming back to the House to make sure that money is voted for paying premium and ground rent. This is because most of these cases, for instance, the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine at Makerere where the church is insisting that all dues that have not yet been paid since the 1960’s must be paid. We need money!

We have had a problem of Njeru Stock Farm, Ntawo -(Interjections)- I was trying to clarify on re-entry.

MS EKWAU IBI: Madam Speaker, this House very well knows which ministries are well facilitated and well budgeted for and given enough resources. Ministry of Lands is right at the tail of government priority with all its problems. Our boarders are being taken. Other countries are moving in to Uganda 10 kilo metres as if the minister is not there. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to tell us that what he is trying to explain, when even he has been having unfunded priorities for over 20 years and they cannot get the funding - is he in order to promise this House hot air that they are about to do something, when they do not have the capacity to do it, because they are not a priority? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister was explaining the right of re-entry.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was consulting with colleagues that if the revelation is that when you talk about land, you become a minister – if that is the move, I do not know but I wish him success. (Laughter)

We have now understood re-entry and, therefore, this cabinet sub-committee that has been formed - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This government has a whole department of the Attorney-General’s Chambers and the Attorney- General is part of Cabinet. Is it in order for the Prime Minister to say that they have just understood re-entry now, yet it is a question of law? There is even a question of lease, which has covenants which clearly spell out the obligations of each party. He says that they have just understood that now. The Cabinet is now going to take it very serious. Is he in order to say that they have just understood now?

THE SPEAKER: What he meant was that they had ignored the repercussions of not paying the ground rent.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: So, that is the problem of understanding; we shall excuse him. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am actually concluding. What I am saying is that government supports the motion. Let it go ahead as we also push it from Cabinet. We shall solve the problem from various angles. That is possible. I accept the contribution. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, please read resolution number one.

Resolution No.1

Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament that –

    1. Government suspends all allocations and take-overs of land belonging to public schools, public health facilities and other government installations.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We need a timeframe on this and an enforcement mechanism. Therefore, I would like to propose that we put the words “with immediate effect”, meaning with effect from midnight tonight. And we also add that “Any violation of this resolution shall lead to automatic censure or dismissal of the persons involved”. (Applause)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I have said that we have supported this motion but supporting this motion does not mean that we are going to do it outside the existing law. Much as we have –(Interjections)- of course, every institution here has its own law. This motion can be implemented within the existing law. With “immediate effect” does not arise because we have to do it within the law. (Interjections) What are we going to do with Land Commission, with all these laws? 

So, I think that in as much as we agree that a step must be taken it should not be taken randomly as if we are going to –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: I would like to inform this House that Cabinet, where my good friend sits, had suspended the functions of Uganda Land Commission before. I think this is a matter, which the honourable minister must be in the know of. 

So, for us to say that “with immediate effect” is not in any way contradictory. The Uganda Land Commission is a question of the Constitution; even its functions are in the Constitution. But Cabinet had suspended its functions some time back. This is why I am saying that the Prime Minister should be in the know of this.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Now, the honourable member should explain what it means when we say “with immediate effect”. What does it mean? (Interjections) It means that as soon as we move from here? Then who will implement that? After saying that, we need somebody to implement it. And that implementation cannot be done by Parliament.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, you see, the mafia group can sit and in just one week, they dispose of all the files pending before them. And by the following week, they stop, after disposing everything. That is how this becomes very important, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, it is possible for us to sit here and deliberate and the Executive arm of Government could simply say that this has no effect. It is important that we put a timeframe otherwise, it will be redundant. Who will implement? It is the Executive and what is the mechanism for Parliament to ensure that this works? Within the law, we have a possibility of censuring the individual who renders our resolutions redundant. 

So, that is why I am proposing that we say “with immediate effect” and “any violation of this resolution, should lead to dismissal of the person who violates it.”

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on the issue of “With immediate effect” now that our learned friend has explained, I have no problem. But the issue of censure should not arise – (Laughter)– Yes, it does not arise because you would be punishing some people in advance, before even investigating or giving them chance to defend themselves. That would be a kangaroo court. Are we going to turn this Parliament into a kangaroo Parliament?

I think I object the issue of censure. Let people be censured in a proper way not in confusion like this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I want to agree with Gen. Moses Ali. Suppose the PS acts, then you censure the minister for what the PS did? Is that vicarious liability?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I want to agree with Gen. Moses Ali. And I am happy that he is also happy. The reason I agree with him is that, technically, you cannot provide for a penalty before someone has even committed the offence. And in any case, we have our weapon. We just carry our weapon here and anyone who is within our jurisdiction of censure, if he commits what we consider to be contempt of our resolution, we can always censure. So, as a mover, I want to concede to the proposal by hon. Magyezi, only to the extent of “with immediate effect”. Then I persuade my colleagues to drop the rest of the censure.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the resolution be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the resolution as amended be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution, as amended, agreed to.

Resolution two: Government suspends all evictions on public land without the due process of the law.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This contradicts itself, because these people are doing it illegally; what is happening now, is being done legally. Therefore, “Without due process of the law” should not be added. Let us just suspend.

MR	SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we proceed to the amendments proposed by Gen. Moses Ali, unless hon. Wilson Muruli Mukasa is disagreeing with his boss on the Floor. The proposal by Gen. Moses Ali, as I understand it is that we say “Suspend all evictions on public land.” And I do not see any problem with that.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that, that resolution be amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution as amended agreed to

Resolution three: Government expedites all investigations relating to allocation and evictions on public land.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the resolutions. I put the question that that resolution be approved.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution four: Government takes immediate steps to halt all developments on the land housing Nabagereka Primary School and suspends all plans approved on the said land.

THE SPEAKER: How do you suspend the plans?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, we know that whoever has been purportedly allocated this land, must have presented plans; for instance, to put malls and many more, other than the original plan of the school. For that matter, in order for this Parliament to curb this and restore the school, as a lesson to all others and to restore sanity in to the sector, any plans given by any Authority should be suspended for the use of the school. Therefore, it means that any person now claiming that he is going to put this land belonging to Nabagereka to another use,  those plans be suspended and this does not mean total cancellation but they are suspended until the investigations reveal otherwise.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the submission of the motion, it says, “… noting that in a letter to the Permanent Secretary, Minster of Education, the Executive Director warned of the impending eviction…” If we are talking about unapproved building plans and it is the Executive Director warning, it means there is no approved building plan. If at all the Executive Director knew that there was a problem, then there is no way KCCA would have approved the building plan. So, I do not think there is an approved building plan involved.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I rise to seek a point of clarification from the Attorney-General. The matters that have been laid on the floor, in connection with the resolution, may hinge on us traversing on matters that may be in the courts of law. I would like to seek clarification from the Speaker that if we as Parliament move decisively, we would not interfere with any due process in the courts of Law. 

That is very important because I would not like Parliament to move on a matter that becomes incompetent.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, before the Attorney-General comes in, because mine is also related to what hon. Mukula has raised. The courts of law have processes; our resolution here as Parliament cannot stop the process of the Judiciary. This Parliament is pronouncing itself on stopping any eviction; let us assume that tomorrow, the High Court in Kampala issues an order for an eviction. Will these resolutions we are passing be binding? That is why I am requesting that as we pass - especially the second resolution we have just passed, will it not be redundant, if tomorrow a court issues an order -

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, in order to take care of the concerns raised by hon. Mukula, we could just improve on three and not carry four. Assuming there is a court order which is being enforced, the best we could say is under three, as we have put it, “Government expedites all investigations…”, how the court order was obtained, under what circumstances and so on, “…relating to allocations and evictions from public land.” You can even say, “….in particular the Nabagereka land.” (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, when you look at three, for which I am glad to see my colleague conceding to, it is different from four and look at the background and spirit for the two of them. 

In three, we are telling them to expedite all investigations relating to the allocation and eviction on public land. In four, we are talking about immediate steps to halt all developments on the land. The purpose and spirit is under the Land Act. Hon. Ruhindi knows, once you evict unlawfully, even when you are the land lord, that eviction that does not take away the right of the bona fide occupant to reclaim, come back on to the same land. 

The point we are making is that if you do not suspend those plans and developments, after your investigations, if you establish that the eviction was unlawful, a lot would have been overtaken by events. It is for that reason that we want Government to approve, suspend and withdraw these plans according to the law. We are saying before you go into withdrawing plans and developments; stop them in the interim, pending your investigation. That is the spirit -(Interjections)- I will take the information from hon. Nambooze.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, hon. Medard Sseggona, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give is that the land policy functions are zoned. In this incident, the land was zoned, its purpose was for a school to be built there; it was never zoned for anything else. 
So the mere fact that we do not have the metropolitan physical planning authority, which would ordinarily de-gazette or rezone this area from the function of an education institution to another - knowing that we do not have that authority yet in place - when we allow development to be done on this land, in case those developments do not fit into the zoned function of being an education institution, then they would have defaulted highly on the plan of Kampala Capital City Authority because this land was originally zoned to house an education institution.

So I want to support the resolution as proposed basing on the fact that there was no rezoning of this land done by a competent body of Government and so we cannot allow a developer to make developments on this land without changing its user function. 

MR SSEGGONA: I think with that information, I rest my case and I hope my colleague has had sufficient answers.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am pleased to receive the alternative view. These days you have very popular alternative views but I normally approach these matters with an open mind because, if the intention of resolution (4), where you are saying, “Government takes immediate steps to halt all developments on the land housing Nabagereka Primary School and suspends all plans approved on the said land under due process,” then I would understand. 

If you are saying Government, for instance, should see to it that if there is sufficient reason to believe - as you were submitting that for instance, these were bonafide occupants legitimately in the place and they should not have been evicted - and therefore, under due process, takes steps to ensure that that order, which was granted by court is reversed without saying, we countermand what took place in court and everything that was sanctioned by court should stop, then I would agree. I believe I am understood, because otherwise, you would be really saying that we just go ahead and countermand what happened in court without reverting to court, which I think would cause a problem.

THE SPEAKER: What do you propose? Because we are now moving away - what do you propose?

MR RUHINDI: If there was no court order –(Interjections)- I am not aware because I have not investigated this matter. This is why I was saying that we allow investigations to take place and whatever comes out from these investigations, we take action, because we are taking action before even the investigations take place. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, can I specifically help the minister on this? The Attorney-General is my lawyer as Government. I am instructing my lawyer to go and do work in accordance with the law. I already have a letter from the Ministry of Education and Sports. There is also a letter from the Executive Director of Kampala Capital City Authority, asking the Attorney-General to take court action. Now, if the Attorney-General or the government is to ensure that our resolution is obeyed, he must do so in accordance with the law. I do not even have to say, you follow the law, it is a standing instruction by your training.

So, my view, Madam Speaker and colleagues, is that we take the resolution as proposed. If the Attorney-General has any reason to come back to Parliament to tell us that there was a court order and that he could not disobey it - even as Parliament, we cannot disobey a court order. 

But the background, which the Attorney-General must have as my lawyer is: as a client, I am telling you - and the facts are clear - the school has been in existence since 1966. It therefore qualifies to be a bonafide occupant on the land. At least from the factual point of view, you know how to defend your client. So, on that there is no debate that maybe if the investigations reveal -(Interruption) 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, there is a letter written by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, particularly by the Office of the Solicitor-General. The Deputy Attorney-General is the Minister of State for that Ministry. The Solicitor-General was giving guidance on this very matter – the letter is dated 22 December, 2014 - because there were lots of correspondences between the Ministry of Education, KCCA and the Solicitor-General’s office. 

On one of the issues where guidance was being given, the Solicitor-General said: “I have come to the conclusion on issue No.1 above that Nabagereka Primary School has an interest on the land as a bonafide occupant. Therefore, the land could not be available for lease to a third party without taking into account the interest of the school…” 

This means his very ministry already gave guidance that Nabagereka Primary School had a possessory interest on this land. Therefore, the ministry disagrees that this school should not have been demolished without protecting the interests of Nabagereka Primary School, as a bonafide occupant.

So, I just I want to inform the Attorney-General that his ministry has already put in writing its position on this matter. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, with that on the Hansard, you can carry the resolution. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to raise amendment on suspension. It is Government, which issues and approves the plans and if the plans were approved by Government and the same Government is the one saying, Nabagereka Primary School, as the bonafide occupant has interest - in that regard, I want to amend and say, “The government withdraws the approved plans,” if at all they are there, but not to suspend. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, as the movers, we concede.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I fully agree with the position of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. But I would like to only propose the redrafting of resolution (4) to read as follows: “Government takes immediate steps to halt all developments on the land housing Nabagereka Primary School and withdraws all approvals that may have been granted for redevelopment.”

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification as to how Government can withdraw the plans before the investigation. I thought that we would halt the exercise, as a temporary measure and carry out investigations. If investigations find that indeed the court order was invalid, then we can take further steps and withdraw all the plans. I think it will be unfair and improper to withdraw the plans before the investigations are done.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think I need to give to my colleague, the hon. Jovah Kamateeka, who is also the Chairperson of the Human rights Committee of Parliament, the information that there has never been a court order. Under no circumstances could there have been a court order with respect to the plan. There could only have been, if at all and if I am to stretch my speculation and imagination, a court order maybe on eviction and demolition but not on the approved plans, because there has never been a controversy.

Therefore, I think the government can withdraw the plan. Let us not be worried about that. I want to trust Government, whose legal representative is hon. Fred Ruhindi, on the procedures of withdrawing a plan even if it has been issued; we can trust him on that; I mean on the withdrawing of the plan.


MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to have is with respect to hon. Odoi’s amendment of halting all developments. The question is: development in which perspective? I am asking this because Nabagereka Primary School, we are told, has been demolished and we have got pupils there. How about if they want to put up temporary structures to house the pupils we are pleading for? So, what is going to be halted? If it remains that all developments be halted, that is vague. Who should do so?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you. I want to inform my brother, hon. Biraaro - of course now you are in charge of the works committee. Nabagereka Primary School is the bonafide occupant. If there is anything that this school wants to do for any purpose, there is nothing to be stopped in regard to that. The only thing we are stopping is the so called investor - the grabber - who used the Uganda Land Commission to grab this land. It should be the developments by that gentleman or woman to be halted including the withdrawal of the plans they are applying for.


THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odoi, can you restate the proposal quickly.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The proposed amendment reads: “Government takes immediate steps to halt all developments on the land housing Nabagereka Primary School and withdraws all approvals that may have been granted for redevelopment.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the resolution be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution No.4, as amended, agreed to.

Resolution five: Government puts in place emergency education facilities as an interim provision to accommodate the 1,443 stranded pupils and 23 former teachers of the school

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that -

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, we are interested in being informed as this is done. We should require the Minister of Education and Sports to report back to us on this particular one within not more than seven days. The proposal is to add, after the word school, the phrase, “and the minister of education reports to Parliament in two days.”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us do things that are really feasible. Let us not make it difficult for the minister to do anything. So, we leave it at seven days. Not so?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution No.5, as amended, agreed to.

Resolution No.6: Parliament sets a select committee to investigate the takeover of land formally belonging to public schools and makes appropriate recommendations to Parliament

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether this is not a very broad area - belonging to public schools. Where? Is it in Kampala, Jinja, Kisoro and all over the country? Honourable members, let us be realistic. Who will have time to do all this work and report when?

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the time aside, the biggest encroachment on government school land has mainly been in the city. Can we start with Kampala? And after the committee has tabbed that report, they can be given time to do other parts of the country where these things are taking place.

Madam Speaker - if it was not because of the slow speed at which the Committee on Physical Infrastructure is moving – there are issues upcountry too. For example, there are such issues in Mbale; the grabbing of public land. So, I would propose that for this purpose, because we want to help the Nabagereka Primary School, can we start with Kampala?

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While debating, I also mentioned a problem in Agago, Owipolo-Soloti Primary School, which took me a lot of time and resources to quench the fire though as I speak, we are about to lose that land. Therefore, I will urge you to include Agago District into this investigation so that we can have two or three districts - that is manageable. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Commission’s funding on select committees is really almost at the bottom now. I do not think we have the time and resources to do even three districts. No, we can’t.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I have a proposal that since we have a very serious and vibrant Physical Infrastructure Committee of Parliament, we give it a chance because we do not have time really. It can be given time to move around and compile a report for Parliament. That is my proposal.

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We have a very serious matter in Soroti. The Soroti Flying School - the only public flying institution in the whole of East and Central Africa – has had its land grabbed including buildings by the unknown - again it is by the ministry before hon. Migereko came in.

Madam Speaker, this is a public school; it is for public good and I want to put it on record that we have discussed this matter on many occasions. While we are quite concerned with the Nabagereka Primary School, whose resolution I really support, I want to urge Members of Parliament to look at the amount of land that we have lost at the flying school and which we continue lose as I talk.

It is, therefore, important that if it were possible - much as I know that as a Parliament, the inquires that we have put up are quite many - I would propose that areas like Soroti Flying School be included in part of this inquiry that the committee is going to undertake. I thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Committee of Physical Infrastructure at the moment has a lot on its hand. There are cases almost everywhere. So, at least be mindful of the fact that some of these cases come about because of the conduct of the respective district land boards. If we blow it up and take it wholesome - my conviction is that this may be too big.

Let us focus on Kampala for the moment and also look at the work of the land commission focusing on what they have done not only for schools, but for health units and other public facilities in Kampala. This will be an eye opener. 

True, the Prime Minister told us that they have set up a select committee of Cabinet, but I think, as Parliament moved by the Nabagereka case, we should focus on what is happening in Kampala and make recommendations.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we are doing - except Government is not listening to us - is the work of the government and Executive. If the Executive was doing its work, there would be no need of even setting up these committees and investigations.

Now that the government is not listening to us, my proposal would be that we take the Nabagereka case as a case study. I am saying this mindful of the many select committees we have put in place and which take forever to report back even when we have given them deadlines. By the time they report, things have been over taken by events. This Nabagereka matter seems to be a very clear case. There are some documents that got into this House and definitely people knew that this was bound to happen, but somehow they did not take action. Can we have the Nabagereka case as a case study? 

There are about two, three or four schools that have been mentioned, Kitante Hill –(Interjections)- Shimoni Primary School is now the late but there was Nakasero Primary School and others. If we get these with concrete proposals within a limited time –(Interjections)- it should not be open. The idea of benchmarking through travelling to countries to see how land is managed where the rules are different and the mafias and nature conspiracies are different, sometimes does not add value to what the committees are doing.

I am suggesting that after getting the report adopted and recommendations are put clearly, if we have time - I am mindful of Soroti Flying school - it should be addressed, Agago is there, in Bujenje we have Nyabubale Primary School, which is also about to be evicted by the landlord who is fortunately a Member of this House and is sympathetic though the instructions down there are different. Let us have this Nabagereka issue as a case study. That is my opinion, Madam Speaker.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In fact, what Princess Kabakumba Masiko has raised is a very simple matter. One just has to go to the school, if it is there, ask them questions about their original land and to whom have they allocated part of it? If they have done so, go to Uganda Land Commission and get the allocation. Later, go to the ministry where my brother hon. Daudi Migereko is, get the copy of titles; every school can take half a day. 

The schools we have mentioned in Kampala will take only three days. In fact the committee should be able to submit a report within two weeks. The longer the committees delay, the more problems we get. And the committees we have set up have select committees that give them progressive reports; we should call them to order. What are they waiting for; they should ably keep updating us on weekly basis on what they have done. benchmarking on investigations does not carry sense.

Madam Speaker, the information I want to give to hon. Kabakumba Masiko is that one week can be enough for Kampala. 

The piece of information I want to give to the House is that there are not many schools whose land has been encroached upon. It is only land for schools in municipalities, which has been encroached on. 
I expected the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to have produced the report in regard to the land grabbing in Mbale, but they are still dragging on. They have delayed yet the more they delay, the more land continues to be stolen. 

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, for the information. Madam Speaker, that is my considered opinion.

THE SPEAKER: So, you mean to say we name Nabagereka specifically?

MS KABAKUMBA: I said Kampala Capital City Authority – the schools that were mentioned - Kitante Hill School, Nabagereka Primary School, that school at Kasanga, City High School and Buganda Road Primary School and so on.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to imagine that this issue came to Parliament with the need for urgent attention. But from the submissions by the ministers - the one of education and that of lands - we have nothing clear about the interventions being put in place to help the children who have lost out. Therefore, I would urge that we become specific for a time being so that something is done to redeem the situation. I am saying this conscious of the resolution we made, as amended, by hon. Fox Odoi in which we resolved to halt all developments. In my lay understanding, this includes even developments by the bonafide occupant. So, I would say let us first focus on the Nabagereka Primary School and if there is time, another committee or the same committee can extend to other schools as well but after we have found a solution to help the children at that school. Thank you very much.

MR DEOGRATIOUS KIYINGI: I just want to put out a proposal. Since Nabagereka Primary School has been demolished, I don’t think we are going to save much. I want to support hon. Mukula - let us save Soroti Flying School because it is still being encroached on; we cannot save much at the Nnabagereka Primary School.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you were not listening to debate. The resolution has been passed already.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to concur with other Members that we need to focus on the issue that was raised if we want to rescue other schools. At a future date, may be these other schools can be brought on board. 

But I want to also say that in addition to investigating the takeover of land belonging to public schools, in this case Nabagereka Primary School, we should also investigate the operations of the Uganda Land Commission; the involvement of Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Education and Sports. I believe that by the time this school was demolished, Ministry of Education cannot say that they were not aware of the notice; they should be thoroughly investigated.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, what you are asking is contained in Resolution No.6; the one we are doing now.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, yes it is good to carry out a thorough investigation into land grabbing in Kampala and other areas but the urgent issue that we must address now is the more than 1,000 pupils and teachers of the Nnabagereka Primary School. If we could have an immediate solution – that solution lies between the Ministry of Education and Sports, KCCA and us. The decision we must take now is to see these pupils back to class by next Monday as we continue to carry out other measures.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are taking us back. We are processing resolution six. Please how do you want it phrased because the other one was too general? 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it seems the scope of work is big. But we could structure it in stages by getting a select committee to deal with this issue of the Nabagereka Primary School and others in Kampala. We need to allow the committee, in its terms of reference, to give us a report within one week, including their findings on Nabagereka and how they think we can proceed. They can then continue, in another three or four weeks, to deal with the rest of Kampala.

The second segment of it, which deals with the other broader scope of work, is first of all to take cognisance of the fact that if this Parliament does not intervene, institutions like the ones in Agago and Soroti Flying School, which you visited, Madam Speaker, will soon be no more. Given that now we do not have huge amount of work coming to the House about the budget process, would it be okay, as a second phase on this, which will also start together with this select committee, to direct the committees of this House - for instance, you can send the Committee on Education to go to education institutions.

Every audit report that comes to the public accounts committee has issues of public land being grabbed and not being titled. And when you ask the relevant agencies, they say they are doing nothing. How about if we asked the Education Committee - these institutions fall under its watch - to begin immediately with the process so that they can deal with this issue as we wait for the budget process? We can also send the Committee on Health to visit the health institutions and deal with the issue of Butabika Hospital as an urgent thing so that within a month or two, we can have three reports ready. We will have made progress in the way we handle this matter.

THE SPEAKER: We have to conclude this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you know Kampala Parents Primary School is just here. There used to be a pitch on its left. It was a public pitch for all schools around there to play. But I am told that they have fenced it off. How do you fence off such a public place supposed to be used - I am sure the Minister of Lands has already issued a title for it.

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This debate is definitely going to help us in the management of our land affairs as a country. When we chat about Nnabagereka Primary School and Kampala Parents, the message will be received in the whole country that there are serious measures being taken by Parliament. In the past, I have had to suspend land transactions in some districts including in Mbale. 

Is it in order for a Member, who is supposed to be knowledgeable and who is one of the leading land owners in the country, to come to the Floor and state that a minister has been issuing land titles for public land in Kampala when he knows very well that that is not the responsibility of that minister? Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to go on record and express his ignorance to that level?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the titles are signed by the registrar but if the minister has been signing then explain to us or withdraw.

MR MAFABI-NANDALA: First of all, he is right that I am a land owner. I own land in Uganda but I have never grabbed public land. I got land as an heir to my grandfather. But I have acquired land in many districts not in public areas but through buying and I think buying land is not a problem.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but explain to us which title deed the minister signed. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, I am not a land grabber, Madam Speaker. I wanted to first clarify on that. Now, who gives titles? It is the Ministry of Lands and the boss is my brother, hon. Daudi Migereko. That is why I am referring to -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Speaker, I am a Member of the Physical Infrastructure Committee. When we were handling the land matter from Mbale, we came across letters written by ministers in that ministry to the Uganda Land Commission, directing the issuance of titles of the land in Mbale. There were two letters, one by hon. Daudi Migereko and the other by hon. Sam Engola regarding the land transactions. 

If I knew it was going to come up here, I would have brought those letters here. But the letters disagreed with one another. While one was directing the issuance to take place, the other said, don’t do it to the Uganda Land Commission. 

Madam Speaker, at the time we bring the report, we shall lay those letters here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I can tell you if hon. Daudi Migereko had suspended that Mbale District Land Board - and he has authority - Ministry of Lands would not have issued land titles because land registration commission or directorate is under his ministry. So, when he fails to control his ministry that is a mistake. I wish I knew, I would have come with those letters where hon. Daudi Migereko gave directives. That is why I am saying you are making mistakes. And you cannot run away from that by saying that I, hon. Nandala-Mafabi own a lot of land in the country. No, you have never written letters for me to get land.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude this matter.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is true there is a nationwide concern. But I would like to draw your attention to resolution three, which we just passed, which talks about Government expediting all investigations relating to allocation and evictions on public land. Under that, we can still capture those loose ends where land is being given away. 

But specifically for resolution No.6, I would like to rephrase it to recast it – “Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate the takeover of land formerly belonging to public schools in Kampala Capital City Authority and make appropriate recommendations within -(Interjections)– no, there could be some other interventions. But I could say, “And it makes a report to Parliament within three weeks” -(Interjections)– what? One month? -(Interjections)- yes, Nabagereka Primary School has been captured under resolution four. But specifically, under five on the children, we have resolved that contingent measures be put in place to enable them access education. And for that matter, it would do us no harm to allow it a month.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that resolution six be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution No.6, as amended, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I think there should be a proposal on the other committees to handle Soroti and Agago. So, propose resolution seven to cover the other areas.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker I want to propose resolution seven that the select committee, after completing Kampala; I mean the select committee, which we shall set up - but we have forgotten something; we have only talked about schools yet there was a health centre along Nkrumah Road which was sold and demolished, you are aware.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to -

CAPT. MUKULA: Madam Speaker, apart from the health centre at Nkrumah Road, Nakivubo Stadium has now been turned into a shopping mall with close to 2000 shops being constructed. I even wonder where we will be parking - with all these shanty places around - when there is a football match. How do we have such a facility that belongs to the Ministry of Education and Sports being taken over and turned into a shopping centre? Really, what are we talking about? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason we took so much time on how the committee should work - we took it on account of the size of the job as originally planned. That is why we decided to narrow it down to something achievable in a short time. But we need to deal with other areas outside the Nabageraka school. There was a proposal that those other issues be sent to the committee responsible so that we do not duplicate work.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to propose resolution seven that after Kampala, the select committee should investigate the allocation of public land in municipalities. Okay, we could say that immediately a select committee should take up -

THE SPEAKER: Let us just set the principle. I will put the rest in writing because everybody is drafting. There are additional – there is something that reads that sectoral committees of Parliament carry out their oversight role in respect to public land.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek to improve on that. I propose that it should read that “This Parliament directs the relevant sessional committees to carry out investigations on the status of public land under their sectors and report back within two months.”

THE SPEAKER:  That is better.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, there are some areas which we have talked about. Why don’t we be specific? Areas like Soroti can stand alone, Agago and other areas can stand alone too. Otherwise, if we just let the committees go and find out - because there are so many problems in all these districts. Now that we know that we are going to be very busy, let us try to identify areas where we need that report as urgently as possible.

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, this problem cuts across. It is everywhere and in all districts only that we do not have enough time for every Member to stand here and tell us what is happening in their constituency. Districts are selling land, prisons land is being sold, school land is being sold, play grounds are being sold off and then public land is being offered to people with titles that are not leases but which entrench these people on these lands for eternity. Therefore, I agree with the proposal moved by hon. Alice Alaso that we let each sectoral committee handle the issue of land falling under its docket. For example, in the Local Government and Public Service Committee, we may handle issues to do with district land and the committee that deals with issues to do with Soroti Flying School will also deal with that issue accordingly. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have agreed and we understand what we want. So, I put the question that Resolution seven be approved as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Resolution No.7, agreed to.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, from the letter by KCCA, it is clear that Parliament has been appropriating money to Nabagereka Primary School. I am of the considered opinion that a financial audit be carried out –(Interjections)– I wish members could try to understand the prudence of my proposal first. It means that by the time the ministers let the school to be demolished, they ought to have put into consideration its value.

That is why I am calling for a financial audit to be carried out. That will help us to know how much we had sunk in as a country so that in case of any compensation, there is actually a basis; there was a running lease protecting our rights. So, I would like to propose that a financial audit be carried out to ascertain how much had been invested into the school through appropriation before its demolition.

THE SPEAKER: To be carried out by who?

MR MWIRU: By the Auditor-General.

THE SPEAKER: Is that proposal okay with you, honourable members? So, I put the question that a new resolution eight be created as proposed by hon. Paul Mwiru -

MS NTABAZI: Madam Speaker, I thought we had already captured something to do with investigations. Isn’t this part of the investigation process? If you bring it as a stand-alone resolution, what will the investigations include? The investigations should include all that –(Interjections)- yes.

THE SPEAKER: No. This is a financial audit. Honourable members, I put the question that the proposal be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution No.8, agreed to.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that all the resolutions be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Resolutions adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. Tomorrow, we shall proceed with other items, which were on the Order Paper. The House is adjourned to 2.00.p.m tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.42 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 February 2015 at 2 p.m.) 

