


Thursday, 11 February 2021

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I just have one major matter to communicate. 

I am really happy that as an institution, we have been able to majorly survive the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. I have, however, received information that in the committee rooms, there is now congestion, contrary to the guidance I issued in April 2020. 

I would like to remind the chairpersons, members of committees and the Government agencies that we have not yet got clearance to bring entire agency teams to the committee rooms. You are still expected to bring few people who are relevant to a subject.

First, we still require the meetings to end by 5.00 p.m. Of course, this has been difficult sometimes. However, since the start of the curfew was extended, I think they can still work until 7.00 p.m. or thereabouts.

Secondly, the committee meetings shall only be held in the Conference Hall or any other place designated by the Sergeant-at-Arms. The sitting arrangement shall adhere to the social distancing measures set by the Government.

Thirdly, as much as possible, we are to conduct paperless meetings, through the use of Members’ iPads and video conferencing where necessary. I believe the Government yesterday relented and switched on the internet. I hope that you can now use your iPads.

Fourthly, the committee secretariat shall consist of one Clerk Assistant, one Legislative/Legal Counsel, one Research Officer, one Budget Officer and one Sergeant-at-Arms at a given time. Other members of the secretariat shall offer background technical support from their offices or at home, as may be determined by the Clerk.

Fifthly, the media and the public shall not be allowed to physically access committee meetings. The Clerk shall make arrangements to enable the media and the public to access the committee meetings electronically. Every submission to a committee shall be in soft form through the official email of the Clerk, which is clerk@parliament.go.ug.

Sixthly, the restrictions on entry to Parliament are still in place. I would like to therefore invite the Sergeant-at-Arms to ensure that access to Parliament is limited or is allowed only where it has been cleared.

Finally, where travel has been funded by Parliament, the Clerk shall communicate to all the affected Members and staff about the movement to and from Parliament. 

I would like to appeal to the agencies to come with a few staff. You do not need to collect the whole ministry to come and sit in a conference room. I think the proposal by the Government of 200 people probably meant open-air meetings and not closed-door meetings. I, therefore, would like to appeal to you to continue observing those guidelines.

There are a few matters of national concern.   

2.54
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a country, we have just concluded the general elections. Among the elections, we had the presidential and parliamentary elections held on 14 January 2021. Permit to congratulate all those who won in those elections. To all those who lost, there is always another opportunity to serve our country in various capacities.

Madam Speaker, citing Article 1, Clause (1), (2), (3) and Articles 77 and 78 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as amended, Uganda is a democratic country. The Constitution states that all authority belongs to and is derived from the people of Uganda, who shall be governed through their will and consent. 

Articles 77 and 78 of the Constitution stipulate the composition of Parliament, which consists of Members directly elected to represent constituencies. These include one woman representative for every district, representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine. We have just added the representatives of the elderly.

Madam Speaker, we have Members of Parliament who were elected by less than 5,000 voters. My prayer, therefore, is that the first runner-up of the presidential election results, who in this case is hon. Robert Ssentamu Kyagulanyi, voted for by more than three million Ugandans, should become an automatic Member of Parliament rather than rendering such a voice idle, yet one of our four cardinal pillars of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government is to promote democracy –(Interjections)– Yes, it is very important. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, your idea is very interesting. However, I think it requires a serious Constitution amendment. Probably, it might involve a referendum. We may need to ask the people about that issue. Tt is not something that we can handle here. 

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, I have less than two months here. I have no time to come up with a Bill. Thank you. 

2.58
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to raise an issue of national importance concerning Teso, especially the district that I represent in this House. 

One year ago, as Members of Parliament from Teso sub-region, we presented an issue here with regards to the eviction of the people of Teso, who relocated to Abim District in Karamoja sub-region. As I stand here today, that issue has remained pending. 

Over 16,000 people from Teso, Ngora, Bukedea, Serere, Kumi and Soroti have been rendered homeless, having been based in Abim for over 20 years. Their displacement came about as a result of occupying Government land.

Madam Speaker, if the interest of Government is her people, why would these people that have occupied this place for over 20 years be displaced? Why would they be displaced because they are saying the land belongs to Uganda Wildlife Authority? 

On behalf of the displaced people in Abim, I would like to call upon the line ministry, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry that is directly in charge of UWA to – (Interruption)

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I remember I brought a petition here last year, on behalf of those people. Since that time, nothing has been done. 

Secondly, during the recent general elections, all those people who had been displaced from Morulem-Okwang in Abim were taken to a company called Koblin, in Napak District. 

The information I would like to give you is that all those people were requested to go back to Morulem-Okwangto vote. Currently, they are there and nobody is in charge of their safety. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, hon. Abala. Madam Speaker, yesterday, another eviction took place in that area and left more other people homeless. It is a fact that these people moved a long time ago from their respective districts and settled in Abim. Everyone has a right in Uganda to settle in any place of their choice, as long as they acquired the land through proper channels. 
Madam Speaker, evictions have taken place and the line ministry has never come to this House, since we last asked them a year ago, to explain the fate of these people. Even if this Government is carrying out this displacement, if the interest of Government is her people, they should be compensated so that they can find some other areas to settle. (Mr Aogon rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not need to debate this matter because the Ministry of Internal Affairs is here. This matter is not new. We reported to the Government sometime back but it has not yet been resolved. I do not want to hear an exchange between Abim and Teso. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, it is not exchange. We respect our colleagues from Abim; they are our brothers and sisters. The Itesots and Karamojongs are our uncles and so, we enjoy cordial relationships. 

This is a matter of urgent public concern. Besides these people being displaced, the petition that was brought here by hon. Abala had many issues. One of the issues concerned the rape of women during that displacement, which is a very serious matter. Therefore, it goes beyond the issues of wildlife and having the land but also borders issues of security. 

Madam Speaker, it is a very serious issue. The manner in which these people were displaced was not normal and therefore, we demand for urgent action from Government, because we too belong to this country; we must enjoy the benefits of Uganda. 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you very much for that information. Our issue is not about the Itesots or Karamojongs being attended to by Government. We would like to pray that the line ministries come to this House and explain the fate of the people that have been displaced in that area. 

These people have stayed in those places for over 20 years and so, they should be compensated. Lastly, the people torturing the Itesots in Abim are people working for Government; the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Why wouldn’t the relevant ministry come here and air out the fate of the people? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, fortunately, the Minister of Internal Affairs is here. I do not know whether he can say something about this issue. He is in charge of law and order in that area and the rest of Uganda. The Prime Minister is also here. 

3.04
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Amongin for raising this matter. Indeed, as observed by the Speaker, this is not a new matter. This is a matter that Government has considered. The Minister of Internal Affairs was faced with this sometime back and we attempted to provide a solution. 

However, now that hon. Amongin has raised it again, if it pleases the Rt Hon. Speaker, we can find an opportunity later on to explain the actions that have so far been taken and what remains to be done in greater detail. I am unable to do that right now because I do not have the facts on my fingertips. 

THE SPEAKER: Should we expect a report next week? Prime Minister, there is also the issue of relief and displaced people. I do not know what commitment you can make.

3.06
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen.(Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, the best way to handle this matter is to invite all the concerned people to our office and discuss. Thereafter, we will come back to the House. 

We shall discuss and come back for the Hansard and pick out the relevant issues relating to this concern. We shall invite everybody and then discuss. Thereafter, I will come back to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The Members are encouraged to go and attend the meeting with the Prime Minister but we shall also be waiting for the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish what is happening and report to us. 

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural issue. While I appreciate the fact that the Minister for Internal Affairs, hon. Jeje Odongo, has clarified the issue of bringing the report to this House in regard to the Ateso affected in Abim, this report has been overdue because it has taken over a year. 

As a representative of the people in that region, I would love to know from the honourable minister when exactly they will present the report. This is because when these issues are raised in this House, ministers come here and say that they will report back and it remains pending. 

Therefore, my senior colleague, hon. Jeje, who is the Minister of Internal Affairs should let us know when he is bringing the report so that we are in attendance. We hope it will be handled once and for all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This is an old matter. We expect the minister to present it on Thursday next week. Let us have the next item.

MR NSAMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the time you have accorded me. I rise on a procedural matter.

In 2018, we passed the mobile money tax which Government later realised they needed to slash because it was heavy on the taxpayer. Along the way, through some manoeuvres, Ugandans are paying more money on mobile money transactions because of the increment of that tax without our knowledge.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, social media was awash with another proposal to tax cash withdrawals from banks and deposit-taking institutions. We want the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and clarify these matters. Why should our Government be planning to heavily charge Ugandans on money which they have already earned and is probably taxed? Why would Government think about raising revenue under such circumstances?

It would be prudent for the Minister to come and clarify that letter which was authored on behalf of the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury. We need to know this. There is also need to carry out an investigation into the mobile money charges because there is a lot of dubious behaviour and many Ugandans are losing a lot of money along those lines. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate my colleague’s comment on a letter which was written by the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury inviting the central bank to consult on an internal engagement we are having with them. 

I propose that in line with the rules of this House, we focus on something that is before the House or that is a proposal by law. If this House is going to be discussing internal memos within the Government departments, it will be a tough job to do. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if it is a matter that touches taxation, you have not come to the House to make your proposals; why do you move before the House?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in the letter that he is referring to, the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury is writing to the central bank for consultation; it is not a proposal by law. It is not to this House. I would like your guidance on how the honourable member raises issues about internal communication that has no bearing on the House - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we are in a terrible situation. The honourable minister has stated that this is an internal memo that has now become a public memo. I do not know how Government operates when they have their internal memos that turn public. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister not to give us a better position? We have seen very many things that have gone on without Parliament passing them, yet they are supposed to take place after Parliament has allowed them to take place.

I heard the honourable member saying that there are taxes on mobile money that were not passed by Parliament. Therefore, we are not just speaking in anticipation. A snake in a hole has bitten us, so we know what exactly happens with that.So,when does an internal memo become a public memo if at all it is confidential? 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I want to add to what has been said. We appreciate what the minister has said, but we would like the minister to know that we represent Ugandans. When there is an issue in the public and Ugandans ask, we must have answers. If it were an internal memo, we would not know. How can an internal memo find its way to a WhatsApp group?

We do not want the minister to come here - He knows it because from the way he has stated it, he is aware and he knows the person who wrote it, how he wrote it and to whom he wrote it to, and they are going to discuss. Maybe the minister should tell us what we should tell Ugandans. Should we say thatit is going to happen the way it has been happening? Once bitten, twice shy; you know what happens next. Ugandans are crying because they know what is going to happen.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is not a memo but a letter, which was written on the 9th of February to the Governor, Bank of Uganda. The subject matter is “Budget consultation for the Financial Year 2021/22” and it reads as follows:

“Following our budget consultative meeting held on February 5, 2021 at this ministry, attended by officials from Uganda Communications Commission, Uganda Revenue Authority, telecom operators, Bank of Uganda, it was proposed that we explore taxation of cash withdrawals from commercial banks. Currently, Mobile Money withdrawals are subject to 0.5 per cent excise duty but on the counter, agency banking and ATM withdrawals in commercial banks are not subjected to the same tax.It is noteworthy that this would encourage cashless transactions, promote e-commerce, improve tax compliance in addition to raising revenue.

We, therefore, wish to seek your opinion on the proposal and also request you to avail us with data on all categories of withdrawals for our further review and determination. We require this data for the past three financial years (i.e. starting from Financial Year 2017/2018.) Please, send this information to Edmund.ariyo@finance.go.ug and Isaac.arinaitwe@finance.go.ug. 

We would appreciate to receive your opinion and the data not later than Friday, 12 February 2021.”

It is signed for the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury by Mr Patrick Ocailap and copied to the Executive Director, Uganda Communications Commission; the Commissioner General, Uganda Revenue Authority; the Chief Executive Officer, MTN (U) Ltd; the Executive Officer, Airtel (U) Ltd; the Chief Executive Officer, Africell (U) Ltd. 

Madam Speaker, this is what Ugandans should be ready for concerning taxation. It should not have been at this time when we are still struggling and recovering from COVID-19 for Government to be thinking of this wild proposal.

Madam Speaker, if you hear that hon. Bahati is going to rape, you do not wait for him to rape before you stop him; you stop him before he rapes –(Laughter)- We are justified to discuss this matter so that we stop the “rape”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have now listened to what is in the letter. I expect the minister to bring here proposals for taxation. You are going to bring some revenue Bills; can we have an undertaking that you will not implement this before you come here for our authority? That is what we want.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have never implemented any tax before the approval of Parliament and we shall never implement any tax measure before it is approved by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: We have got the undertaking. Let us go to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE LEGALITY, STRUCTURE, COMPOSITION AND OPERATIONS OF THE MINERAL POLICE PROTECTION UNIT IN THE COUNTRY

3.18
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, before I make this statement, my mask seems to muffle my voice a little. Permit me to speak without it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

GEN. ODONGO: Let me, from the onset apologise for my failure to make this statement on 9 February 2021 as the Speaker had directed. I was not able to do so because I was away, upcountry on duty. I took the liberty to write to the Speaker on 8 February 2021 seeking leave of the Speaker to make the statement today, Thursday 11 February 2021.

I would, therefore, like to apologise for the inconveniences my inability to do that at that time have caused. 

The establishment of units in the Uganda Police Force (UPF) is done under the general powers given to the Inspector General of Police. The command and running of the operations of the UPF is put under the IGP as stipulated by Article 213 of the Constitution. 

This is done, cognizant of the mandate of the UPF, which is also stipulated in Article 212, which mandate includes;

    1. To protect life and property
    2. To preserve law and order
    3. To Prevent and detect crime

Under Section 4 and 5 of the Police Act Cap 303, these functions are repeated and amplified.

The Police Mineral Protection Unit was, therefore, established pursuant to the powers I have just cited. Furthermore, consultations were carried out with His Excellency, the President and Commander-in-Chief. 

Following this, in 2017, a radio message, Ref HRM/31/133/08 Vol 08/54 was issued notifying all police units about the creation of the Mineral Police Protection Unit. In that message, the functions of the police unit were outlined to include:

    1. Implementation of plans, policies and strategies for effective security of minerals in the country
    2. To conduct inspections, surveillance and monitoring in order to detect and prevent illegal mining in the country.
    3. To develop and manage systems on maintenance and regulations of technical equipment and other resources for the unit for the function they were assigned to-
    4.  develop the human and non-human capacity of the mineral protection unit in the country;
    5. prepare periodic reports on policing of mineral activities;
    6. collaborate with other stakeholders responsible for managing minerals in the country;
    7. sensitise communities on safe mining, environmental impact and dangers of illegal mining;
    8. liaise with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources in ensuring compliance to the standards guiding the mining industry.

Currently, the Mineral Police Protection Unit consists of the following;

There are 122 males and 26 females making a total force strength of 148. 

These are deployed in the following areas: In Mubende – 45, in Ankole – 20, in Kabale-Kisoro – 12, in Busia Tororo mining areas – 25, in Moroto – 09 and in Entebbe processing areas, there are 35 deployed. 

This, in short, is how this unit was formed and this is how other units like the flying squad, which has now been disbanded, the Police Land Protection Unit, the Environmental Police Protection Unit were formed. 

It is important to note that their formation was to respond to immerging policing challenges arising out of the dynamism of our society.

I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister for that update. Of course, it arose from the reports of the Committee on Natural Resources on incidents in Mubende and Buhweju where the mineral police were involved in evicting people.

Hon. Oshabe, do you have something to say on this? 

3.27
MR NSAMBA OSHABE (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The gold mines that are claimed to be in Mubende are in Kassanda and it is only that Kassanda was part of Mubende then. I think the record should be made straight that whenever we talk about gold mines, they are in Kassanda District.

Ugandans are suffering at the hand of this mineral protection unit. What came out of the committee report was the ordeals Ugandans go through at the hands of a force, which should have been intended to protect Ugandans, to enforce law and order, a force that has turned into a force that is dealing in mining. It is these Mineral Protection Unit people who are doing the mining. They chased Ugandans out of the mines. When you come to the gold mines in Kassanda, all of us were chased out. It is only the Mineral Protection Unit police officer who can give you an opportunity to go and do some alluvial mining. That is the unfortunate bit. The Minister of Internal Affairs is probably not aware that this force is not doing a service to Ugandans. 

I would like us to go through the records of Uganda Revenue Authority and see whether, since the establishment of this force, we have registered any increment in the gold sales we have in this country. All they do is mine, sell it clandestinely and we will never even know. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. Let him bring records; since 2018, how has this police unit helped to increase or make sure that there is proper mining in the country?

Madam Speaker, the Flying Squad was disbanded; I think even this force should be disbanded immediately because they are not helping at all. The Uganda Police Force can still do what is necessary. 

They are benefitting from the disorganised mining sector we have in the country. The earlier we organise that sector, the better because Government will gain more revenue from the sector and Ugandans will be employed. However, what they are doing now, what is happening now is disorganisation. 

It takes one to know someone in order to do mining in this country. The licensing process at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is one that many Ugandans have gone through. I think we deserve better in organising that sector. If it is part of the entire organisation of the sector, like it is done in Tanzania - In Tanzania, at the gold mines, Government has somebody who is collecting tax, there is a dealer who is known and a miner who is also known. However, what is happening in our sector here is very unfortunate, and the biggest disorganisers of this sector are the mineral police force. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.31
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised this matter on the Floor of Parliament I think last year or before we went for elections, but the minister has not addressed the issues that I gave. Let me go back to them, Madam Speaker.

When we handled this matter, I laid on the Table a petition that was given to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development in Kampala about illegal mining in Lujinji and Lugongwe, Kassanda. At the end of this petition, there was a serious issue I raised here and that was the last one.

This gentleman – the petitioner – said, “I am not being tribalistic but I am realistic. How come that all the gazetted officers in PMPU come from one region? One wonders what criteria the police human resource management used in selecting these officers to be transferred to PMPU.” I read the names. Let me read them again because this is where the problems are coming from –

1. 	SP Keigomba Jessica – Commandant
2. 	SP Mwesigwa Sarah Atamba – Administration and Finance
3. 	SP Tashobya Abbey Caleb – In-charge Investigations
4. 	SP Kakuru Ian – Legal officer
5. 	ASP Mwesigwa Joshua – O/C Airport, PMPU
5. 	ASP Kafureka Isaac Kanzira – Zonal Commander, Ankole
6. 	ASP Wasiima Lauben – Zonal Commander, Kigezi
7. 	ASP Musinguzi Karakire Moses – Operations Officer
8. 	ASP Mutabazi Yoweri – Logistics Officer, PMPU
9. 	ASP Ampurira Kenneth – Deputy, Investigations
10. 	ASP Gumisiriza Kenneth Kabwigo – Zonal Commander, Mubende
11. 	ASP Kentaro Annah – O/C Busia
12. 	ASP Tumwesigye Bonny 
13. 	ASP Namanya David – O/C Kisita and Lujinji
14. 	ASP Mbambu Felestus – O/C Kamalenge
15. 	ASP Mugwisagye Levis – O/C Lugongwe
16. 	ASP Birungi Sakinah – in –(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the honourable member. However, the President has always been here telling Ugandans that he is not tribalistic and his institutions are not tribalistic. Is the honourable member in order to read a list, which the President and the Inspector General of Police (IGP) know about, which is very tribalistic? Is the honourable member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Please complete the list.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, last is ASP Aryampa Nathan, O/C Lubaali.

The honourable minister, Gen. Jeje Odong, was once my boss when I was a teacher in the military police; never ask any other issues about me –(Laughter)– They would never, at any time, allow any officer to speak their mother tongue or any other language other than Swahili in the barracks. Sijui hayo nakumbuka hiyo mambo kabisa. I do not know whether you recall that time.

Madam Speaker, I listened to the President on Tarehe Sita day. Among the accusations he gave on why he left the Democratic Party (DP) was that the party was sectarian. He gave a very elaborate story on how DP was sectarian. I cannot accuse the President; you are the one who has accused him. The determination of these policemen is on the advice of the President and it comes from him; you have said it here.

However, Madam Speaker, even when you talk about Entebbe area, the airport he is talking about is not a mining area but we know where gold and all minerals are collected at the airport before they are taken, yet Government is not getting revenue. At the right time, we shall give all the details of the minerals that have been stolen using these particular faces you are talking about. 

There are already imbalances here. There are only 122 males against 26 females in the Police Mineral Protection Unit. You all know what is in the minerals. When you talk about a police officer guarding the bank in Kibuye, Makindye, or even guarding Parliament and the one in the minerals department, there is a difference because of the privileges available. (Interruption) 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: I would like to give the honourable member information. The information we have is that all these officers are related to the President. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, let us be serious. The minister has refused to address the matter I raised. Can he tell us how the human resource officer in police –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order from the Minister of Local Government.

MR SSEWUNGU: Be careful, you are not from there. (Laughter)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. Hon. Patrick Nsamba has made a very serious accusation. Is he in order to make such wild allegation without substantiation? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, let me first conclude. Hon. Patrick Nsamba is not on the Floor. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Patrick Nsamba, you have said something very serious. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: I began by saying I come from Kassanda where the mining is taking place. I would like to inform the Minister of Local Government who is not aware that Sodo Aine, the brother of the President of Uganda, Gen. Tibuhaburwa, is the commander of all those mines there. He chooses who to deploy there. That is the substantiation. If you tickle me more, I have more information. 

MR SSEWUNGU: As I conclude, I ask the minister to address this issue I raised here. How did your ministry and the human resource determine one tribe to take up all these big offices at your office? Lastly, can you put it on record again that all these people were appointed under the consultation of the President? 

Some of us speak all these languages by the way. When we are talking about the imbalances, it is for the sake of making people happy. We want to see a country, which is fair on all sides for all Ugandans. I can speak Runyankore. I speak Kiswahili, and Gen. Jeje Odongo knows that. I speak Rukiga, Luganda, Kinyarwanda and many other languages. 

When there are imbalances, however, we must answer these questions very clearly. Who allowed these people to be the only beneficiaries and to command all the issues of minerals at the cost of other police officers who can even be better than them? I rest my case.

3.41
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Kira): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ssewungu has refreshed our minds. The issue for which the minister was instructed to address Parliament had nothing to do with background to the creation of the Police Minerals Protection Unit. The issue was the composition of this unit. I had expected the minister to table a list – first of all; these people are not many – the 120 people who are in this unit. He could present their names since they are not many to allay our fear that hon. Ssewungu is telling lies. 

Therefore, can the minister do what Parliament asked him to do and not frame his own issues for this statement? He should read the names of these 120 people and maybe,give explanation like hon. Ssewungu has asked. What particular competence do these people have as the reason they were chosen above all the others? 

Finally, I raised here a question, which hon. Bahati made an undertaking to investigate and make a response to, which he did not. If you look at the records of gold now - In fact, hon. Bahati can correct me if I am wrong. We now get more money from gold than remittances from Ugandans and sale of coffee. However, this rise in the amount of money we collect from gold has been a subject of speculation in the international media. At one time, it was said that gold came on an aircraft at Entebbe and then it was re-exported as if it was originating from Uganda. 

The minister has said there is part of the Police Minerals Protection Unit – maybe, this is the mining he is talking about; that gold can come from Venezuela and it is repackaged as if it is originating from Uganda. That is why we have a Police Minerals Protection Unit at Entebbe.

Hon. Bahati made an undertaking that he would come here and explain that particular consignment of gold that came from Venezuela on one aircraft to another and wasre-exported. Between both ministers, they should tell us whether the part of the Police Minerals Protection Unit role at Entebbe is to do that sort of mining. 

These are the two issues. First, the minister should address the question on the names. He should give us the names and the reason why individuals were chosen above the others.  The second point is on the gold coming through Entebbe Airport, offloaded and then loaded onto another aircraft and it is recorded as if it is gold mined in Uganda. 

3.44
MS OLIVER KOYEKYENGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I just would like clarification from the minister. I am very sure we have the Police Minerals Protection Unit in various places. We even have the police unit in URA. The Police Minerals Protection Unit is supposed to work independently from the ministry. 

The last time we were with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, she said the ministry never instructed the police unit to go to Buhweju. Yesterday, we had the minister launching the license and association of Buhweju miners. However, even after giving them the license of exploration, the police are still harassing the miners. They are beating, chasing and doing all sorts of bad things to the people. I would like to understand who these people are. If this police unit is supposed to do the work, how are they doing it? What are they supposed to do? Actually, they are not protecting anything as far as the functions you listed are concerned. 

Are you aware these people are doing their own things? They are the miners down there. They are the ones stealing the gold while destroying everything. I do not know whether you have been there. I do not know whether you have any information on what you are saying here. Mr Minister, you have to get information from these people and tell us the right things. Otherwise, I do not believe what you are saying here. 

Honourable minister, the people of Buhweju have got the exploration license but even today, they have been calling to tell me that the police are there beating them. I think you need to make the investigation and see what your unit is doing down there. Thank you. 

3.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for the statement. Your statements are always well presented. 

I have some few issues that I need the minister to clarify. Honourable minister, I do you have a special training that you give this particular police unit who are in the area of minerals?

Two, I have ever seen a map that tries to show the different minerals in this country. There are minerals in Busoga and other places but you have given us a number of just about 100 men and women protecting these minerals. What about the other areas that you have not talked about where minerals have actually been identified? How are they protected? 

Because you went on to create a unit to protect minerals, I would also believe that you have a unit aimed at protecting petroleum. Also, minerals and petroleum appear together in the Constitution. My question to you, honourable minister, is:  Do you have a unit protecting the petroleum of this country in your ministry? Thank you very much. 

3.49
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to our minister but with a lot of pain. It hurts to hear a brave minister trying to shield some things as if he is not aware of what is transpiring. 

I seek clarification from the minister whether he is also aware that part of the roles the Mineral Protection Unit is supposed to play is mining. Honourable minister, you might have forgotten that mining is also part of what your police is doing; so, you can now add the mining role. 

Lastly, I wish to know the criteria used to deploy these police officers. The reason is that according to what he has read to Parliament, in the greater Mubende, now Kassanda, we have 45 police officers, yet the rest of the other places have only five or 20. My concern is: why do we have so many police officers deployed in Kassanda? Is it because in Mubende we are stubborn? Have you realised that there is a lot of theft? Is there more gold? 

We have very many minerals in Uganda. Why is it that the Mineral Protection Unit is only concentrating on protecting gold mines? Why are they not deployed in Tororo where there are mining rocks and cement? Why are they not in Karamoja? Why are they in these gold mines? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.52
DR MICHAEL BUKENYA (NRM, Bukuya County, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent Bukuya County, which has the biggest gold deposits in Uganda, and it is located in Kassanda District. I am not a miner but my voters are miners and others are landlords.

I beg to disagree with what the minister mentioned about their roles. My voters and I brought a petition from a place called Lubaali-Lwensambya, where after evictions in 2017, the voters were not compensated. However, under the watch of the Mineral Protection Unit, their land was sold off. 

Secondly, in Lujinji, where the eviction took place in 2017 on about 20 square miles of land, up to date the land owners have not been compensated and are not allowed to access their land, including their houses. I am not sure whether no mining takes place there. 

I talk to the Mineral Protection Unit regularly. They licensed a few Ugandans, about 80, to do mining. However, my concern is: Why is the Mineral Protection Unit involved in selling land where people were evicted and have not been compensated? It is now four years down the road, specifically in Lwensambya and Lujinji. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.40
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This problem has appeared on this Floor more than six times. I pity the officers working in that sector because their names are always read on the Floor of Parliament. 

When there were problems on the lakes, they were first aggravated by the police. The whole world complained and it seemed like there was no answer, until a recommendation was made because of what was happening on the lakes – the depletion of fish in the lakes, yet it is a source of livelihood. It culminated into the Government deploying the army there. We do not want this matter to degenerate into the same problem. 

What was asked for here was the composition and the way they administer the mines. The answer that the minister came back with was about the policy. Madam Speaker, I think we should give the minister the right questions so that when he goes back to the field, he can bring us the real answers. Otherwise, this issue will keep coming back on the Floor. 

This is an administrative problem that can be rectified very fast by the minister going to the ground and asking what is happening - why are there problems in Mubende? Why are there problems in Buhweju? This should be done in cooperation with the Ministry of Energy and Minerals because at one time, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development came here and it was as if she was a back bencher because of the problems of the police in this sector. 

I pray that the General this time goes back –(Interruption) 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, sometimes I am a silent Member of Parliament of Samia Bugwe North, but I would like to say that we have mining in Tiira Mines in Busia District.

I would like to inform the House further that what hon. Kasule has submitted is true. What the Minister of Internal Affairs said was totally off the question because what he submitted was an issue of policy. Moreover, some of us in Busia know these mineral police as mining police because they are into mining permanently. 

Therefore, I would like to agree with hon. Kasule. Hon. Ssewungu gave a submission of names that I do not agree with. Hon. Ssewungu should permit the minister to give us the right names because not all the people in a department can come from one sub-county. Up to now, I believe hon. Ssewungu lied to Parliament that those are the true names. Therefore, the Minister of Internal Affairs should submit a true list of the officers on the Floor of Parliament.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to ask the minister to go and look at the administration and operations of this police before it is handed over to the army. Once reports keep coming and there is no solution within the police, then they should advise another agency to rectify the problem.

3.58
DR KIWANUKA KEEFA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for enabling this point to be discussed further. It is a point from the report of the Committee on Natural Resources.

However, there are two things. First – and I believe many members of my committee who are here agree with me – we would like to distance ourselves from the submission of hon. Ssewungu. 

We did not look into the tribes of the people who are in the mineral police because we saw a cross-section of people. Some of them were tall and others short, some were brown and others dark while some had long noses and others short noses. That is my submission, specifically, on that point. In addition, in my view, it takes us from the substantial matters that we have to deal with -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order against Dr Kiwanuka. When I came here some time back, I read the same names, not basing on the findings of the committee.

Secondly, I remember that on Tuesday, I raised a procedural matter when the minister was responding to some issues. I asked if you would give room for the minister to give us an answer to the questions I raised. Indeed, he has come and given what has not satisfied me. 

The honourable member standing there one time told me that while in the committee meeting, these police - the head of the MPPU - the honourable member told me that the President rang him and asked why he was questioning that police officer and indeed, he adjourned the committee meeting. (Laughter) He told me. If he is a Christian, let him deny when I am standing here.

I am raising issues that are not from the committee, about those people being from one tribe and he is accusing me and distancing themselves from what I am saying, yet, I am not basing on the committee findings. 

Is he in order to accuse an honourable member who has not relied on the committee report, yet, he told me the same facts about those police officers and about the woman police officer whom they were questioning? He said the President rang him, asking why he was questioning that person in the committee and he adjourned the committee meeting himself at the cost of the work of Parliament. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I just want – for the record – to say that the interest of hon. Ssewungu and the interest of the committee have coincided today. However, it is true that hon. Ssewungu raised that complaint last year and he was waiting for the minister to confirm or deny the composition as he had stated it.

However, it is also true that the Committee on Natural Resources, in their report from Mubende and Buhweju, have taken issue with the conduct of the Mineral Protection Police. Both interests are legitimate but they just coincided here.

DR KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your ruling on that. These are the substantial issues that I thought the minister would be addressing. As he was presenting, I wondered whether he had read the report of the committee –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu has made a very wild and allegation against hon. Kiwanuka, the chairperson of the committee. It leaves us disturbed here whether it is going to be like the issue of the names that he read and we are not confirming whether they are correct or not. 

Now that hon. Ssewungu has, again, made the allegations that the chairperson did confide in him that the President called him when he was interrogating the Commandant of the Mineral Police Unit and told him to stop and he adjourned the meeting, is it in order for the chairperson to just proceed as if nothing has happened, which is tantamount to tainting his name? 

The honourable member has gone further to say that if he is a Christian, let him deny or accept this allegation and we proceed. Otherwise, we are going to leave with Members doubting whether you lied or fear to tell the truth. Is it in order for the Member to proceed without clarifying?

DR KIWANUKA: If there was any conversation between me and hon. Ssewungu on that matter, I am sure he misunderstood me. (Laughter) Let me add that the meeting continued to its logical conclusion. We did not stop the meeting at any point. We may have had an interruption to confer, as members, but not on the directive of an external person.

Madam Speaker, this is a very important discussion. We need to pay specific attention to the issues that we raised in the report. Of course, hon. Ssewungu has issues that he has raised as properly pointed out by the Speaker, but there are other serious issues that we raised in the report that the minister should be addressing –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, under our rules, you allowed – and I would like to thank you for this interaction over the statement that the minister has made. The chairperson of the committee, whose report was presented long ago, wants to divert us from the issues relating to the statement and begin discussing his report, which he brought here and we discussed.

The procedural issue I am raising is whether the Member should be allowed to violate our rules by substituting a statement presented by the minister with his committee report.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I do not know. Of course, when the report was discussed, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development was here but the Minister of Internal Affairs was not. It is true that the issue of the mineral police was outstanding and we needed to hear from the minister. I think we shall give you an opportunity to respond to the report from Buhweju and that from Mubende because there were issues raised concerning mineral police.

DR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, I also recall that I am the one who raised this issue that the minister should come and respond to the issues that were raised in the report and, of course, it is an addition to what hon. Ssewungu is raising.

THE SPEAKER: For that matter, I will put him on the Order Paper, specifically, to respond to report from Buhweju and that from Mubende. Today, he was answering the issues of composition and numbers of the mineral police.

DR KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is that, first, as a committee, we saw the memo establishing the Mineral Police Protection Unit. It had all the good intentions. It was meant to do the sensitisation of the artisanal miners on the dangers of illegal mining and things to do with environmental protection.

However, what we have in the report shows that the intention of establishing it and what is happening now completely defer. This is why I am wondering whether, actually, the honourable minister has seen that report. If the minister has not seen the report, he should confess that he has not seen it, ask for time to go and look at it and then come back and respond.  To bring out some key highlights from the report – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should be fair to the minister. He came to answer a particular question. If we had asked him to come and respond to the Buhweju and Mubende report, that would be a different matter. You are being unfair to him. We shall put him on the Order Paper and he shall come back specifically on those issues. 

MR KIWANUKA: Madam Speaker, we did not mention Buhweju or Mubende. It was a request that the minister comes and responds to that report. 

THE SPEAKER: I am going to create time on the Order Paper for him to specifically respond to those reports. Allow the minister to conclude, please.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, as the minister concludes - I wish hon. Opendi was also here. You remember, I was amongst those who added their voice to demand Gen. Moses Ali to see the fear and the matters that were raised by hon. Opendi that day. I asked: how can we allow this? Is this really one Government?

One other allegation that hon. Opendi raised was that she had been denied access, yet she is the political head of that sector. She even said that she had gone to see one of the senior ministers and the minister refused to see her. That is why I am saying that I wish she was here. Like my colleagues raised, Gen. Odongo Jeje should look at that Hansard and pick those issues

The other is the Prime Minister, who is supposed to respond to this. How can a minister and her commissioners be denied access? The commissioners from Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development also complained that they are denied access by this police force. Have the police overtaken the management, the policing and everything else? This is why I would like to agree with Members who said that they needed to have looked at the Hansard and picked out those issues, other than us repeating those matters here.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister promised to report back to the House. I am still waiting for that report to understand how a minister can be denied access to those places. To save my brother, these allegations from hon. Ssewungu should not be on him. He should just lay on the Table the list so that we can know that hon. Ssewungu is a liar.

THE SPEAKER: I instruct the Clerk to avail two hard copies of the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the Mubende artisanal miners and the report from Buhweju on the same subject to the minister. I am going to arrange time for him to come specifically to speak to those issues.  Honourable minister, please conclude.

GEN. (RTD) JEJE ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker,for the opportunity to respond to the issues raised by Members. I would like to also thank colleagues for their interest in the subject matter. 

Let me quickly run through the additional points of inquiry that the colleagues have raised. The first point was whether the police is involved in mining. The second is whether there has been an indication of a rise in revenue or otherwise, since police has been deployed in this area. The third is on the need for the mining industry to be reorganised. 

Before I continue to answer these questions, I would like remind us of the initial purpose of my statement. First of all, my statement was intended to explain the legality of the Police Minerals Protection Unit. Is it legally created or is it an illegal creation? Secondly, the structure of that unit once formed. Thirdly, the composition of that unit; and fourthly, the operations of that unit. Those were the four operative areas I was supposed to respond to.

In my statement, I have indicated the legality, the structure, the composition and the operations of this unit. However, you have raised supplementary questions and I would like to respond as follows:

One, I am not aware that the Police Minerals Protection Unit is now involved in mining. Since you have raised it, it is a matter of interest and I will take interest in it.

Two, on whether the police officers come from the same area, what I have and know is that the 148 officers that I have alluded to are composed of almost all tribes; for example, there is a gentleman named Cheptoek, there is another called Ogwal -(Interjections) - In other words, the point I am trying to make is – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow him to respond.

GEN. ( RTD) ODONGO: The third question was on why there are 26 ladies in the force compared to 122 men. You will recollect that our Constitution requires at least 30 per cent. If you do a quick calculation, 26 translates to about 30 per cent.

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssemujju inquired about what you asked me to do. I have just told you that the statement I was asked to make was on the legality, structure and operations of the Police Minerals Protection Unit, which I have made.

I would like to respond to the fact that colleagues seem to think I have made a theoretical presentation. I would like to inform you that I have had the opportunity to sit and discuss this matter with hon. Opendi, the Minister of State for Minerals. I have also had the opportunity to visit some of the mining areas with the honourable minister, together with other persons, including the Commissioner General of Uganda Revenue Authority and others. So, I am talking about what I have seen on the ground. 

You raised the matter of whether the officers in this unit do training. Initially, when they are deployed, they are not trained but they receive training on the job, as they perform their responsibilities. 

Indeed, the initial protection unit was formed as a result of the challenges arising out of the areas where mining was taking place. It is true there are mines all over the country but if there is no mining activity, we have not yet taken interest to protect those areas. 

On what criteria we take to deploy, I have just explained to you. When there is an activity and there is a concern, that is how we happen to have deployed our police officers in the six areas I have mentioned in the report.

There has also been an imputed absence of a relationship between the police and the Minister of State for Mineral Development; hon. Opendi. As I have told you, I have had opportunity to sit in a meeting with hon. Opendi and the officers of the Mineral Protection Unit. 

I have had the opportunity to travel with hon. Opendi, with the officers, Commissioner - Mines and URA Commissioner-General to a mining area in Mubende to see for ourselves what the issues were and what was going on.

In effect, what I have presented is what you asked me for and what I have told you are facts, as I have found them in my field visits; on my part as relates with hon. Opendi.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for labouring to answer our issues negatively. However, I would pray that if he has really talked to the minister, most of the problems in the Police Mineral Protection Unit are because of these police officers I have mentioned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already said that I am going to give an opportunity to the minister to come and respond to the issues contained in the report, as the minister in charge of minerals, in context of those reports. Please.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, my prayer to the minister is that he assures us that he can do readjustments and other redeployments in changing these officers. That would solve the problem. I think he is accepting that my list is legitimate and correct.

The best answer from a General is to say that they are going to correct this mistake and see how they will redeploy. That is the best way -  and he is laughing. That is the best way, otherwise, problems will not stop. So, you have not answered my question.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item no.4.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UPTO $166 MILLION AND 200 MILLION EUROS FROM THE AFRICAN EXPORT IMPORT BANK (AFREXIM) AND 200 MILLION EUROS FROM TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE DEVELOPMENT AND INFRASTRUCTURE BUDGET FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal of Government to borrow up to $166 million and 200million euros from the African Export Import Bank, and from Trade and Development Bank to finance the development and infrastructure budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on National economy for perusal and report back.

PROPOSAL TO BORROW SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS (SDR) 57.0 MILLION (EQUIVALENT TO $ 78.2 MILLION) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO FINANCE THE UGANDA INVESTING IN FORESTS AND PROTECTED AREAS FOR CLIMATE-SMART DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, again, this is a proposal to borrow up to $78.2 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank group to finance the Uganda Investing in Forests and Protected Areas for Climate-smart Development Project.

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on National economy for perusal and report back. Honourable minister, you did not actually – Did you write them electronically? I did not see you lay on the Table. Did you lay the proposals?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I thought now that they are with the Clerk, in this fight against COVID-19, reading them would be sufficient but I can lay them if you ask me.

THE SPEAKER: Present them, please. If they are there, lay them. They are going to the Table, not any particular person and they will be sanitised and sent to the committee.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, it is not the first time for the honourable minister not to lay the documents on Table. Do you remember - one day, there was an issue of the Budget Framework Paper. The minister has this tendency of coming and pretending that he is laying something when it is not there.  He sometimes does not deliver.

Therefore, it makes it look awkward and ugly. He should learn to take Parliament seriously. If he does not have the document, he should say so other than coming to lie to the Speaker and also putting the Clerk in an awkward position. I think the minister must be put to order.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I have confirmed. I am not lying, hon. Okupa, but the procedure is that before an item is put on the Order Paper, the Clerk has to have the papers. Otherwise, how would they come? I do not have them here, Madam Speaker. I thought that they were with the Clerk and I apologise for that. Therefore, I withdraw the item and I will lay them tomorrow or in the next sitting.

THE SPEAKER: The instructions to the Committee on National Economy are hereby withdrawn. Let us go to item five.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 4 AND ADDENDUM 1 AND 2 TO THE SCHEDULE 4 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.24
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Madam Speaker, we submitted the report of the Committee on Budget on Tuesday last week. Madam Speaker, you directed the House as the committee to include a recommendation that would include procurement of marine ambulances for the islands.

The committee has now added the recommendation that we approve Shs 23,893,860,000 to the Ministry of Health for procurement of ambulances of standard type to all districts. 

Furthermore, the committee recommends that some of these funds are utilised to purchase ambulances for the hard-to-reach areas and islands and should specifically be designed ambulances and motorised marine ambulances. I beg to lay a copy of that report.

The committee was also directed to meet the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, including the Uganda Land Commission. The committee has a report after that interaction.

The committee observed that the supplementary expenditure requested was for a specific purpose, as submitted by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the beneficiaries for that request were specifically for the family of Rwabukurukuru, Mr Nagenda Stephen Peter, Busuulwa Julius, Natalia Namuli, Yisaka Lwakana and Geoffrey Mugisha. 

The committee observed that these are part of the stock of arrears for compensation at the custody of Uganda Land Commission, something that was confirmed by the team from the Uganda Land Commission comprised of the Chairperson, Secretary and the Undersecretary.

The committee, therefore, recommends that since this fund was requested for a specific purpose, they therefore be voted for that intended purpose. So, we recommend that the funds are approved for payment to Rwabukurukuru family, Nagenda Stephen Peter, Busuulwa Julius, Natalia Namuli, Yisaka Lwakana and Mugisha Geoffrey. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table copies of that report. I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meeting. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Committee on Budget produced its report on Tuesday and it was debated. However, today as I was seated here, I have been served with a minority report from one of our colleagues, which I would like to object to. As a matter of procedure, the minority report was not submitted to us on the day we produced the main report. As a result, it does not form part of our report. 

I, therefore, request the House to go ahead and approve Supplementary Schedule 4 together with Addendum 1 and Addendum 2. I beg to move. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Budget is a senior Member of this House and he knows that when an addendum is made, it becomes a new idea. This was debated by the committee, therefore there is no way that we can hide the dissenting view. So, based on that addendum, we have been able to come up with the dissenting view. I do not see how Parliament can stop it from being shared by the entire House.

Is it, therefore, in order for the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Budget to deny this House from listening to the voices which are departing from the views of the majority? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not abuse the rules of this House. The committee sat on that addendum, discussed, agreed, and a report was brought here. The report was debated and we would have actually passed it, only that we instructed the committee to go and review two areas – the areas on the land and the ambulances. So, you cannot now come with a minority report at this stage. Let us proceed to the committee stage. 

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 002 – State House

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 2.27 billion be provided for under vote 002, State House, as development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum Shs 2.27 billion be provided for under vote 002, State House, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 003 – Office of the Prime Minister

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a sum of Shs 12.87 billion be provided for under vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, as development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 12.87 billion be provided for under vote 003, Office of the Prime Minister, as development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 10.18 billion be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 10.18 billion be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 012 – Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 7.67 billion be provided for under vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, as development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 7.67 billion be provided for under vote 012, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that Shs 34.6 billion be provided for under vote 014, Ministry of Health, as development expenditure – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, thank you very much. I have here the Schedule 2 report, which was issued in October 2020. It is about face masks. On page 7, it mentions procurement of face masks at Shs 33 billion. On page 20, it mentions procurement of face masks at Shs 24 billion. If you add Shs 33 billion to Shs 24 billion, it becomes Shs 57 billion. 

In the committee report, they are saying the amount of money which the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released is Shs 54.5 billion, yet the total is Shs 57 billion. This is in the report of the committee on page 14. It says, “Releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is Shs 54.5 billion” yet, the supplementary we passed had Shs 33 billion and Shs 24 billion. That is already Shs 57 billion. Shs 57 billion is not equal to Shs 54 billion. 

There is already a discrepancy on the money released for masks. This calls for us to understand what figures we are considering. Where do we put the difference between the Shs 33 billion plus Shs 24 billion and Shs 54.5 billion? 

If we just go by figures, we are going to get confused everyday by changing numbers. Before we pass this, the chairperson should shade more light on this. It should also be a process for Parliament to make a directive to the concerned bodies to issue a report in as far as masks are concerned and audit. 

Madam Chairperson, I have an objection to the approval of the Shs 34 billion before I get the difference on where it went. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I invite the Minister of Health or the chairperson? 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, what my colleague is explaining is a different item that is not under schedule 4. That money under schedule 4 is money for donations, not for masks. The topic for masks is on a different schedule, which is ahead.  

According to confirmation from the ministry, it is true that the approval of the money for masks was Shs 57 billion; that is Shs 33 billion in Addendum 1 and Shs 24 billion in Addendum 2 coming to Shs 57 billion. 

Nevertheless, the releases from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Health did not total to Shs 57 billion but it totalled to Shs 54.5 billion. That is what they paid to the suppliers of masks and now they demand the balance, which is on another schedule of Addendum 1 and 2 of schedule 4. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the chairman should have helped us. He says what we approved – because we have not finished the financial year. This would be less because the other – you are going to vote money twice, if you are not aware, Mr Chairman.

This means what we should deal with should be Shs 33 billion plus Shs 54 billion. The difference between that should not be voted again. That will be voting twice in a budget, which could lead to misappropriation. Someone in the ministry may say, “The other one was voted and so, I should release it and since they have voted it one more time, I should release it.” 

Unless a correction is done – I would also be happy if –(Interruption) 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, I think the chairperson should be fair to the committee, which acknowledged that discrepancy. I thought that the chairperson would explain what happened.

We are aware of a gap between Shs 54 billion and Shs 57 billion. When the ministry asked for the Shs 57 billion, they had not explained what happened to that gap. The chairperson should be fair to some of us who want to tell the House the truth. Can the chairperson explain whether the ministry was able to establish that discrepancy? 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is right. The committee identified that and expressed concern. The chairperson was supposed to get clarification from the ministry. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, what the colleague has raised is right. I would like to concede that when we reach Addendum 1 of schedule 4 on page 29 - since that money was already voted, we reduce that amount by Shs 2.5 billion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, are you conceding to reducing it by that value? 
Madam Chairperson, the other point I would like to put across is that we, Parliament, are getting confused with these monies. When we pass the supplementary budget for the Ministry of Health – even the upper one for ambulances because it is all in regard to COVID-19; this can be abused. The Auditor-General should quickly issue to us a special audit report on these masks. 
If you look at the list of distribution – I will give an example of my district, which has a population of almost 300,000 people. They have only supplied 19,000 masks. What happens to the others who have not got them? That shows that they want the people of Sironko to die while others are protected. That is not the only district I am mentioning. There are other affected districts, including Kamuli. 

I would like request that before we pass an additional funding, we need a directive to the Auditor-General to quickly conduct a special audit in the expenditure of COVID-19 resources.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, that issue has been noted and we shall handle it. For now, let us proceed with Vote 014. I had already put the question and I would like to confirm that when we come to page 29, we shall deal with the issues raised by hon. Nandala-Mafabi; that the chairperson of our committee has also conceded.

I put the question that the sum of Shs 34.6 billion be provided for under Vote 014 - Ministry of Health as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 20.49 billion be provided for under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 20.49 billion be provided for under Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 114 - The Uganda Cancer Institute  
THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1.28 billion be provided for under Vote 114 - The Uganda Cancer Institute as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021.
I now put the question that a total sum of 1.28 billion be provided for under Vote 114 -  The Uganda Cancer Institute as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I heard the chairperson say that they met and agreed to approve but if you look at the reasons given, it looks like it is only big people who fall sick and the small ones do not. 

The schedule they have attached says - and I would like to read it verbatim – “and yet, there are many people demanding for money in Uganda Land Commission…”; 

    1.  Kisaakye – a presidential directive; 
    2. The second one is a court order;  
    3. The third one is lost county;
    4. Need for urgent medical attention which is Shs 1.6 billion;
    5. The next is Shs 123 million - need for urgent medical attention;
    6.  Mugisha Geoffrey – Shs 1.49 million, also need for urgent medical attention. 

Madam Chairperson, I think if we collected all the people demanding money from the Uganda Land Commission, the majority of them would be sick. If they are sick, why did we choose only these six as sick while others are not?

Therefore, I would like to ask Parliament to stay this until the entire list of the people is here. Failure to do this - It looks like you picked a few people and left out the majority. There are those who are demanding for only Shs 20 million, Shs 30 million or Shs 50 million. Why do you want only six people to take Shs 12.1 billion? Is it because they have access to the minister or the President? 

All these people are Ugandans. I do not think it would be very fair that only six people are paid Shs 12.1 billion yet the demands on the Uganda Land Commission are more. Why wouldn’t we put this under the normal budget process so that everybody gets something, or we make a schedule so that every Ugandan gets a portion?

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is bringing up a pertinent issue. He is saying that maybe the minister should come with the criteria used for paying the people who are demanding. If this Parliament has okayed the Lusanja and Ndeeba church payments, for example, how can we pay these ones and refuse to pay the others?

I propose that since all these are demanding payment from Government, we pay in a phased manner; we clear this one, then another supplementary may come - hon. Bahati and the Prime Minister are here - so that we clear another group. Otherwise, if we chase them, they will say that you have now paid Kiconco, why are you not paying us?

Therefore, what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying is true but we need to pay these people. I request Members that the idea of paying these people is okay. Let us pay them but the minister should come - since the Prime Minister is here – to tell us when you are paying the others.  

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The Prime Minister knows that from my area, from Nakisunga Subcounty, in a place called Buziranjovu, people came to his office before I was a Member of Parliament. However, to date, they are still demanding for compensation. Last time, they heard that we were considering the Ndeeba case, which is just recent, yet they are not a small number of people but two villages. 

Madam Chairperson, if we are to consider this, all the people should be brought on board so that we see how we can cater for the concerns of everyone. Otherwise, people think that we are considering the rich and forgetting the poor.

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The list of the beneficiaries has been mentioned but they are few, yet there are many people who want to be paid. Could the line ministry explain, before we pass this budget, when the others will be paid? 

It has become an issue that those who are close to the powers that be are paid, yet there are others who are supposed to be paid under the land fund. Wouldn’t it be prudent for us to first get the names of beneficiaries and how much each beneficiary is getting before we approve this supplementary budget?

There are those of us out there who may not have access to the top offices and may never get paid. Even if they are 1000, let them be highlighted. Let us know when we are passing a supplementary budget indicating that for this financial year, probably we are clearing the first phase of 100 and the rest will be cleared in another supplementary budget or another financial year. That would help us in planning as Parliament. I would like that to be rectified.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Chairperson, what the honourable member is saying is true. In Kanungu, for instance, those who suffered because of Kibwetere have never been compensated. Their land that was sold has never been paid for. When we talk about land compensation and other issues, I feel touched. 

We are talking about these people that are close but those who are far and who have no one to talk to, who cannot reach anywhere, the very vulnerable ones, should be thought about. Kibwetere orphans should be considered when we are talking about compensating land issues because they do not have land as I speak. Those children are suffering in different areas and do not have where to build houses. It is very serious.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise in support of the payment for land compensations. However, we must be guided further because there are several people affected, especially those of Bukakata and Nabugabo.   

I was here on the Floor about a year ago and I talked about these people. They have not done any activity on their farms and they are about 370 people. They have never been compensated and it is now almost four years. 

The Prime Minister will bear witness. We had a very big meeting in Nabugabo and Bukakata with the residents trying to claim their compensation but up to now, nothing has been done. I appeal to the ministry to come up with the entire list of those who need compensation for their land. Otherwise, I have no objection to paying those already in the pipeline. I rest my case.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the Minister for Lands to give an assurance to the country that there are other Ugandans who are going to be considered and when? How will it happen?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should also be held culpable. You remember the matter that came up in the committee where Bank of Uganda came and disowned the Shs 481 billion; how does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development operate without having these MDAs on board? Now, it is a similar case with the Uganda Land Commission. Where is the problem?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you need to sort this out because if we encourage this type of ad hoc things, we would have lost that money, which finance was pushing for without Bank of Uganda’s knowledge. If the chairperson had not insisted that we want the Governor here - When Bank of Uganda officials came, he said they had never asked for that money. Before even two weeks elapse, the Uganda Land Commission has also come up with a similar problem. Where is the problem? Can the Prime Minister sort out this issue in the Executive?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We really need to move. I know that many people are waiting for money in this country; honourable minister, what is your plan for the country?

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate the views of my colleagues and I would like to inform the House that the Uganda Land Commission has a regular budget where many people are regularly compensated. 

I would also like to acknowledge that there are many other people, a long list to the tune of Shs 1 trillion, who need to be compensated. This one arose out of a supplementary budget. 

I would like to assure this House that my ministry undertakes to Table before Parliament, the entire list of people that have a claim for compensation. 

I would like to say that the Chairperson of the Land Commission is ready with this list. We shall Table it and even Table a criteria through which people will begin to be paid. Otherwise, this one-off was just a supplementary –(Interruptions)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act provides for how a supplementary comes in. Given the way the minister is proceeding, does this meet that criteria that it should be unforeseen? No. If this has been a part of the list, it is not something that is unforeseen as stated by the law. How does this come here? Couldn’t it have waited? There are very many people who are out there – including the people of Teso and others.

Is she in order to bring this matter that is foreseeable instead of bringing it in the budget? When she even talks about the Land Commission’s own funding, I thought this comes from the Land Fund. Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to move. Honourable minister, this matter is really of national concern and we think that before the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development returns with the National Budget Framework Paper, we want you to lay here the list of those people who are claiming so that we can incorporate their issues into the budget. It must be done before the end of this month.

MS KAMYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. It will be brought before the end of this month. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we still have time. This Shs12.1 billion, given the criteria they have applied does not really pass the test. One, is that it was not unforeseeable. And they have said it was in the budget. If you remember, the Chairperson of Land Commission said they were not aware of what was happening. That means the minister has become the accounting officer and under the law, the minister can never be an accounting officer. Given what I am seeing, I think hon. BetiKamya is now the accounting officer of Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and Land Commission. 

Given that this is a disagreement, wouldn’t it be better – if you look at the figures, one wants Shs1.5 billion for medical attention, another wants Shs1.4 billion, the balance for medical attention. But there are those who need Shs 50 million or 10 million. 

If we decided to divide this and everybody gets something – for example if everybody got Shs 10 million, we would serve 1200 people. If we gave Shs 20 million, 600 people would get. 

Madam Chairperson, I would propose that every Ugandan is a tax payer. Every Ugandan who had his property and has lost it to Government must be paid. Given the fact that we have now identified money here, maybe, from the contingency fund,Shs 12.1 billion, I would propose that we stay this money, get the whole list and share it equally among all the people who are demanding. (Interjections) – How do you say “order” to me? Do you have authority? (Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am compelled to put my brother to point of order. I am a member of the budget committee. Among the entities that we have consistently given money under supplementary expenditures is Bugisu Cooperative Union of which hon. Nandala is the sole beneficiary. Never at any one point has hon. Nandalastood to ask the criteria under which Bugisu Cooperative Union has been getting in almost every supplementary (Applause)

Madam Chairperson, even then, as the committee on Budget, the first thing we do is subject all these requests to those requirements of the law as to whether they are foreseeable or unavoidable. We did that.

Is hon. Nandala in order to come and start raising issues as to whether other claimants can get yet when it comes to Bugisu Cooperative union, he has never raised any issue here. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult to foresee sickness. You cannot plan for sickness. Let us allow these people to get this money. We have already set a programme and we have tasked the minister of lands to bring the list before the end of this month and before the minister brings the National Budget so that we can incorporate the demands of the population in that. 

I now put the question that Shs 12,112,154,000 be provided for under Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission as development expenditure. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Othieno has raised an issue which should not go unchallenged. He says that he is a member of the Committee on Budget and he said that Bugisu Cooperative Union is a beneficiary. He knows the reason why it was a beneficiary. 

Madam Chairperson, Bugisu Cooperative Union was taken over by Government. When they took over, they came and took their money and their coffee. What they are reclaiming is what Government took. That is what they have been paying.

Madam Chairperson, is a whole member of the Committee on Budget procedurally right to come and start making statements when he knows that what he is raising is quite out because there is an audit report which clearly shows that Bugisu Cooperative Union demands a lot of money from Government?

Secondly, I had never known why this gentleman also lost primaries in NRM –(Laughter) I think the behaviour he has – (Laughter)

MS BETTY AOL: Madam Chair, it is very important that hon. Othieno is a member of the Committee of Budget. If something was wrong that time, why didn’t you come out and say it then? Why do you think that something that is not right should simply be passed because that one of Bugisu Cooperative Union was passed? We are not doing our work correctly. 

The honourable minister of lands should go back to her people and make sure that they do not appear very ugly before the nation when the Chairperson of Uganda Lands Commission speaks differently from what the minister will have said. That is why the question of who the accounting officer is arises. If it were just because of an emergency, not all that which has been presented here would be about sickness. The cases of sickness are three; the rest are not. So, why do you have to leave out the rest? Let us do our work to the dot. Let us not simply think about personalities. Thank you.

Vote 157

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 57 million be provided for under vote 157 for National Forestry Authority as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 57 million be provided for under vote 157, National Forestry Authority, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 500-797 - Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a sum of Shs 785 million be provided for under votes 500 to 797 as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2020/2021 -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are aware that there are a lot of complaints about new administrative units not being catered for, yet they are already operational. I have looked at this supplementary request of Shs 785 million and realized it does not cater for those new units. That means there are staff salary arrears. There are issues to deal with expenditure taking place. 

For the other votes, we are paying up in billions but when it comes to local governments, we are only looking at Shs 0.79 billion, which is for about 144 districts, 2,300 sub-counties, I do not know how many municipalities and there are also cities already in place. This figure does not include all these.

Madam Chairperson, wouldn’t it be better that we first understand what happens to those local governments?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, you are all aware there was money in the famous hon. Karuhanga and hon. Odur case of Shs 20 million, that was appropriated among the Shs 10 billion, which was paid to each Member of Parliament as COVID-19 funds. Colleagues returned that money and this is the money we are now giving back to those local governments to allow them spend. We are now voting for them to spend. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 785 million be provided for votes 500 to 797, local governments, as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 6.983 billion be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 6.983 billion be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: There is an item on vote 122, Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) - Shs 40 million.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not yet got there.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: It is on the first part that we have just finished.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which first one?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: It is on Schedule 4 - the one we have just concluded. It is before the local governments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not touched KCCA at all.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: It is there. We are now moving to another item.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before local governments, we have National Forestry Authority.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, it was an error by the finance ministry to include KCCA under the local governments. So, the committee deemed it fit to transfer from the local governments. It comes before we go to the local governments; vote 122, Kampala Capital City Authority, with Shs 40 million. It is the same money which was returned by the Members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which vote number is that?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: It is vote 122, on page 28 of the report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, under votes 500 to 797, the sum of Shs 785 million includes Shs 40 million for vote 122, which is Kampala Capital City Authority.  The Clerk will correct that.

I put the question that a total sum of Shs 6.983 billion be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the amount in Schedule 4, Addendum 1, for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under vote 008 should be Shs 31,983,500,320.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, this Shs 6.9 billion is not correct.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: No, it is not correct. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I will put the question on vote 008. I put the question that a sum of Shs 31,983,500,320 be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,983,500,320 be provided for under vote 008, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for development expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that development or recurrent expenditure? Are there two figures for development expenditure? I see another one of Shs 25 billion.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports-

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 1.451 billion – 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I am particularly interested in Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) under Ministry of Education and Sports. Already, they have Shs 15 billion for PLE. They also have Shs 46 billion for examinations in secondary schools. However, in their justification - this is what they are saying, which I do not agree with. They say they are going to open up 10 more examinations marking centres. 

The number of students at different levels is not the same. Primary Leaving Examination has a bigger number, Ordinary Level has a smaller number and Advanced Level has the smallest number. I wonder what these 10 centres are going to do at that particular time. (Interjections) No, they cannot use them all. 

Secondly, they have said they will procure face masks and hand sanitisers. We have already given face masks to Ugandans. That means these teachers got face masks. Are they going to get another set? I do not think this money is going to serve the purpose. We know that these children have been studying and there is no report attached here to show us how they have been sitting in schools and whether they have the same spacing at school. That is the question we should ask as we look at this money. I am not in agreement with the Shs 10 billion. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Ssewungu for raising that question. Last time, he did the same. I would like to confirm that this budget, which was submitted by UNEB was truly and thoroughly scrutinised. It is a budget to cater for the situation that we are in, in order to be able to conduct examinations. 

I have seen the Minister of State for Education and Sports here. Hon. Obua is here to give you explanation. I would like to, however, tell you that we went through this budget when the submission was made to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. For us to be able to carry out these examinations, under the COVID-19 arrangement, this money is needed. 

MR SSEWUNGU: You see, as I leave, this is why we have different situations here. Hon. Bahati has not been coming in for some sections like Uganda Land Commission. Hon. Obua is around but hon. Bahati has come in first to ask him to come and explain. This is a very funny scenario. I do not know why hon. Bahati is coming in. The situation you are talking about is not in tandem with what we are saying. This money will not help.

Madam Chairperson, we shall be coming back here. Definitely, God will keep me survive. Otherwise, the expenditure of Shs 10 billion is not necessary for UNEB. I can give information later on that; even the ministry was not agreeing with this money. 

I am saying that there is enough space for the students to sit during examinations. I do not the need to create more. I do not think UNEB is the first institution to give examinations. Other institutions have been giving examinations under COVID-19 without asking for a supplementary, yet, they are also Government entities. (Interjections) I am not talking about the whole country. I am talking about examinations, hon. Kasule. You know I know these things. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it examination rooms or marking centres? What is it? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Is it examination rooms? Marking centres is one of the reasons they are giving. Madam Chairperson, I have said that the sitting –(Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Chairperson, hon. Ssewungu is raising an issue while we are in the Committee of Supply. The item we are looking at right now is Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports. He is, however, raising issues of UNEB, which is a different vote that we have not yet reached. Is it procedurally right for him to take us where we have not even reached? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a sum of Shs 1.451 billion be provided for under Vote 013 – Ministry of Education and Sports as Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 – Ministry of Health 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, this money is for the Ministry of Health and I think it has been reduced to Shs 31 billion. It is no longer Shs 33 billion. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we reduced that money to Shs 31,056,115,200. 


THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 31,056,115,200 be provided for under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health as Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 31,056,115,200 be provided for under Vote 014 – Ministry of Health as Recurrent Expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 112 – Kampala Capital City Authority 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does KCCA have two votes? Why is it Vote 112 here? -  Honourable members, I propose the question, under Vote 112, that a sum of Shs 60,000,000 be provided for to KCCA as Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 60,000,000 be provided for under Vote 112 – KCCA as Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 312 – Petroleum Authority of Uganda
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what about Vote 016 – Ministry of Works and Transport? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is coming. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable committee chairperson, why did you put it in this order if it is coming later? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 1.88 billion be provided for under Vote 312 – Petroleum Authority of Uganda as Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1.88 billion be provided for under Vote 312 – Petroleum Authority of Uganda as Development Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 500-797 – Local Governments 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 159,960,000 be provided for under Vote 500-797 – Local Governments as Recurrent Expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021.

I put the question that a total sum of Shs 159,960,000 be provided for under votes 500-797, Local Governments, as recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 500–797 - Local Governments 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 23.14 billion be provided for under votes 500-797, local governments, as developmental expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that a total sum of Shs 11.5 billion be provided for under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, as development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 
I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11.5 billion be provided for under vote 016, Ministry of Works and Transport, for development expenditure for the financial year 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 18.6 billion –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, this is vote 014, Ministry of Health. According to page 23 of the report, this money is going to be used to buy the vaccine, and they are saying that each dose will cost $16.92. During our debate, we discovered that Kenya is going to buy each dose at $3 and this has been confirmed. If we approve this $16.92, that means that even for the next doses, the price will be $16.92. 

I would like to request that the committee of the whole House stays this until we establish the right price. Why can’t we buy from Kenya, which is buying its doses at $3 and we want to buy ours at $17 per dose? 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a very bright person and he brings good ideas. Can he lay on the Table the Kenyan contract with the firm? He could probably be bringing up social media issues. If they are very good issues, why don’t you lay them on the Table?

Madam Chairperson, if it is true that the price in Kenya is $3 and we have passed ours at $16, then we shall multiply the number of doses. Otherwise, I propose that members just approve. The technical people, together with the minister, came up with how they reached at that figure. Now that hon. Nandala-Mafabi has brought up the issue of $3, let him substantiate and give us the details. If it is true that the price will come to $3, we shall increase the number of doses.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think engineer Waluswaka is right in his own way because he is always absent. During this time, he was nursing the idea of losing the primaries and elections. This is not the way you are going to earn a living – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member. I think you are using unparliamentary language. Democracy is democracy. You do not need to harass someone because he lost an election. It is not right.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, he has been harassing me because he must be too tired from the election. 

We have a report here from Kenya, which says that the Kenyan Government is going to import 22,000 doses at $3 each. This was even in the Daily Nation of Monday, which is the national paper of Kenya. Newspapers are very important. The Daily Nation of Kenya is equated to our New Vision here.

Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Chairperson, I rise on a point of order. First of all, we are aware that any communication can be put in any media. In this particular case, we are talking about the budget of the Ministry of Health. 

Secondly, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is good at undermining losers. Hopefully, next time, he never wins so that he can feel it. 

He is quoting the Daily Nation of Kenya to justify why we should stand over our supplementary budget for the Ministry of Health on the doses. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order? Should he continue to be heard when he is still undermining Members of this Parliament, who are serving their term in this august House? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, today is Thursday. On Tuesday, when this supplementary was brought, there were submissions on the Floor of this House that the cost of the vaccine, as presented here, was exorbitant. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s point is that if this is overpriced, should we allow it to be overpriced? That is what he is asking. These are public resources. Honourable minister, why are you shy? Go to the podium.

MS ACENG: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clarify on the prices of the vaccine. First, I would like to refer Members to the COVID-19 vaccine market dashboard that is easily accessible on the website. Just type it and it will come up. That dashboard gives transparency and visibility to information on the COVID-19 vaccine market. It also gives an overview of the vaccines in the pipeline, their developmental stage and technology platforms. It also provides information on the price points.  

Currently, the range of reported vaccine prices per dose varies from $2 to $44 and it keeps on changing every minute. Regarding the $7 that we quoted, all countries have been guided by the GAVI supported countries to use a working price of $7 per dose, as a planning figure for the AstraZeneca vaccine. This means each person would require $14 for the vaccine and an additional $3 for deployment, which gives us $17.

However, Madam Chairperson, when a country places an order, they begin negotiation and join the queue. Since then, we have negotiated a price of $4 and we are procuring 400,000 doses to begin with. Subsequently, as the queue keeps on jumping up, we will get many more doses. 

Madam Chairperson, that $7 came from GAVI and that was our tentative price at that time. Right now, we have an allocation at $4 per dose. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you can see my argument. I would like to refer Members - you do not have to go to the Daily Nation. Go the COVID-19 vaccine cost. If I had not raised that, you would have taken the cost of $8 and 40 cents.

They are even giving prices and now, the current price is $2.63 per dose. I do not know which dashboard we are using. Therefore, Eng. Waluswaka and my sister Amongin are busy with technology for roads. If I had not raised this, we were going to pass a budget allowing the ministry to buy a COVID-19 vaccine dose at $ 17, yet here, the minister has come with $ 4 for a dose. However, when you google, it is £2.65. What are we looking at? We have to be very careful. Madam Chairperson, let me get information - 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, can you work out at $ 4, how many doses we shall get from this money?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, as he works out the numbers, I would like to give information. Every time we watch television, we notice that we have several types of vaccines. It is not just AstraZeneca. Countries have come up with different types of vaccines. Which one is Uganda going for? We must be specific.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the minister has said we are going for AstraZeneca.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, given the fact that we have intervened, it means that we were going to spend $17 per vaccine, and out of that, we are going to get $ 4 and save one. Therefore, from the 8 million, it means we are going to import 32 million doses. Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for your resilience and asking the minister to come and speak.

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Using exactly the same Google source hon. Nandala quoted, a minister in Kenya, on 31st January in Reuters, was quoted saying that the vaccine costs $ 7.7 per shot. Therefore, I propose that we approve and we audit. If you do $7.7, you get $15.5 for the complete dose. I propose that we pass the budget and we follow up, so that we see what we can get with what have approved because we require the vaccines.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, Dr Bukenya is now taking us back. We were coming closer to what the minister was processing from that dashboard.(Interjections) Hon. Bahati, stop pointing at me. If you want to speak, the microphone is there. You and your colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, do not make me say what I should not say from here.

I think we are getting closer; it is now a matter of now agreeing. We could go by $ 4 and move on. Of course, these things should be audited and in case of any variation, it can be adjusted.

DR ACENG: Madam Chairperson, it is quite true that the price on the dashboard keeps on changing. The exact price that will be offered to Uganda will come on our invoice after we have paid a commitment fee. The $5 million that we are requesting is a commitment fee. I request that the House approves this and oncewe have the invoice, we shall present that paper to Parliament here, so that we can view the exact cost.

Madam Chairperson, we urgently need this vaccine. I humbly request that we approve the figure but not the cost. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that under vote 014- Ministry of Health, Shs 18.5 billion be provided for the recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 18.5 billion be provided for vote 014- Ministry of Health, recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 101- Electoral Commission

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you recall that one of the issues is biometric voter system and they want Shs 43.762 billion for this. It would serve us to understand, are these new ones or these are the old ones that we are hiring? The Chairperson of the committee should help us. We already had biometric systems, which even did not work. What is this money for and how many biometric systems are they?

Secondly, you are saying that these are the same systems we used on Parliamentary, Presidential and Local Government. I never saw any difference between the new ones and the ones that we used in 2016 elections.  This means the ones of 2016 elections were the ones that we used. If there was an addition, it must have been a small number. If the number was small, how many are they and at what cost?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, just on the machines, I think a lot needs to be clarified from the Electoral Commission. I will give you a live example of myself. I voted during the Presidential and Parliamentary elections but when we went back to vote for Local Government, I put my finger and they said I was not on the register. Yet, we voted in the first round. So, were they the same machines or different? Were these the borrowed ones? How could I vote in the Parliamentary and Presidential elections but the same machine rejects me for the Local Government, claiming I was not on the list despite having the slip?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, there is information we have that the Electoral Commission procured 2,000 biometric machines and the 30,000 were hired. As we pay for these machines, what is their durability and time service? Would they still be of any essence in the next elections? We should look at these issues because they were very difficult. I used them twice but they may not serve for the next election, as the honourable member has stated.

Chairperson of the committee, I do not know whether you took effort to find out whether the Electoral Commission hired these machines from abroad and now, they want to buy them after use. What is the quantity and quality of those machines? You must find out that information before we give out this money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, you are asking questions that should really be in an audit. I do not know how the Chairperson of the committee would be able to answer that.

MR ISIAGI: Madam Chairperson, I have only exact answers. As far as machines are concerned, we were informed that Government took a decision to hire the Biometric Voter Verification System and a contract was signed with the supplier totalling Shs 93.762 billion. A down payment of Shs 50 billion for the contract was already made. The supplier now demands for Shs 43.762 billion as the balance. Therefore, this money is to fulfil the terms of the agreement. That is how much we have; it is Shs 93.762 billion. I cannot divulge other details, unless the Electoral Commission comes on the Floor and submits them. I do not know the number of machines, but they were at each and every polling station. If you know the number of polling stations, divide that by the money and you will know how much each machine cost. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, if you have said that the cost was Shs 93 billion and Shs 50 billion was already paid, why is it Shs 55 billion now here? That goes beyond the Shs 93 billion.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chair, that is one item, the BVVS. The next item is demarcation of parliamentary constituencies, local governments and other electoral areas which were re-organised. There was re-organising of town councils. That comes to Shs 2.8 billion. Another item constituting the Shs 55 billion is the conduct of elections in the newly created areas like cities, counties, districts and town councils, which elections they conducted. Another item is the newly created constituency of older persons. They had to conduct elections for those older persons. 

Colleagues, you will note that the Electoral Commission was supposed to conduct a general election. After a general election, there can only be by-elections. So, they had to fit this within their resources. That is why they say, that amount - Shs 2.8 billion, Shs 7.3 billion and Shs 1 billion –was got from other activities which they had to postpone payment for; for example, they were now not able to pay electoral supervisors. 

This is also the money they would use to gazette the winners and the results, and to also collect electoral materials from the field. They have not been able to do that because they used that money to conduct elections in those newly created constituencies. 

Colleagues, you are aware that at the time we created some of these constituencies like cities, town councils and for elderly persons, the budget had already been approved. That is how it qualifies to come under a supplementary budget. Totalling all that, together with the contract of Shs 43 billion, that brings the figure to Shs 55.023 billion. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I think we just have to stand over this one. Already, hon. Opolot has told us the truth. From my first submission, I said that they procured 2,000 and hired 30,000 from Smartmatic Company of Netherlands. Now, we need to find out what the interest of procuring 2,000 and hiring the 30,000 was. 

In your supplementary, you are saying that you want to buy, not pay for – 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: The cost of the contract of hire is the Shs 93 billion. Shs 50 billion was paid, so the balance of Shs 43 billion is to pay the contractor for what was hired.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that under vote 102, the Electoral Commission, a total sum of Shs 55,023,000,000 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2020/2021. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 55,023,000,000 be provided for under vote 102, Electoral Commission, as recurrent expenditure for financial year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 128 – Uganda National Examinations Board

MR SSEWUNGU: I come back on that same matter as before. I think now hon. Bahati will not come up and the minister will come in. I still maintain my earlier position as I stated that UNEB has already got this money and there is no need to give them Shs 10 billion. 

The number of children sitting for Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) is far bigger than the number of O-Level students and those at A-Level are even far less. Therefore, when you go for 10 other centres throughout the process, that will be wastage of funds. 

I stated that the masks are already procured; they have already been catered for within the supplementary. Also, examinations have always been sat in a spaced manner. They have never sat exams without being spaced, and this is not the first time that exams are being done during COVID-19 time, unless they are going to say they want to buy desks. We also need to know that. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Chair, it is true, as my colleague has said, that PLE candidates are more than those sitting for O-Levels and A-Levels. However, he should also take into consideration that PLE is done within two days while O-Level and A-Level examinations are done in 24 days. 

According to UNEB, they have been having a standard way of spacing. Their standard has been one metre apart. Now, due to COVID-19, it has to be two metres. That calls for a sitting arrangement of two metres apart. As such, they will need more classrooms to fit these candidates. Those who would fit in one classroom will now fit in about three classrooms. As such, it increases the number of invigilators. That is the first cost raising this money. They have to get more invigilators. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, let me help the honourable member. Yes, PLE candidates sit for two days and all of them attend. When you go to O-Level, the numbers of students who sit different subjects keep changing. There is even a day when a school has only one student sitting an exam, depending on the selection done by students. It is only maybe mathematics or English that has all the students. The money has to reduce as a matter of fact. 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: I thank the colleague for that contribution. However, UNEB also put that into consideration -

MR SSEWUNGU: Why are you helping the minister?

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: I am giving an explanation as the chairman. Why don’t you want to get the information? The exams are done in 23 days but there are those subjects which are sat by few candidates, therefore not requiring all those invigilators. That is why in planning for the O-Level exams, UNEB is planning only for 14 days instead of 23 days. They have offset some days where there are going to be few candidates and as such, fewer invigilators. Their cost drive is based on 14 days not 23 days for O-Level. 

You must note that from a planned budget of 14,850 invigilators, the SOPs will require them to have 23,553 invigilators - a variance of 8,700 - at a unit cost of Shs 48,500 for 14 days and not 23 because of those small subjects you are saying. For A-Level, the planned budget takes care of 7,500, yet the SOPs will require 12,247 invigilators - a variance of 4,747 - at a unit cost of Shs 48,500. They have planned for only 10 days out of the 23 days that examinations take. They have taken into consideration those small subjects like music, fine art and other optional subjects where there are few candidates.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chair, and I thank the committee chair for allowing me speak. I would like to appeal to us to compare the comparables because if you come here and say that PLE is four subjects for two days – First of all, when you talk of O-level, there are very many days, subjects and invigilators involved. I want us to be fair to this entity so that we do not blame anyone for messing up the exams. 

I would really want to give information that you cannot compare PLE to UCE and neither can you compare it with UACE. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Thank you for the information. I would like to emphasise that as far as PLE is concerned, my fellow teacher, hon. Ssewungu; UNEB always – without COVID-19 – uses 39,183 invigilators for two days. However, due to the COVID-19 SOPs, they will require 59,093, which is a variance of 19,900. They pay the invigilators the same rate per day for two days because that is done for just those two days and it is over.

Another cost driver for this money is marking of exams. The invigilators report to marking centres, which marking centres must observe SOPs. There is going to be hand washing machines, temperature guns and they will need extra personnel at the marking centres.

The UNEB still decided not to ask for money for testing for COVID-19 for the examiners. When examiners are taken to a marking centre, you must have those who are negative for COVID-19 and the tests are done. Therefore, they are still in negotiations with the Ministry of Health for Government to support them in testing these examiners without a cost.

However, in case that negotiation fails, you will see UNEB again requesting for money for testing the examiners in big numbers.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I am conceding but my main question is, are teachers getting something bigger this time? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssewungu, I will offer to send you to UNEB to assist them. (Laughter) 
Honourable members, I propose the question that the sum of Shs 10,465,000,000 be provided for under vote 128 - UNEB, as recurrent expenditure of the Financial Year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 10,465,000,000 be provided for under vote 128 - UNEB, as recurrent expenditure of the Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Votes 552, 588, 596 and 786 – Local Governments

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a sum of Shs 1.11 billion be provided for under votes 552, 588, 596 and 786 Local Government as development expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021.

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 1.11 billion be provided for under votes 552, 588, 596 and 786 Local Government as development expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do report thereto.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has approved Supplementary Schedule 4 and Addendum 1 and 2 with amendments.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
6.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: The minister was laying air earlier on. Can he now formally lay the documents under item four? Hon. Nandala, do you want to take coffee? (Laughter)

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal by Government to borrow up to $166 million and 200 million euros from the African Export and Import Bank and 200 million euros from Trade and Development Bank to finance the development and infrastructure budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Secondly, I beg to lay a proposal to borrow SDR equivalent to $78.2 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank group to finance the Uganda Investing in Forests and Protected Areas for the Climate-smart Development Project.

Madam Speaker, these are real papers this time. I beg to lay.
Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both papers are sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. Thank you.

6.03
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, the minister has just talked about some money for infrastructure development. There is this road, which they have kept talking about but the money is not there - the one from Kamuli to Bukungu-Kagwara-Serere-Soroti-Kumi.

The President has kept on pledging this road up from 2011, 2016 and 2021. Does this infrastructure development include that road? We cannot keep passing money; I cannot be here for the last 20 years, hearing the same thing being pledged and I keep passing loans for infrastructure development for this road and nothing is being done on it.

If it is not here, when is the minister bringing money for that road? The BKK ferry construction has started but there is no way you can only be travelling on a murram road, go into a comfortable ferry and then, go again to murram to connect to these places.

Therefore, when is the minister bringing money for that, if it is not part of this? If it is part of this, let him say so now.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, we may need to request the committee to identify some of these infrastructure developments. We want to understand the items.

The issue of Kamdini-Lira road has become a disgrace to this nation and not only for the people of northern Uganda. It has become a death trap and some of us who are now of age wish the Government could make provision for the senior citizens to fly us over. When we travel along that road, by the time you arrive, you are broken in pieces. I think my senior, the First Deputy Prime Minister, cannot manage that road.

Madam Speaker, I think it is important that the committee is compelled to include Kamdini-Lira road in this infrastructure programme.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are discussing something, which is not here. I do not know what is contained in that proposal. Why don’t we wait until the Committee on National Economy reports and then you can ask? Right now, I do not know what is there. I do not even know who to ask. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, you are right. We are going to interrogate the report. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, my mother, has said, “Nandala-Mafabi, why did you keep quiet today when it came to source of funding for the supplementary? Have they given you something?” I would like to say that they have not. 

The way I see this, it looks as if part of the supplementary is this one. The law says –(Interjections)- I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. If we bring it omnibus as infrastructure development without specifying, it means they can pull the money for infrastructure and say it is the money they have used to fund the supplementary budget on development. That distorts the planning process. 

Why is it that this thing that we have sent to the Committee on Infrastructure – They went to negotiate. What did they really negotiate to put in this development so that it is supported? This money is going for budget support but it is coming with a specific development project. What are those they went – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what you are doing is in breach of our Rules of Procedure. We do not discuss papers, which are laid on the Table. Please, wait until the committee reports and then you can take issue. Let us go to the next item. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BILL, 2018

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek your indulgence. Since Monday, we have been working and this is a technical Bill. We are going into false qualification, investigation and others. We have a lot of issues to raise. Wouldn’t it be right that you allow us to go a bit early today? I am begging you. It is only the few of us who stay here for long. Those who are making noise have just come today for something small and they will leave the three of us here.

DR LYOMOKI: Additionally, apparently this item has many issues but the one following, the one on NSSF, is short; it has only two clauses. I would request that – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2018. Please, we have not yet called that one. Let us finish one item at a time. Honourable members, there were only six or seven clauses remaining. 

MR AOGON: As we closed yesterday, the work that was remaining was not so big. How I wish Members could be patient and we deal with this so that we know it is done. I think there are less than seven clauses remaining and they are without contention.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are not very many; there are about seven clauses. Can we complete them? Otherwise, Dr Lyomoki is going to die of stress if we do not finish this and move his nearer. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister of Health, please stay. We do not want people to leave because their businesses are done. Everything here is Government business. 

Clause 31

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, there was something we were doing on clause 31. 

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Chair, let me read the amendment. Clause 31 is on applications by persons resident in Uganda to foreign accreditation bodies. The proposal is to amend clause 31 in the headnote and body by inserting immediately after the word, “person” the words, “or conformity assessment body”.

The justification is: to provide for application by conformity assessment bodies. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am sure we stood over that clause but not because of that reason. The reason was for the part where we are saying, “resident in Uganda”. The law is very clear; to be a resident in Uganda, you have to stay in the country for more than 183 days, in a year of income. We are therefore arguing about this because this provision will make people come from other countries, stay here for a short time, get accreditation and then seek for foreign accreditation. 

This disadvantages our citizens because those who will come here to register quickly will get the resources. I had wanted us to find out how best – We left this to the chairperson and he agreed that he was going to frame so that it would mean Ugandans and not non-residents will come here for a short time and get that accreditation. I thought that is how we left it. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chair, the word “resident person” is wide and it is inclusive of Ugandans and investors. Imagine CNOOC, Tullow and Total are here and they will need certification for their materials or calibration of their refinery. We are requiring them to do the work here. When you remove the word “resident” and include “citizens”, you will exclude them. The nomenclature refers to a person resident in Uganda. It is all inclusive and it allows all investors to be included as well as citizens. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether we should now make laws that are discriminatory. If we have allowed people to come to Uganda, why do we stop them from doing any type of business? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: These are residents who are already here who want to make an application outside Uganda. The proposal says, “A person resident in Uganda seeking accreditation by a foreign accreditation body”. This person who is a foreigner here should have been accredited by those foreign bodies instead of coming to use Uganda. For us in Uganda, we do not want to reduce our space. In fact, Uganda should use this for businesses so that if you want to come from Kenya, you must join a Ugandan. As a result, the foreigner will be accredited with a Ugandan. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you can be a Ugandan resident here and you will want foreign accreditation. Should you also be stopped? 

MR KASULE: More to that, the head note says, “Application by persons resident in Uganda to foreign accredited bodies”. It means we are compelling people who are here like CNOOC or Tullow or any other company to first deal with accreditation in Uganda before they take this work elsewhere. That is why we are specifically putting this clause to compel everybody. The moment you are doing work here and you need certification, whether it is Coca-Cola or any other company, you do the work here and in order to do it elsewhere, you consult with the minister. Thank you. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, being an independent Member of Parliament, let me give my independent judgement to what I feel is right. 

My proposal is that we do away with the word “resident.” The headnote reads “application by persons in Uganda to foreign accreditation bodies.” As we continue, we now do away with the word “resident in Uganda” so that it reads: 

“A person in Uganda seeking accreditation by a foreign accreditation body shall, before making such an application, comply with requirements specified in regulations made by the minister, in respect of application for accreditation of persons in Uganda by foreign accreditation bodies.” 

We should also eliminate the word “resident”

Madam Chairperson, there is an issue here. If we decide to apply the word “resident”, we are trying to discriminate. There is an implication and so, we shall lose revenue. 

The person who has not made 183 days in Uganda will come and go to Kenya, for instance, because our neighbours have these services. Hence, they will get the services from there and we lose out, which will be a problem. 

In terms of controlling the quality of the products, we need this accreditation, first, to be originated from Uganda. If we did it there, then, things will be okay. I, therefore, would like to urge the House to accept and adopt my proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, do you want me to come from Mauritius and then, come here for one day in Uganda and apply? Is that what you want? 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I really think that, supported by members of the House, if we use the word “resident” it will limit the participants. However, if we dealt away with that word, it will open Uganda up for business. First of all, we are the beneficiaries. If somebody comes here and gets the stamps and the quality being marked here, we are the ones benefiting from the money – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: I think I can agree to the extent that we have already said that wherever there is a word “person”, it should, as amended earlier, also include “conformity assessment body.”  Therefore, we can remove the word “resident” and then remain with the earlier amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what was your rationale for the word “resident” here? 

MS KYAMBADDE: We can collapse the word “resident” and say “accredited body.” We can remove the word “resident.” We concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What have you amended? You should probably tell us the amendment. 

MR KASULE: We are agreeable to the amendment that we say “a conformity assessment body” We have removed the word “resident.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the final text?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we said that it will read; 

“A person or a conformity assessment body in Uganda seeking accreditation by a foreign accreditation body shall, before making such an application, comply with the requirements specified, in regulations made by the minister, in respect for application for accreditation of persons in Uganda by foreign accreditation bodies.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Amend the headnote. 

MR KASULE: I am agreeable to the headnote reading “Application by a person or a conformity assessment body in Uganda to foreign accredited bodies” 

MR OLEGA: Madam Chairperson, in my view, when we have the word “resident” in this law – when someone comes to Uganda, he must be given time so that he is studied and then everything is taxed.

When you remove the word “resident”, it means the powers that be will not identify or look at the person who has just come in to know him properly and know whether he can work here or not. A resident does not do any harm at all. Why remove it? What is the rationale of removing it? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think my colleague was not around yesterday. Let us help him. We all agreed that to go to the foreign bodies, you must have been accredited in Uganda. When you are accredited in Uganda, then, it means you can now apply to a foreign body. In summary, that is what he means. 

However saying “resident” is where you are coming in. by the time you accredit someone, he must have passed the test of having an office, has people who are residents in Uganda and so much more. That is the rationale. That is why we agree. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I have more information to that. Once we decide to qualify this headnote, it will mean that those who are non-residents will find an avenue to escape. A person will come and say he is not a resident and so, he is not bound by the law to get accreditation in Uganda, before he gets accreditation from South Africa, for example. That will be a problem. 

When we leave it generally in Uganda, everybody is bound. As long as you have stepped on our soils, you cannot go and get foreign accreditation before certifying the conditions in Uganda. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if the Minister of Internal Affairs was here, he would help us. The issue of being a resident is important because it attracts tax obligations and some other obligations. It is not a simple matter. That is why I asked the minister what her rationale was for writing “resident” so that we know whether we need it or not. You are the owner of this Bill. What was the rationale? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, given what you have raised again, I suggest we stand over it and study it further because we could easily make a mistake. We want to consult other laws to deal with this.

The Income Tax Law is very easy. A resident is somebody who has stayed in Uganda for 183 days or more. It says that one will be taxed at a resident rate; that is for purposes of tax rates. 

Now, for – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: By the way, in which country will you just go and walk in and apply without a status?  This is not a small issue. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right. We must define the resident as far as the Accreditation Conformity Assessment Bill is concerned. I think we must put an exception. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I think we need professional advice. Is there anyone from immigration here that understands immigration laws? 

MR KASULE: The technical bench has capacity but I do not know whether they are admissible. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They cannot manage this now. 

MR KASULE: They had advised to say that the amendment is to be read this way: 

 “Applications by persons or accreditation assessment body 

A person or a conformity assessment body seeking accreditation by a foreign accreditation body shall, before making such an application, comply with requirements specified in regulations made by the minister in respect of applications for accreditation of persons in Uganda.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I asked the minister, what was the rationale for using the word “resident” here? It is not just the question of nomenclature. Being a resident or non-resident is important.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson, the rationale was to illustrate the fact that the assessment body is operating within Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the body can fly in, apply and go away?

MS KYAMBADDE: Yes, it can.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think. Let us stand over it. Hon. Rukutana, I think we shall need some work in this area. Let us stand over it and ask the Attorney-General and the legal team to handle.

Clause 32

MR KASULE: We propose that clause 32 is amended in the headnote and body by inserting, immediately after the word “person”, the words “or conformity assessment body”. We had said that this is a consequential amendment and that wherever there is the word “person”, we add “or conformity assessment body”. 

The justification is to cater for conformity assessment bodies. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR KASULE: We propose to substitute clause 33 with the following: 
“33. Appeals Committee 

(1) 	There is established a committee to be known as the Appeals Committee, which shall hear and determine appeals relating to decisions of the Service such as refusal to grant accreditation, refusal to renew accreditation or revocation of accreditation.

(2) 	The Appeals Committee shall be an ad hoc committee consisting of three persons appointed by the Minister to hear and determine an appeal relating to a decision of the Service.

(3) 	The members of the Appeals Committee shall be experts in the matter being considered.

(4) 	A member of the Appeals Committee shall not be or have been a person who participated in the making of the decision of the Service that is being appealed against.

(5) 	A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Appeals Committee may appeal to the High court.

(6) 	The conduct of the business of the Appeals Committee shall be as provided for in Schedule 4 to this Act. 

(7) 	The minister shall, in consultation with the Board, determine the terms and conditions of service of the Appeals Committee.”
 
The justifications are:

i) 	The minister being the overall supervisor of the Service, it would cause conflict of interest and bias for the minister to hear appeals from the Service;

ii) 	Having an independent Appeals Committee will eliminate bureaucracy in handling the appeals; and

iii) 	The committee of experts is better placed to handle technical issues of appeal.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the appeal process has timelines; we need to put timelines to it. Secondly, we cannot remove the minister from the process because, having gone to the Appeals Committee, you have to go to the minister and explain that you appealed but that you have gone to him for the final decision. When the minister makes a decision, that is when one goes to court because it is important. The minister is alone but as the supervisor he would not love his institution to be encumbered by court issues, which would become costly. The minster would consult his staff in the ministry.

Having said all that, I want to add that the Appeals Committee should be able to review an appeal within 30 days. First, we have agreed that there should be a committee but when it receives a decision, which has been taken by the service, this aggrieved person shall appeal within 30 days to the Appeals Committee and the Appeals Committee shall, within 30 days, take a decision. 

In addition, if the aggrieved person is not satisfied with the outcome of the Appeals Committee, they will appeal to the minister in charge and the minister, within 30 days, shall have taken a decision; short of which, the appellant can then go to the High Court.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had eliminated the original one that reads thus: 

“(1) 	A person who is aggrieved -
(a)	 by the refusal to grant accreditation;
(b)	 by the refusal to renew accreditation;
(c) 	by the revocation of accreditation, 
(d)	by the Uganda National Accreditation System 
may apply for review of the decision, in writing, to the Minister in a manner and form prescribed by the Minister by regulations.

(2) A person who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Minister may appeal to the High Court.”

The committee, in their wisdom, said that we should create a special appeals committee of three and we laid out the modus operandi. What is admissible from hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that we put a timeline and we are agreeable that it should be heard within two months.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I am agreeable to the 30 days for the person applying. However, the committee should be able to dispose of this within 45 days. I feel that is a middle ground.

MR KASULE: We agree to the 45 days. Lastly, whoever is aggrieved by the committee’s decision is free to go to the High Court not again go to the minister because the appeal will have been completed. The same process applies to tax matters. When one feels they are aggrieved by the committee’s decision, they are free to go to the High Court. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you have entirely removed the minister.

MR KASULE: Yes, on the appeals. We may only add that the appeals decisions be communicated by the minister to whoever is aggrieved.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How can the minister just communicate what he or she has not been involved in?

THE AOGON: I think the committee will have done a good thing. Let us just agree that for purposes of fairness, the minister can help us in doing the review. Somebody can apply to the minister, asking for a review. 

After all, even in courts of law, people apply for reviews. I think it is okay. After that, if you feel things are not okay, you proceed to the next court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that we retain the original proposal?

MR AOGON: Yes, let us retain the original position. 30 days, you apply and after 45 days, the case is heard. After that, you are free to go to the minister, asking for review. If that is exhausted, you can then go to court.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had agreed that a reviews committee be put in place. Once it is put in place – an appeals committee is a third party and makes decisions on behalf of the conformity assessment service, an institution we have created. Once they are dissatisfied with that appeals committee appointed by the minister, then somebody is free to go to court. It is as simple as that. We have put a timeline of 45 days.

MR AOGON: We are on the same page. The whole issue was about the timing. We agree.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson, we concede to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you realise that since yesterday, we have been having trouble working on these amendments. On the 10th, we were considering a Bill entitled, “Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2018”. The House made various amendments to the Bill and stood over clauses 14 and 29, relating to the office of the executive director and revocation of accreditation, respectively. 

These clauses were stood over to review the proposals made by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, where he proposed to have the office of the deputy executive director created under Clause 14 and for provision to be made in Clause 29 to cater for renewal of accreditation. 

I do not want to go into the merits of the above provisions but I am concerned that the amendments are coming in contravention of Rule 133(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Rule 133(4) requires that the Committee of the whole House shall consider proposed amendments by the committee to which the Bill was referred and may consider proposed amendments, on notice, where the amendments were presented but rejected by the relevant committee or where, for a reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented before the relevant committee. 

The above rule allows a Member to move an amendment when the House is considering a Bill during the Committee of the whole House in very limited circumstances.

According to that rule, a Member is required to give notice of his or her intention to propose amendments during the consideration of the Bill in the Committee of the whole House. Notice must be accompanied by the evidence indicating that the Member presented the amendments before the committee that scrutinised the Bill but they were rejected by the committee or that a member has reasonable grounds for not presenting them to the committee.

Therefore, in regard to these amendments, honourable members, there was no proof that these matters specified were admissible under rule 133 and I see that, again, we have started the same thing on the other clauses. 

We have a precedent, under Constitutional Appeal No. 2 of 2018, Male Mabirizi and others Vs the Attorney-General. Court was unanimous in holding that it is clear that the introduction of the extraneous matters during the Bills Committee Stage, without being presented to the relevant committee, was in violation of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, specifically Rule 133(4).

The result of that finding was that matters that had been proposed in violation of Rule 133 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament were declared a nullity and ruled from the Constitution (Amendment) Bill. This is the fate that awaits amendments made to the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill. 

Honourable members, I would like to urge you not to bring amendments to the Floor of this House, which have not gone to the committee and the minister has not had an opportunity to see them. It really confuses us because now, I am stuck. I do not know what Members are proposing because I do not have them. 

Therefore, if you have not presented a proposal to the committee, you are stopped from making proposals on the Floor of this House. Let us proceed with proposals from the chairperson. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are right but those were applicable when there was no COVID-19. Now, we are under COVID-19 and everything is being done in a scientific manner. Even that committee’s report we are talking about came out yesterday. We did not even have it as we were discussing it. Even now, we are following the chairperson. 

If the chairperson can remember, I wrote to him a letter concerning this because I was very interested in organic farmers’ certification. That is why you saw me asking yesterday. He said that at an appropriate time, I would be invited. Unfortunately, we went for elections and we have had hard times. 

Having raised that, it is at this time – this law is very important. My mother was calling it a malwa law but it is not. It is a very important law for our people. We shall seek your indulgence that something must be done. The only thing is that, maybe, we put it in writing. If you allow us, we can do it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I appreciate that it is a very important law but we will make discordant laws because of amendments that come on the Floor. I have not read or thought about them, the chairperson has not seen them and neither has the committee nor the minister. All of us are being ambushed here. This is not fair. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we had proceeded well on Clause 33. The amendment is in the report and it was on the appeals committee. We said that we propose to replace the appeals committee with the proposed amendment and I have read the proposed amendment. What the Members were adding was the timeframe of 45 days. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the timeframe has not come. I have not studied the timeframe and neither have you. 

MR KASULE: Yes, thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34 

MR KASULE: Clause 34 is on giving false information. Clause 34 is amended by substituting the words “one hundred” with the words “six hundred”. The justification is that a stringent fine will deter possible offenders. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR KASULE: Clause 35 is on the use of accreditation for uncertified purposes. Clause 35 is amended by substituting for the words “one hundred” the words, “six hundred”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37
MR KASULE: Clause 37 is on duty not to disclose information. Clause 37 is amended in sub-Clause (3) by substituting for the words “one hundred” the words “five hundred”. The justification is that a stringent fine will deter possible offenders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR KASULE: We propose that clause 38 is amended as follows:

a) 	In sub-clause (2) by inserting in paragraph (b), immediately after the word “person”, the words “conformity assessment body.

b) 	Inserting in paragraph (h), immediately after the word “person”, the words “conformity assessment body”;

c) 	In sub-clause (3) by substituting for the words “seventy-five” in paragraph (a), the words “two hundred”.

d) 	In sub-clause (3) by substituting the word “fifty” in paragraph (b) with the words, “one hundred”. 

e) 	In sub-clause (3) by substituting the words “one hundred fifty” in paragraph (c) with the words “five hundred”.

The justification is that a stringent fine will deter possible offenders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 39, there is the amendment of the schedules, and we have proposed as a committee to include other schedules. 

The schedules are amended by inserting Schedule 3 and Schedule 4 to read as follows:

“Schedule 3 

Proceedings before the Accreditation Committee

1. An Accreditation Committee shall meet as and when the members are notified of a meeting by the Executive Director.
2. 	An Accreditation Committee shall meet upon seven days’ notice being given by the Executive Director, including the agenda of the meeting.

3. 	A special meeting of an Accreditation Committee may be held on a date and at a time as the Accreditation Committee may determine in the interest of necessity. However, the Executive Director shall be informed of the meeting.

4. 	A meeting of an Accreditation Committee shall be held at the registered office of the Service, except where, by written permission, the Executive Director authorises the meeting to be held elsewhere.

5. 	At each meeting of the Accreditation Committee, the members present shall select one of their own to be the chairperson.

6. 	A decision on any matter before an Accreditation Committee shall be made by consensus, but where consensus cannot be reached, the members present shall decide on the matter by a majority vote and in case of a tied vote, the chairperson shall have the casting vote.

7. 	Each Accreditation Committee shall maintain written minutes of its meetings and the minutes of the Accreditation Committee shall be kept in the custody of the Executive Director.

8. 	The members of the Accreditation Committee in consultation with the Executive Director may, through electronic means of communication, take necessary actions on any matter that may not, due to unavoidable circumstances, be considered physically at a meeting of the Accreditation Committee.

Schedule 4

Proceedings before the Appeals Committee

1. 	An Appeals Committee may receive evidence by affidavit.

2. 	An Appeals Committee may specify the period within which it may hear the evidence in person from witnesses.

3. 	An Appeals Committee, while making an award under the Act, may consider any evidence which it considers relevant to the matter before it.

4. 	A party to an appeal before the Appeals Committee may be represented by an advocate or any other suitable person as is permitted by the Committee.

5. 	All summons, notices or other documents issued under the hand of the chairperson of the Appeals Committee shall be deemed to have been issued by the committee. 

6. 	The Executive Director shall determine the place where the Appeals Committee shall sit to carry out its duties.

7. 	The proceedings of the Appeals Committee shall be open to the public except where the committee, for a good cause, otherwise directs.

8. 	The quorum of an Appeals Committee shall be the chairperson and two other members. 

9. 	Where the Appeals Committee has made an award, it shall notify the parties in writing.”

I beg to move. The schedules will help the other departments created within the body.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the two new schedules be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there were areas - We did not put the question on clause 39. That is the Schedule; isn’t it?

MR KASULE: Yes, those are the schedules we amended.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We inserted new schedules. I put the question that the two new schedules do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, he has added two more schedules - Schedule 3 and Schedule 4. Since these schedules are not part of the main Bill, they must be on the other side so that they can become part of the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have already put the question for schedules No. 3 and No. 4; those are the new ones. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you put the question on schedules No. 3 and No. 4 under clause 39. Now, we are going to the schedules themselves. Here, there is Schedule 1, Schedule 2 and now we are going to the real schedules themselves. We have Schedules 1, 2, 3 and 4.

MR KASULE: I think, Madam Chairperson, we pass clause 39 as is and then when we get to schedules so that they are passed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When I was putting the question, I said “I put the question that the two new schedules be inserted as proposed”. That is the question I put.

Clause 14

MR KASULE: Clause 14 was the matter of the Executive Director and we said –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I realised that when this Bill was brought, there was a Certificate of Financial Implications. Now, if we create another office, it will offend that certificate. We do not have a new certificate for that office. It is a good idea but I think it should not come after we have completed making the Bill. So, the proposal does not stand. 

MR KASULE: So, Madam Chairperson, clause 14 stands as it is, and we have no amendment for it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

MR AOGON: Given the fact that we are dropping the aspect of having a deputy executive director, in cases where the executive director has problems and he is not able to perform, I do not know whether it is possible for us to create a provision so that somebody can perform his roles in his absence. It may not necessarily be the deputy executive director. I do not know whether technical guidance should be provided in that aspect. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have just ruled that spontaneous amendments are problematic to this House. You did not introduce them to the chairperson nor to the minister and the committee. Therefore, it will not be entertained. 

Again, I have just said that a new office of the deputy executive director creates a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Under Article 93 of the Constitution, you cannot move a motion to that effect. Therefore, please, leave the issue of the executive director. 

MR OKUPA: I wish hon. Bahati was here. Of course, some of these have been problematic because we know that there is no position of the deputy executive director but we saw someone was appointed a deputy executive director for Uganda Investment Authority. Yet, in the Act, which we even amended and passed, there is no position for the deputy executive director. That is why I said I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was here because that appointment poses a charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

Therefore, how do they handle such situations, where the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development goes ahead to have a position, which does not exist in law? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you know that provision in Article 93 prohibits Parliament from doing it. I do not know whether the minister has a – The minister acts on behalf of Government but here, we cannot create a new office unless –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if I can take you to clause 16, it says, “Other officers and staff of the secretariat”. Even the deputy executive director falls under other officers. So, even here in this Certificate of Financial Implications, under clause 16, does not come up with the specific numbers or persons who will be employed and the costs. That means they have left it open, that they are going to look for resources to fund this entity. 

I do not want us, as Parliament, to take this – What we are saying is that we are pulling somebody from among other officers and put him up. It is rational. We are not doing it against – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you read clause 16, it says; “Other officers and staff of the secretariat- The board may, on the advice of the executive director, appoints other officers and staff of the Uganda National Accreditation System as may be necessary for the effective performance of the function. Two employees appointed under this section shall hold office on such terms and conditions as the board, in consultation with the Public Service Commission, may determine.”

I do not think we can sit here and say, “among those that you are going to appoint, can you also appoint a deputy executive director?” I do not think we can do that. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What we are doing is; on the advice of the executive director, definitely, we need an assistant executive director. That is why we are saying that for purposes of avoiding this gentleman or lady not looking for that person, someone should be appointed to assist the executive director.

In good governance, you will never have an office where there is no assistant. For example, in Parliament, we have the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. In the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the ministers of state. In the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, there is the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the ministers of state. The reason is that there must be somebody substantively who will always be there to deputise the head if he or she is away. 

If you leave it in this category - because we are following our rules, it is going to make work really hard for the institution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I am aware about a number of institutions that are struggling but if the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives could stand up and make her own proposal with accompanying Certificate of Financial Implications, then I have no problem. The problem is that the proposal is coming from us. Under Article 93, we cannot move that motion. There is hon. Bahati - 

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In this particular issue, we realised that we cannot afford to have a deputy executive director because we have already received a Certificate of Financial Implications. We need to have a skeleton body and this deputy executive director would be redundant considering the fact that the workload is not excessive and they work with technical committees. So, I pray that we retain the original position of having only the executive director. 

I submit, Madam Chairperson. 

MR AOGON: Maybe, to concede and support that position, if we look at clause 16, it gives the leeway to the board. The clause says, “They may appoint where necessary.” That covers our issue, because the fear has been on who covers the gap in case there is a vacuum.

So, that provision in clause 16 gives us enough cover. We can leave it to the board. Where it is necessary, the board will go ahead and say, “We need somebody to take care.” I think that will be okay. I concede to that position. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had stood over that. As I told you, we are going against Article 93 if we move the motion ourselves. So, I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 29

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 29 –

MR AOGON: I think there was a decision to combine the issue of accreditation and the one of renewal. Therefore, I suggest that before we go for Third Reading, I move for re-committal so that we separate the two. The reason is that we should be able to give details to that one of renewal under clause 27. We leave it as per the original position of the committee. 

Clause 27 was originally talking about renewal. Clause 29 was talking about revocation. I felt it was very important that we leave them separate but we build on clause 27 to make it detailed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I ruled earlier that spontaneous proposals are against Rule 133 of our Rules of Procedure. I put the question that clause 29 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2 is on interpretation. Honourable chairperson, do you something on clause 2? 

MR KASULE: Clause 2 is amended by inserting immediately after the definition of accreditation the following:
“
    a) Accreditation certificate means a document or a set of documents that confirm accreditation to have been granted to the conformity assessment body or person naming the documents and states the conditions under which the accreditation has been granted and the scope of accreditation.

    b) Substituting for the definition of the word, “accredited person” with the following:
    i. Accredited body or persons means a body or person accredited by the Service in accordance with this Act or;
    ii. A body or person not resident in Uganda and obtains approval from the Service to operate in Uganda and is a member of the recognition arrangements of the International Laboratory Accreditation Co-operation (ILAC) or the International Accreditation Forum (IAF).”

c)	By inserting immediately after the definition of accreditation symbol, the following: 
	“‘assessment’ means the process undertaken by the Service to evaluate the competence of a conformity assessment body based on a particular standard.” 

d) 	Substituting the definition of the word “conformity assessment” with the following:
	“‘conformity assessment’ means demonstration that specified requirements or characteristics relating to a product, process, service, system, person or conformity assessment body having been fulfilled.” 

e) 	By inserting immediately after the definition of conformity assessment the following: 
“‘conformity assessment body’ means an organisation or a facility that carries out conformity assessment services, including but not limited to testing, calibration, inspection, certification of management systems, certification of persons, certification of products or processes or registration.” 

Justification: 

For clarity and to enhance understanding of the words used in the Bill. 

I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 
MR KASULE: The committee proposed that the title of the Bill be amended by substituting the word “for conformity assessment” with the word, “services”, so it would read, “The Accreditation Services Bill”.

Justification: Conformity assessment is one of the components or types of accreditation. Therefore, referring to “accreditation for conformity assessment” will limit the scope of the Bill to conformity assessment, yet there are other components and types of accreditation and services that are to be offered under such a Bill, such as calibration, verification, certification and testing, among others. 

I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.08
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.10 
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

THE SPEAKER: You are supposed to report on the clauses that have been passed. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the House has amended the following clauses: 2, 29, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38 and 39 and passed clauses 14, 30 to 31. I beg to move.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ACCREDITATION FOR SERVICES BILL, 2021

7.13
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Accreditation for Conformity Services Bill” be read a third time and do pass.

MR AOGON: For record purposes, I thought we agreed that we delete the word “assessment”. Let it be clear on the record that it was changed to “services”.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Accreditation for Conformity Services Bill, 2021” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled. “The Accreditation for Conformity Services Bill” be read a third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY SERVICES ACT, 2018”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. It has been a long journey towards the development of this Bill on accreditation service. Today, Uganda has achieved a milestone with the approval of the Bill by Parliament.

The Bill will enhance the competitiveness and international recognition of our products and services for trade facilitation as we strive to attain the middle-income economy.

I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the Speaker for guiding the debate, the chairperson and the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry and Members of Parliament, especial hon. Nandala and hon. Aogon, for the good report. I thank all Members for the debate and passing the Bill. God bless you all.

THE SPEAKER: Where do we go this evening? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: We realised that this Bill was highly technical and we have come to identify that in our amidst, we have people of special skills and these kind of skills are only found in malwa clubs. 

I have come to realise that hon. Nandala and his colleague belong to that club and this is the time they drink best. (Laughter) I would like to request the minister to consider some of us who have given them encouragement to be around and keep the fire burning. Therefore, if you are organising for the malwa club, please, do not forget us. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, I like the colours of your dress. (Laughter)

7.17
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am also very grateful that this law has finally been processed. We have been dwarfs in the region because all the other countries have been earning big money from all corporations who have been testing their products and exporting those hard-earned dollars: to South Africa, Ethiopia, Turkey to make their products accepted. 

This might be one of my last Bills in Parliament this term. So far, I have processed about 20- this is the twentieth. I am grateful to Parliament for always allowing me process these Bills. I thank the Prime Minister for giving me the opportunity. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the cooperation and hard work.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. It has been a technical Bill but I want to thank you for staying and giving the necessary support. Of course, hon. Nandala is always leading, hon. Aogon a member of the malwa club and hon. Okupa.

Honourable minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, you are supposed to lay the Coffee Bill to return to the committee. I do not know if you are ready. It would take only half a minute, if you were ready to lay so that it could go back to the committee for those three areas that the President wanted us to look at.

7.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion for the reconsideration of the National Coffee Bill, 2018 as returned by H.E the President, in accordance with Article 91(3)(8) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is referred back to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for review of only those areas that were identified. No new matter should be introduced and I am sure that they can report in a very short time.

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2.00 p.m. I understand Tuesday is a public holiday. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the chairperson. They had come but we will start with you on Wednesday.

(The House rose at 7.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 February 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

