

Tuesday, 2 February 2021

Parliament met at 3.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca A. Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I thank you for the work you did in the morning, to pay tribute to our fallen colleagues. I have two matters to communicate.

One, is to remind the members of the Cabinet who have business on the Order Paper that they should come to the House so that we complete the Bills that were commenced before we went on recess. We need to get them out of the way. 

Secondly, I have received communication from His Excellency the President, relating to the National Coffee Bill, 2020. He would like us to review the following Clauses:

    1. Clause 14(5) on the appointment of the board of the authority;
    2.  Clause 14(4) on the appointment of the board chairperson;
    3. Clause 14(3) on the appointment of the chairperson of the board by the minister;
    4.  Clause 22(1) on the appointment of the managing director of the authority;
    5. He would like us to look at clause 26(3) on the registration of coffee farmers. 
    6. Clause 28(3) and clause 29(3) are also of interest and the President would like us to review that, in relation to the certificate of registration of the coffee nursery operator or a coffee seed garden operator. 

He has some proposals, which we shall ask the committee to review. Therefore, I would like to invite the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, at the earliest opportunity, to table the Bill again so that those few clauses can be handled before we return it for assent.

Thirdly, I have a petition from the Makerere University Business School Academic Staff Association, who are petitioning the delay in approving the wage harmonisation, which they had been promised in meetings with the Head of State and other stakeholders in the Education sector. They are concerned that the recent proposal for supplementary did not include the Shs 4.9 billion, which had been proposed for harmonising their salaries. 

I would like to now refer the matter expeditiously to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, so that he can handle it before we consider Supplementary Schedule No.4. The Clerk is requested to ensure that this is handled as quickly as possible. 

There are some two matters of national concern.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have just informed us that we paid tribute to our two former colleagues but you will recall that there is an earlier request about the late former Second Deputy Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Paul Etyang and hon. Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa and the late former minister, hon. Henry Obbo. I do not know if you could alert us as to when we will pay tribute to these fallen people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the late Rt Hon. Paul Etyang and hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa, we shall convene on Thursday morning to pay tribute. I still have to hear from the Government on the issue of the late hon. Henry Obbo. However, I have just asked the Clerk to contact their families before we announce but that is the date we have discussed. 

3.31
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a matter of national importance, concerning the irregularities in payment of allowances for the police constables who are helping the Electoral Commission, to provide security at polling stations. 

I would like to report that my people in Ntungamo are complaining about the inconsistency and irregularity in their payments. They were supposed to get Shs 40,000 per day as their allowance but they have been paid Shs 30,000 per day, while Shs 10,000 is retained after signing for Shs 40,000 every day. This means that at the end of providing security for three days, instead of getting Shs 120,000, they will get only Shs 90,000. As a result, every police constable loses Shs 30,000 to people they do not know.

Secondly, where they were supposed to deploy two police constables, the Electoral Commission deployed only one and they are claiming that the Shs 10,000 is going to cater for those people who were denied chance to come and participate. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the agency concerned goes on the ground and rectifies the problem everywhere, because the challenge might be in the entire country. 

Secondly, we need an explanation from the ministry concerned about how much the police constables were supposed to get per day as their allowance and why some of them were not deployed, yet according to the budget, which was made by the Electoral Commission, two police constables were supposed to be deployed at each polling station. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I had also received similar reports from my district but I thought it was a local problem. However, it seems to be a national problem. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, you are in charge of the elections. 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Member from Kajara County for raising a matter of a national character. 

Madam Speaker, I request that you allow me time to cross-check with the Electoral Commission and come back to respond comprehensively. However, inconsistency in payment or delayed payment is not acceptable. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Will you be able to give us the response next week, honourable minister? 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We expect a response from the minister on that issue on Tuesday, next week. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DURING ELECTIONS AND KIDNAP OF ONE SHARIF KATO THAT OCCURRED ON SUNDAY, 24 JANUARY 2021 FROM KIREKA CENTRAL MARKET

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is not here.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CONTINUED PROHIBITION OF UGANDAN DAIRY PRODUCTS TO ACCESS THE KENYAN MARKET

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for East African Community Affairs is not here. Both matters will be reflected again on tomorrow’s Order Paper.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE COMMEMORATION OF THE WORLD WETLANDS DAY, 2 FEBRUARY 2021

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, Tuesday, 2 February 2021, we commemorate the World Wetland Day. It is yet another year when we are joining the global community to commemorate this day. 

It will be exactly 50 years since the adoption of the Inter-governmental Treaty on Wetlands in Ramsar in 1971. As we celebrate this golden jubilee milestone, we need to take stock of our commitment and achievements as we pave way for the coming years. A very fundamental question to ask is: What will happen or become of the wetlands in 50 years to come? Indeed, you would even ask yourself what our water situation will be like in the next 50 years.

The theme of this commemoration day is “Wetlands and Water” and it amplifies the important role of wetlands for fresh water security and for achieving the Sustainable Development Goal 6 (SDG 6) on ensuring availability of water. Therefore, as you think locally, honourable colleagues, understand that we have a global commitment to contributing towards achievement of this goal.

Madam Speaker, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has been at the forefront of wetlands conservation, to the extent that he has mobilised financing for the sector from development partners and also allocation within Government. I would like to thank him for being instrumental in this venture and for his tireless efforts.

The World Wetland Day, as already indicated, is an opportunity for us to raise global awareness about the critical importance of wetlands for people and our planet. Wetlands have been referred to as the lifeblood of humanity. This is quite appropriate because they are a source of fresh water and we need to take action to restore them and stop their loss.

We are facing a growing challenge of availability of fresh water that threatens our very existence. This is mainly because fresh water used by various sectors is not matched by nature’s ability to replenish because of the continued encroachment of wetlands. We are destroying the ecosystem of water that all life depends on most, and that is the wetlands. 

Wetlands contribute to the quantity and quality of fresh water on our planet by serving as granaries of water through their ability to store water, purify sediments, toxins and pollutants. Water quality is maintained as a result. Therefore, without wetlands, there is no water and without water, there is no life. We need to appreciate that water and wetlands are connected in an inseparable co-existence that is vital to life, our wellbeing and health of our planet.

In summary, Madam Speaker, wetlands store and clean water as well as provide food; for example, inland fisheries alone provided 12 million tonnes of fish in 2018. Wetlands provide services worth Shs 47 trillion per year with more than one billion people getting their income from the wetlands. 

Forty percent of the world’s species live and breed in wetlands; for example, our own crested crane, the shoebill, Sitatunga and fish. Wetlands protect us from floods and storms, with each acre of wetland absorbing up to 1.5 million gallons of flood water. Wetlands help to regulate the climate as a whole.

Madam Speaker, as you may see from the few benefits mentioned, we need to join the campaign to save these wetlands so that they grant us and the future generations these invaluable benefits. I, therefore, implore you, Ugandans, to stop destroying wetlands and start restoring them, to manage your waste as well as increase water efficiency by using the wetlands wisely. We have already included some of these interventions into the National Development Plan III as well as our Sustainable Development Goal 6 and of course Vision 2040. Our realisation of these commitments requires your urgent support, colleagues, if we are to attain them.

Madam Speaker, my ministry - the Ministry of Water and Environment, has already established strategies to address the threat to the wetlands and their ability to provide these benefits. Together with the civil society organisations and development partners, restoration and demarcation of wetlands is ongoing so that we can reverse the trend that will cause water and food insecurity.

Other strategies include taking stock of our wetlands, and we have caused cancellation of titles, promoting awareness and sensitisation, capacity building on wetland conservation strategies, monitoring and enforcement, wetland management planning, and providing alternative economic livelihoods for those willing to leave the wetlands or by sometimes opening up fish ponds, which is one of the projects we are piloting. 

Installation of mini-solar powered irrigation equipment for those who live along the wetland; this directly answers the vision to create a middle-income status in those communities.

Madam Speaker, my call is that we need to act now and stop lamenting because we have a responsibility to conserve the wetlands; whether you benefit directly or indirectly from the wetlands, as mentioned above. 

In conclusion, I would like to inform you that this year’s celebrations will focus on publicity through different – and my call is for you to be part of this event today and forward. It will be aired on TVs, published in the newspapers and any other ICT medium. 

I wish all Ugandans struggling to conserve the wetlands and those who are to come on board, a good Wetlands Celebration Day. I would also like to remind you that wetlands and water is life. Let us all come together to conserve our wetlands. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Minister for Water and Environment. Are there any comments?

3.46
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the minister for communicating to the country about the need for wetlands and even commemorating the Wetlands Day. 

I expected to hear from the minister on how she is trying to handle the untouchables who are destroying wetlands. This is because in this country, most people destroying the wetlands are the elites - the rich people and the educated. Those people have got the machines to use in destroying wetlands. They have the money and the poor people who do not have the money have maintained their wetlands. 

I expected the minister to comment on how she is going to handle those people that have totally destroyed the wetlands in Uganda and are enjoying that immunity.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to inform this country that from 1994 to 2008, the country lost two per cent of its wetlands under the watch of NEMA. What does it mean? She talked about Vision 2040 but in 40 years, it means we shall have no wetlands. 

Therefore, we expected the minister to bring out the means she is preparing to make sure that we maintain our wetlands without only talking about policies because the policies are already in place. That is why NEMA and the ministry exist; but the moment you talk about a rich person, NEMA hibernates. What does it mean? Maybe they get “kitu kidogo.” 

I would like to ask the minister to talk about how she is going to handle those people that have enjoyed immunity for so many years and are finishing our wetlands. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.49
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement but I would like to make a few observations. 

The issue of wetlands is a very big one, which needs our concerted efforts as Government and leaders. The minister has told us some of the mechanisms they have put in place to help us conserve our wetlands. 

Nevertheless, from her statement, I see a lot of disconnect in the whole cycle. Wetlands conserve water that they receive because they do not produce water. Water is produced in the water cycle. When it rains in this country, within a short time, you will see all the water escaping. It simply means that instead of wetlands receiving water to filter and store, they actually receive a lot of mud because we have not conserved the catchment areas and hills. 

Therefore, instead of the water going into the ground and percolating underneath, the water is not being collected. Therefore, for us to effectively manage these wetlands, we need to go back and look at the whole water cycle, conserve the catchment areas and plant trees on bare hills. This is in order for us to control the runoff and have the water seep and percolate into the aquifers where we would have our wetlands and reduce the burden of managing the available water. 

Secondly, as Parliament, we passed a very good law and now we have the best environment law but it is not being implemented, especially in terms of financing. 

Honourable minister, we just passed the Budget Framework Paper last week. We urge and implore you to make sure that we work together to finance and put a lot of investment into the sector. 

Wetlands and water are a source of life but the financing levels are still very low. The sensitisation is also very low. Honourable minister, when you came here to present your statement, you should have noticed that all of us were not aware that today is Wetlands’ Day. This would have been a very big event; all radios should be broadcasting this but your advocacy is still very low. Therefore, the struggle should be increased otherwise, our wetlands are being depleted. 

My colleague has talked about NEMA and enforcement. There is a wetland in Mbarara called Rukyeye which was dammed. During construction of the Kabale Road, it opened up into the wetland. I have personally taken interest to inform NEMA and the ministry about the dry wetland but they have not responded. 

Where we have made roads and see open spaces - when you report to them, the reaction and response is still very low. Honourable minister, as much as you come here and tell us to support you, we need your own response even when we inform you. You need to get us together; get many soldiers. 

Honourable minister, my struggle with tree planting is that all the trees are being harvested prematurely because there is no control. Everyone is doing what they want in the country. Therefore, let us put our actions together, work together and put all efforts to ensure that we save our wetlands. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my sister, the honourable minister, for the statement made. 

I would like to ask just a few questions. The first one is about heavy farming in the wetlands. As you travel to Gulu and Luweero, you see farming in the wetlands. I also see a similar situation as you travel to Masaka. Is that okay? Doesn’t this kind of farming have some implication on the wetland?

When we talk about wetlands, we know that poor people cannot tamper with wetlands because they cannot reclaim them. Those who do it are the rich. What do we do when these rich people are untouchable? What strategy are you going to put in place to make sure that these rich people save our wetlands? Without wetlands, we do not have homes for water. This is what I would like to know from you. Apart from putting up buildings, how about farming? Thank you.

3.55
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the minister for the statement. The whole world is now fighting to protect the environment. Climate change is a big issue in the world but when it comes to Uganda, we have good polices and this Parliament passes good laws. However, there is nothing happening on the ground. 

I live in the eastern part of Kampala; in Kyambogo where all the wetlands - where the minister lives. We had wetlands that clear dirty water and deliver it to Lake Victoria. All these wetlands have been destroyed. When it rains, the water runs anywhere. It has no way to Lake Victoria and the Government is looking on. If your ministry does not come up to protect the wetlands, climate change is here to cause problems. You can see that the weather has changed because the wetlands have been destroyed.

Therefore, when we come here and make statements, we should follow through and see what we are doing. When we go to international conferences; the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, we go and make statements but when we come back to this country, we do not do anything.

All the wetlands around Kampala, Mukono and Mbarara have been destroyed and are full of factories but your ministry has not done anything. Therefore, you must go back and find out all the wetlands that have been destroyed because we have spoilt our environment. These are some of the issues your ministry should do to protect the environment and Ugandans. Otherwise, within a few years, we are going to have problems in this country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for your statement on World Wetlands Day under the theme, “Wetlands and Water”.

Honourable minister, you talked about the importance of wetlands; filtering and saving water, providing water for irrigation and farming. They are also home to the world’s aquatic species; they create room for about 200 fish species, etcetera.

However, I do not know how far you have gone with the issue of fencing off some of the wetlands. I recall there was a programme where wetlands were being fenced off from the mainland. I do not know how far you have gone with that.

Secondly, what deterrent laws do you have in order to stop the issue of encroaching on wetlands? It appears enforcement is becoming a very big problem. We are not adhering to some of these laws and that is why Members have been talking about rich men encroaching on these wetlands. Please, work on that.

There is also the issue of bush burning, especially in Northern Uganda. When you go there, all the areas around wetlands have been burnt off by wild fires. There are also issues of deforestation and afforestation.

Lastly, sand minding is encroaching on wetlands and as a result, we are reading in the papers that fish are dying at an alarming rate. We do not know why they are dying. Some of us enjoy fish but what is causing all this? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.00
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for bringing up this very important commitment of Uganda. I would like to start from the fact that the Tree Planting Act, 2003, which among others is supposed to make sure that the wetlands are protected, among others, with planting trees on the riverbanks, lake shores and hilltops is redundant to date.

Madam Speaker, you helped me process a motion here in 2009 with hon. Florence Ibi and hon. Anywar, who then was a member of the Committee on Natural Resource but it was shot down by the sector minister who said that Cabinet was ready, in 2009, to start tree planting.

You have been urging them to declare a tree-planting day but to date, we have nothing in that direction. I would like to request for Government’s commitment in implementing the Tree Planting Act.

In relation to that, there is the National Physical Development Plan; the land use plan of this country. We are struggling with developing cities before we even do the National Physical Development Plan. This is what would inform us on the go areas and no-go areas, whether it is by the rich men, the powerful or whatever you are calling them; the elite but we have avoided it. What helps a country manage its environment is land use. You have either slums or encroachments; it all starts with land use. 

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament from the Albertine Region, in particular Bugungu where we have suffered from floods - Honourable minister, I was in your office with the senior minister and NEMA’s Prof. Okurut sometime between September or October. We have lost three and a half kilometres of Butiaba Port, which used to connect with the old Masindi Port and Namasagali. It is now under water and in Wanseko, two kilometres.

Our humble proposal was, if nature has reclaimed, why don’t we, in the same spirit of degazettement, pay us back? We give you the three and a half kilometres under water and you change the buffer zone.

Our prayer to the ministry then was that in exchange, in the spirit of the degazettement law - Nature has taken away from us - give us the Bugungu, Ntoroko, Nebbi communities, which are victims - Because Lake Albert is the lowest area in this region. People have moved on their own in this region.

The other important point, Madam Speaker, is that the flooding we have faced this time round, is beyond the gazetted buffer zone of 200 metres. We are members of the upstream of the Riparian States of the Nile Basin. What engagement do we have with the Nile Basin countries? The water flooding in Buliisa is from Tanzania, Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya and even from Ethiopia through Teso, Karamoja and Kyoga. If we are to balance surface water and underground water, how can we make sure that we understand the question of underground water, wetlands and surface water holistically, so that some of us who are victims can get a permanent solution? Thank you very much.

4.04
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to thank my colleagues who have spoken before me. 

The statement is welcome but it is too general. It does not respond to the concerns that people have and actually, the concerns that the minister has, having earned the name “Mama Mabira”, and the concerns that she has on preservation of our wetlands. 

It is not a crime, for example, to reclaim part of a wetland for other uses but the reclaiming should be planned in such a way that we have clear water channels that will enable the water to flow. Now, there is selective implementation of the law. That is why you have colleagues saying that the rich are being allowed to tamper with the wetlands while others are not. Even for those that we allow to tamper with the wetlands, can we have a firm policy that makes sure that they do not block the waterways for smooth water flow?

We are now worried that fish in Lake Victoria is dying and we do not know the cause. Maybe, if we had planned reclaiming of these areas and there were proper water channels, we would have saved our fish.

There is also sand mining. I remember sometime back, we voiced concerns about the sand mining in Lwera on Masaka Road and nothing has been done. If anything, now you find signposts indicating “sand for sale”, and it is done in pockets. If it is Government policy that investors have been allowed to mine sand in Lwera, well and good, but let it be a planned policy so that people can see that in such an area, there is a clear plan on mining this sand and then there will be restoration. 

Restoration is actually another issue. Once these people have been allowed to mine the sand, can they be tasked to refill the areas? Lwera is now very dangerous because you have ditches where sand has been mined and with a lot of rainfall, these ditches have filled up. This is very dangerous for the people who utilize these wetlands for other purposes. 

We would like a firm policy and clear enforcement of the policy so that every Ugandan knows that such an area is being utilised for such a purpose and it will be restored after that. To have proper planning for these wetlands, we may want to reclaim some of them for use but it should be planned. Thank you very much.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to offer support to the minister in charge of the environment on this important statement. I will make just two comments. 

One, wetlands are not only an environmental issue but an economic issue too. When we handle them well, we can actually gain a lot in terms of the economy. We are being told that 40 per cent of our rain comes from wetlands. When we had drought in 2018/2019, our Gross Domestic Product (GDP) came down by one per cent. Actually, in 2019 when we were hit by the drought, our poverty levels came up from 19.1 per cent to 21.4 per cent. Therefore, as we debate this issue, a very important issue, we should also look at the economic aspect of it. 

We know the importance of this. Yesterday in Cabinet – I heard hon. Mukitale talking about tree planting – we passed a facility of US$ 73 million to help support the sector. So, we hope that the Members of Parliament will get involved in the tree planting and other areas.

There are two categories of wetlands. The first category is the wetlands that were given out by the colonial Government, for example the wetlands in the Kigezi area. In these areas, there are incentives to those who are willing to get out of the wetlands voluntarily to be compensated. A team has been formulated, led by hon. Stephen Bamwanga, and work is going on. We will be allocating around Shs 10 billion to Shs 15 billion to support that effort. 

I just wanted to let the Members know that we are actually looking at this sector as an important sector that can contribute to the economy, therefore when the time comes, Parliament should continue supporting us. (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, you recall that you had made an appeal to Members of Parliament to initiate nation-wide tree planting. That project was started when you hosted the 64th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Uganda. It turned out to be a very successful initiative to have the guests plant trees wherever they went. We felt this was a very good message to the country. The local leaders, wherever we went, supported that initiative. 

Now that the Minister of Finance is on the stage, I would like to ask him to allow some small budget for Parliament to carry out that initiative. I thought Parliament could also help to mobilise the entire country. 

I would also like to remind the Speaker that it was agreed that this project would start from Dokolo. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That is the only point I wanted to make on the economic aspect of the wetlands. Thank you.

4.13
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to comment on this matter. I would like to say right from the beginning that I support and thank the minister for bringing up this matter.

Madam Speaker, in considering the Budget Framework Paper, we had a very cordial and friendly discussion with the Ministry of Water and Environment. One of the areas of serious concern was wetland degradation, I am sorry to report that the committee noted a reverse performance in this area of wetland protection. 

The matter you are talking about now very unfortunately was not mentioned so as a committee we are also learning about it for the first time. 

The main point I would like to point out and I am a bit surprised by what the minister of finance said. We noted a considerable mismatch between the good intentions of the Ministry of Water and Environment, what they professed with their mouths and what is happening in the background around supporting those intentions.

Many of these good things remained unfunded - I would have expected the minister to point out how much money has been made available for this activity, but I am surprised by what the minister of finance just said that it is $73 million.

I know you have always been passionate about tree planting; we had reallocated money for tree planting but the ministry cut it as a non-priority. This sudden change of heart from Shs 10 billion that you cut to $73 million and I hope it is not just lip-service but that it will materialise.

I would like to mention that we have often blamed NEMA perhaps rightly so but I need to point out that the budget of National Environmental Authority has been considerably cut; things like workshops sensitisation that hon. Ngabirano was talking about. 

The ministry of finance saw them as consumptive expenditure, which were non-priority. They are struggling doing the monitoring and if anything is to happen, that is where the real intervention has to start.

Lastly, when we were amending the National Environment Act, we tried to strengthen NEMA as a regulatory agency. They are still trying to deliver but there is a gap in that what is the Directorate of Environment in the Ministry of Water and Environment doing that is still a mystery? Although much money is not going there.

These are our concerns and the heart of it is what really shows that Government is committed to this, which must be backed up by the financial resources allocated to it. Thank you very much.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for your contribution and support to my statement. You have raised pertinent issues, most of them are not new we have been battling them. As Government we appreciate.

The issue of the untouchable; so many people claim to be untouchable and I believe that in Uganda there is no body above the law. We need to apply our laws and those who are caught in the act let Ugandans stand up.

I have been at this ministry and discovered a lot of things, we are doing a lot as a ministry to ensure enforcement. So many people have been in their positions for so long and it’s like they are part of the untouchables. We have requested to have the enforcement team again reshuffled.

I am happy to note that the UPDF has given us a new team which I hope we are going to work with very well. We are waiting for the police force to reshuffle the team which has been in the ministry. Some of them have been there for 20 years. Colleagues, we are already trying to re-arrange the enforcement arm to catch-up with the untouchables. 

I came to this House when we were talking about the Kayunga issue and I made a passionate appeal. I think we need environmental courts to help on the issues of environment because most of our cases when taken to court like NEMA, NFA people run to courts of law and the cases are not disposed of. They take about 10 years or so and by the time the law catches up with them either the forest or the wetland is finished.

This is one of the things I would like this House to consider seriously and we make a case through courts which can quickly respond to the concern.

A colleague raised the issue of the catchment area. We are indeed concerned as a ministry we already have arrangements. We are looking at it in totality. We have different projects to answer for different areas. We need to protect all the catchment areas, plant trees around, and I still thank you for raising it.

I would like to answer this one with the chairperson of the committee; the issue of funding of environmental activities is still a big challenge. I thank the chairperson of Natural Resources Committee for understanding this situation very well. 

Madam Speaker, you are also aware that at that time I also equally made a passionate appeal that if we could be allocated Shs 20 billion per year for five years, we would be able to restore some of these forests, demarcate and protect some of the wetlands we are talking about.

This is the second issue I would like this House- and my minister of finance is also listening - to have it put in place because without funds everything is curtailed. 

Colleagues, personally I am so passionate about the environment, it pains me to see that the environment is going under my docket while I am watching. I will do what I can with your help so that we protect our environment.

Thirdly, we are talking of the big and untouchable people. The big challenge is that we have politicians, colleagues in this House - towards the campaign time, we had arranged as a ministry to demarcate most of the parts along the water bodies, the floods gave us blessings. For those who had encroached on the land, the floods pushed them aside. We thought we would go ahead and demarcate our pillars while the floods are still on.

Madam Speaker, I was approached by almost all politicians and the issue was, “Do you want us to lose an election? Would you want us to lose an election?” Other colleagues – Many people came to my office and said, “You would rather wait until after elections and then you can implement your scheduled plans.”

We had even assembled a team to go into action but we got phone calls and then the police was demobilised. Now that the election is over, fellow countrymen, can we move forward and protect our environment? If we go on dilly dallying around this, we are not going to go forward. It is not a blame game; we all have a role to play.

Therefore, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister, regarding the issue of wetlands.

I will take an example of Namutumba. We have seasonal swamps, owing to the fact that land for commercial agriculture is not enough for the people there. They use the seasonal swamps to grow rice. 

They are not gazetted wetlands yet, the law talks of gazetted wetlands. However, when the ministry is moving to enforce, instead of prioritising which degraded wetlands will affect the environment, they rush to these seasonal swamps that are not even gazetted.

The clarification I am seeking is, do you look for the easier spots, for those that you think are touchable and leave out the bigger problem? Is it really right for you to be prioritising seasonal swamps that are not gazetted for evicting those people? (Interruption) Thank you.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Madam Speaker, we have been in this House and the matter of wetlands has been discussed several times. It came to this Floor of the House and we were informed that there is no atlas, indicating which ones are actually the wetlands that should be –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, our rules provide for a dress code. I can understand the MP representing wetland rice growers but you cannot come to Parliament like you are going to the wetland. (Laughter) Is the honourable member in order to come to Parliament, dressed like he is going to grow rice? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think it is a proper African wear. No. Sorry.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable minister. You talked about reshuffling the enforcement. You then talked about the UPDF. Sometimes, we get scared when you bring in the UPDF for enforcement. I thought we have the police. You know how we suffered with the lakes in trying to control fishing. Are you again going to involve the UPDF in trying to do enforcement in the environment? I need that clarification. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, let me start with the one of the Leader of the Opposition. We have the Environment Protection Police Unit, which we created but there is a liaison officer from the UPDF. You are talking about those who are being talked about; the UPDF on the lakes.

In fact, two days ago, I read somewhere that the people were calling back the UPDF; “Can you come back and protect us so that the fish is not depleted?”

However, Madam Speaker, I just wanted to let the LOP know that the UPDF officer I am talking about is a liaison officer. The enforcement team is mainly the police officers. Even the police officers have stayed there, some for a very long time. We need to have them changed often, as you are aware.

The third issue I wanted to bring to the attention of colleagues – as a way forward – is that as a Government, because of the concern of the big people in construction, farming and whatever, we had caused the cancellation of some of the titles in the wetlands and even in the forests. 

We are even continuing to harmonise with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to see more of these titles being cancelled. We are taking a legal and normal way, so that we cancel the titles of those who got them wrongfully and reclaim the area and protect it.

We talked about fencing off. You have heard my Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development say something about that. It is all about the funds available and if that loan comes to the House, my plea is that colleagues should support it so that we realise what you are already proposing to us.

A colleague also brought to our attention the bush burning, majorly in Northern Uganda. He brought it to my attention that along the wetlands are mostly burnt down. As earlier noted, we need to do sensitisation of our people. People must understand that burning bushes is destroying the nutrients in the land we have. We are rendering our land unproductive yet the land belongs to all of us and we must protect it.

We would like to engage even the local Governments so that we make some byelaws because bush burning has become almost traditional in some areas. There must be people to take action as soon as it is done because if you are to wait all the way from here, then all the bushes will be burnt down. We are going to harmonise that with the local leadership and see if some byelaws can be passed to reinforce our efforts.

A colleague raised the issue of fish dying without people being aware. Madam Speaker, we have suffocated our water bodies with whatever we dump in there. The fish cannot have enough oxygen because we have dumped everything in our lakes and rivers. It is the same plea - can we protect our water bodies. I have earlier, in my statement, mentioned how we manage our waste. How do we manage it? Let us not continue dumping our waste in the water bodies.

A colleague raised the issue of tree planting. Yes, I do agree we had a very ambitious programme of planting 40 million trees per year. We had even planned a tree planting day so that many trees are planted on that day but the COVID-19 pandemic has thrown us in disarray. Most of these things were left hanging. We had already arranged and even set the date.

My prayer is that God helps us to manage this virus so that we go back to our ambitious plan. I will come back here, God willing, if I am still in this docket and call upon all of us as leaders to go to our respective areas to plant trees. As a ministry, we have even been able to give out tree seedlings to many of the colleagues around here. We still want to have the funds restored so that we go full blast. 

A colleague talked about flooding. It is true that the floods did not only claim the 50 metres that belonged to the Government; they went beyond that. We are aware as Government. We only claim what is for the Government; if a community comes out, as the honourable member said, it is a good thing because we can engage them on that and we move forward. 

We are also thinking about those who were wrongfully affected by the floods. As Government, we want to also see if we can help compensate those that are willing to let go. We must help them in managing the flooded area or they give it back to us. It is a welcome suggestion. 

On the sand mining place in Lwera, by law when you mine sand, you must restore the mine. The enforcement officials must ensure that this is done. You are aware that a colleague raised a similar issue about Kyankwanzi where I went. We followed it up and it has been worked on. We would like such things to be reported. Once you do the mining, you must restore the mine by law. You do not need to leave it open because it then becomes dangerous. We are moving towards harmonising all these. 

Lastly, I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for the massive support and care for our environment. I would like to especially thank the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. We hope that as a Government, when we come back with the already suggested budget, you will support it. Let us move to protect our country. For God and my country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I have two comments. One, you have been talking quite a bit about the environmental court but it is a matter, which I think Government should deal with under Article 129 of the Constitution. I do not know whether it would be a subordinate court under Article 129(1)(d) but it is not something the House can move because it will have financial implications. 

Since the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here, you could take the matter to Cabinet and see whether you can establish an environmental court. I am sure that the House will support the matter if it came here. 

Secondly, the Minister of Internal Affairs, sometime in October, went to evaluate the situation of the floods right from Ntoroko up to West Nile. We had expected to get feedback on the impact of those floods. We still need to see that report so that we can advise the population on what to do. We have just heard that some areas have been completely submerged; they are no longer there. So, we need to hear from the Minister of Internal Affairs who undertook, on the Floor of this House, to do that evaluation. Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

4.39
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kyere Sub county, Serere District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Olio Sub County, Serere District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Pingire sub-county, Serere District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Paimol Sub County, Agago District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Ludara Sub County, Koboko District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of East Division, Fort Portal Municipality Council, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Chawente Sub County, Apac District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Akokoro Sub County, Apac District, for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Busiisi Division, Hoima Municipality Council, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Lokopo Sub County, Napak District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Adropi Sub County in Adjumani District for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Hakibaale Sub County, Kabarole District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Ngai Sub County, Oyam District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Morulem Sub County, Abim District, for the financial year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kaberamaido Sub County in Kaberamaido District for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Aleka Sub County in Oyam District for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Lolilya Sub County in Kaabong District for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Inomo Sub County in Apac District for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kawalakol Sub County in Kaabong District for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kamiyoni Sub County, in Kaabong District, for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all those items under (4)(i) will be sent to the Public Accounts Committee, Local Government for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGA 01, ENVIRONMENTAL CHEMISTRY PROJECT MITIGATION OF HAZARDOUS EFFECTS OF THE PETROLEUM INDUSTRY AND OTHER CHEMICAL POLLUTANTS ON THE AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT IN UGANDA; MAKERERE UNIVERSITY FOR 36 MONTHS PERIOD, 1 JANUARY 2016 TO 31 DECEMBER 2018

4.49
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of UGA 01, environmental chemistry project mitigation of hazardous effects of the petroleum industry and other chemical pollutants on the aquatic environment in Uganda; Makerere University for 36 months, period 1 January 2016 to 31 December 2018. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members that report is sent to the Public Accounts Committee; Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF UGANDA PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE SIX MONTHS PERIOD ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2019

4.49
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Uganda Petroleum Fund for the six months period ended 31 December 2019. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report is sent to the Public Accounts Committee Central Government for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE UGANDA ELECTRICITY GENERATION COMPANY LIMITED FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2020

4.49
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Uganda Electricity Generation Company Limited for the financial year ended June 2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report is sent to the Public Accounts Committee; Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF THE NORWEGIAN PROGRAMME FOR CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT IN HIGHER EDUCATION AND RESEARCH FOR DEVELOPMENT, FUNDED PROJECTS MAKERERE UNIVERSITY FOR THE YEAR ENDED 2020

4.50
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, Madam Speaker I beg to lay the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the Norwegian program for capacity development in higher education and research for development, funded projects Makerere University for the year ended 2020. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report is sent to the Public Accounts Committee; Commissions Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises for perusal and report back. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE 4, FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay addendum 1 and 2 to the supplementary schedule 4, for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are sent to the Budget Committee for perusal and report back. However, honourable minister, I had indicated earlier that there is a petition from Makerere University Staff Association, relating to the harmonization of their pay, and it should be addressed before we complete this supplementary schedule.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I will have to get in touch with the responsible accounting officer, so that they formalize the request for a supplementary. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Thank you.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR) (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I rise to seek the indulgence on the matter on the clauses that were stood over. These clauses constitute very sensitive policy matters, with very big effect on the national economy and on the plight of the labour force of this country.

Cabinet, considering that, advised us to come here and seek the indulgence to stand over these clauses, so that we do more and further consultations.

Madam Speaker, I am here to pray that you allow a period of time for my ministry, together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other stakeholders to do more consultations, and report back to Cabinet. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are not being fair to the House and the country, because this matter has been here since October 2020. This is now February, 2021.

MR RUKUTANA:  Madam Speaker, we apologise for the inability to proceed now, but we would like to be thorough, and make a law that will address the concerns of each and every body; protect the national economy and the interests of the workforce.

4.52
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These matters that we stood over were basically two; the issue of supervision of the fund and the issue of benefits in terms of the 20 per cent to the members. From my knowledge and experience of what is taking place, we have done all the relevant consultations and what remains is political will.

Therefore, I do not think that there is more consultation on this matter. What is necessary now is a decision to be taken; whether these matters in whatever direction they go. Otherwise, if we continue trying to assume that there is a consultation, we will be dragging the House into a situation where it would be standing in the way of this proposal.

Therefore, I think – because by the time we stood over this matter, it had a lot of controversies and all this time, we have been patient; hopeful that the Cabinet would come to a conclusion. And there have been a lot of options and proposals that have been generated through the two committees. It is only wise for the House to proceed and Cabinet brings its views to the committee of the Whole House so that we can make a final decision on this matter. 

Otherwise, this looks like a ploy by the Government to kill this Bill, given the fact that the 10th Parliament has about two to three months to end. It looks like whoever is pushing this intends to have this whole Bill aborted.  

Madam Speaker, for us to have reached this level, we have passed through a lot of situations and discussions. There are very many other provisions that we have already passed that are more important than these two. Even if the worst case scenario comes in, it will be in the best interest of workers for the other provisions that we have already agreed upon. 

I beg that you use your wisdom to assist the workers to move forward with this Bill. Thank you very much.

5.02
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister does not specify how much time he needs to consult and who he wants to consult. He does not specify what time to return to Cabinet and when he will want to come back to report. May I request the minister to give us a roadmap? 

As you have rightly said, Madam Speaker, it is long ago since you last considered this proposal and any serious minister should have finished the consultations. Nonetheless, now that he has demonstrated how unserious he is, can we ask him not to carry Parliament along – to tell us how much time he needs and who he is going to consult and when he will be coming back to Parliament? 

4.56
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, this matter was exhaustively discussed in this House. What remained at that time was just the nomenclature. At that time, we had agreed that the two parties meet and harmonise. That was what was left.  

I am just surprised now that it is going to Cabinet and needs wider consultations. I do not know where this is now coming from because I remember at the time, the senior minister was here. 

Therefore, I agree with the view that the minister should have even been courteous enough to tell us how much time he needs, if we are to take his word. What period does he need? We had given him from October to now; of course, we know the challenges. 

I see hon. Bahati who was there at that time and agreed gesturing – I do not know what he means by his sign language. (Laughter) 
Hon. Lyomoki, the other day, you blamed the House and the Speaker for failing but now you have known where the problem is. I think that is where we needed to focus our energies on. 

Hon. Rukutana, you saw what happened to hon. Lyomoki. I think this could have even been part of the reason that befell him because he even tried to protest on this podium here. He slept here but that could not help. The problem was not his but it has now come from your side. 

If the minister is to be given some time, he should have specified it. One week would not be very bad if he needs us to be organised. Whatever side it will take – but let us conclude it and let the matters move because those two issues should not really drag us for a long time. We needed to complete this and it should be done in this Parliament. We do not have to push it to the next one. 

I know hon. Bahati would be interested in pushing it to overlap so that he can use the gymnastics he is fond of using - for us to again start afresh, which will not be an easy thing. Madam Speaker, I think something should be done now. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had actually miscalculated. The last time we considered this matter was on 17 September 2020 - and not even October. At the time, our instructions were that the committee and the minister harmonise the areas that were stood over; those were clauses 10,12,13,14,15,16,17 and 18. 

Therefore, the issue of consultations with the Cabinet does not arise. You consulted and brought the law here and so, we shall finish here and then, you can go back and see whether it is assented to or not. We can only give you up to Tuesday next week. Can you report on the harmonisation, chairperson? Did you sit? If you did, we should move on the issue.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Agnes Kunihira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At that sitting, you allowed us to go and harmonise. The minister has not come to our committee to do so but as a committee, we consulted and harmonised; we were ready to report today. 

I am surprised that I have been seated here and in consulting the staff of the ministry, they did not tell me that they are not ready. Yet, we are ready to submit. We are also aware that on the issue of midterm access, there was nothing contentious. The area that has contention is the issue of supervision, which we have also ably prepared ourselves for. 

As you have already mentioned, Madam Speaker, the other issues will probably be sorted out at the time of assenting to the law. Thank you. 

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, it is true that those were the instructions of the House. What the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development has said is true; that we needed to tighten up some few things to come to the House when we are very organised.

Now that the chairperson of the committee has confirmed that we have not been able to go to the committee, I seek your guidance that we come back on Tuesday. We can use tomorrow, Thursday and Monday for internal consultations and then, come back on Tuesday with clear harmonisation rather than moving forward, when actually the mover of the Bill has some little bit of discomfort. Therefore, we concede to your directive and we shall come back on Tuesday. 

5.01
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, time and again, we have said that the ministers have been letting us down here. This is a clear indication of that. The minister and the chairperson have spoken on two different things. 

Honourable ministers, you had better get serious. We are not serving our people to the best of our ability because you keep absenting yourself from this House. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our committee and the House have done a lot of work. I can only concede to an adjournment up to Thursday. We will give you just tomorrow to harmonise yourselves and on Thursday, we shall proceed with the Bill.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

5.02
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, who is unable to attend Parliament. 

This Bill was presented by the mover for the second reading and what was awaiting, was debate on the Bill. That is the report I have from the mover who asked me to stand in for him.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, did we receive the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? I do not see the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Okay, let us defer that and we go to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those Bills that has been on the Order Paper from September and on the occasions that the matter has come up, there has been no minister from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to move the motion for second reading. We are back to the same position. 

The committee has been ready since September. Let the matter be reflected on tomorrow’s Order Paper. Prime Minister, please ensure that the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives comes to move the motion for the second reading of this Bill. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports? This is another of the reports that was ready before we went on recess in September. Let it also be reflected on the Order Paper tomorrow.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, it is not ceremonial that there is a Leader of Government Business in Parliament. I do not know whether it is in his interest that he comes to lead himself when there is no Government to transact business. We started with a statement on the violation of rights, the minister was not here. We went to the second statement and the minister was not here. Why doesn’t the Leader of Government Business tell us whether today he came to lead himself?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, you appear to have lost your ministers. 

5.07
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMNET (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am not surprised because the person who has asked the question has never been a minister before. He should be a minister in order to get experience. 

The work of the Leader of Government Business in Parliament is clear and we always do it. Everybody here must carry his or her cross. If the colleague thinks that I am going to carry the cross of everybody, I think he is mistaken. Everybody will carry his or her cross but we are going to follow it up and see why they have not come; that is the role of the Leader of Government Business. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, there are two sides in this Parliament - bicameral mode. We have the Government side and the Opposition side. Therefore, for us to do business here smartly and effectively in the interest of the people of Uganda, we make sure that there must be a Leader of Government Business and that leader must know the business that Government is going to bring on the Floor. The Clerk to Parliament has always given the Order Paper on time so that the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition know what is coming on the Order Paper and prepare their team accordingly.

Madam Speaker, I would not wish to call my senior to order but were he not my senior, the most appropriate approach would have been for me to call him to order. Therefore, I am standing on a procedural matter; maybe we may need to educate ourselves on how to conduct business on the Floor of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, apart from being the Speaker, I see you now trying to help the Leader of Government Business. However, they should be many enough to know who should be doing what on a daily basis. I am, therefore, surprised that the Leader of Government Business would walk to the chamber of Parliament without knowing whether his team is here to help him drive the business on the Floor of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to clarify this matter for some of us who have not been ministers and we do not know how the business is conducted on the other side. I sympathise with hon. Ssemujju, who will soon be in government anyway. So far, he has not been in government, so he can be humiliated by his senior; for that, we forgive our senior brother.

Madam Speaker, I would like you to clarify to us how we can move forward because tomorrow, the Leader of Government Business will come back with the same story and then we will just be wasting time. There are young and old people like me who have come back reenergised to work because we have been doing nothing for three months. Now, we are all energised and we want to do something before we close this Parliament. We want to leave on record that in these five years, this is what we have done. 

There are so many things that we ought to have done but we were interrupted by the elections, which happened to be so brutal and have somehow killed our spirit. Madam Speaker, could you educate the Government side on how to conduct business on the Floor of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are all aware that sittings of Cabinet were moved from Wednesday to Monday to enable Parliament sit without interference on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. So, there is no excuse for the ministers not to be here, especially when they have not even taken the trouble to inform the Speaker that they are not coming. 

This Order Paper was published last week. I expected the Leader of Government Business and the entire Government to take notice of what was coming. However, here we are, disabled because of the Government and the ministers.

Therefore, Prime Minister, we are going to proceed with those matters. What has not been done today will be reflected on tomorrow’s Order Paper and if your ministers do not come, we shall receive the reports and move and complete the Bills in the absence of the ministers. Let us go to the next item…

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE PETITION BY LANDLORDS, BIBANJA OWNERS, ARTISANAL MINERS, GOLD TRADERS AND OTHER SERVICE PROVIDERS IN THE MINING CAMPS OF MUBENDE DISTRICT OVER UNLAWFUL EVICTIONS

5.14
MR KEEFA KIWAANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am ready to proceed but just to mention, there are two reports that we have previously presented. One was on the TBEA project; the sub-county project. You had promised that we would have a discussion on that at a later stage. The minister did not give a response on that. I am mentioning it so that we do not lose it on the way. 

Specifically on this one, we agreed that we would discuss that in conjunction with another report that we presented on the eviction of artisanal miners from Buhweju. That was also not discussed.

As I mentioned, this is just to bring to a formal closure our handling of the petition of the artisanal miners of Mubende. However, they had requested that the matter is closed. 

Allow me, Madam Speaker, before I delve into this, to offer a recap on the key issues that were raised in the Buhweju report, which we should be bearing in mind as we go into this one. 

The report of Mubende has been uploaded on our iPads for a while now; on eviction of artisanal miners of Buhweju. In that report, we noted that this extractive sector presents immense opportunities, which if properly harnessed, present incredible opportunities of spurring the country’s economic growth, employment, technological transfer and a great potential of generating economic revenue. However, for a long time now, Artisanal and Small scale Miners (ASMs) have remained unrecognised and unregulated.

We also noted that licenses on large swathes of mining areas are being issued to cold “investors” who, in most cases, are speculators to the exclusion of the local people.

We noted contradictions in Government policies. For example, it is registering and formalising activities of artisanal miners while on the other hand, it is evicting them. There is a big question here of how are you hoping to get them when on the contrary, you are dispersing them.

There is also a point we noted of eviction of artisanal and small scale miners allegedly because –

    a. they use hazardous chemicals and cause environmental degradation;
    b. they are inhibiting exploration activities;
    c. they undertake environmental degradation where they do not restore what they have degraded.

We noted that Government is acting in complete disregard of the law.

There is also a problem of speculators being preferred and protected by the system against the artisanal and small scale miners. For instance, their licenses in most cases are prioritised.

Secondly, while their licenses are prioritised, their licenses in most cases are inactive. Where they are active, they tend to breach their licenses, for example, actively mining using exploration licenses, which wouldn’t allow them to do active mining.

We also noted that Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development has turned a blind eye to these vices, blaming it on weak monitoring systems.

Within this, we also noted that it was surprising that the Mineral Protection Police Unit is actively assisting the investors. I recall that we mentioned in our report that the mineral police have become a law unto itself; not fitting within the police structure, not reporting to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development – They have their own reporting mechanism, which we couldn’t understand and they are keen on protecting investors. In some instances, the Mineral Protection Unit was being referred to as the mining police. 

Of course there was the serious issue of violation of human rights and the issue of archaic mining laws. We have been pleading with the ministry to bring to Parliament the Mining Bill but it remains elusive. 

That is it with the Buhweju report, which brings into focus the issues, which we are also picking up in this report on Mubende.

Madam Speaker, specifically on Mubende, artisanal and small scale miners are a large and important part of Uganda’s economy, employing over 400,000 youth. It indirectly sustains over two million Ugandans through the various supply chains. 

In Mubende, 25,000 people are directly involved in mining where 35,000 are also indirectly involved; 20,000 are women and 45,000 are youth. 

Over a number of years, the mining camps where the artisanal and small scale miners were based had grown into very prosperous centres with shops, clinics, hotels, garages, car washing bays, metal fabrication and a variety of other services, in total directly and indirectly engaging over 60,000 people. 

The ASMs were contributing some form of royalty to the local authorities and enjoying good working relationship with the local authorities. The concentration of large numbers of people was providing market to the local farmers and helping to improve farm gate prices.

However, whereas the ASMs owned the land, either as land owners or as bibanja owners, in most cases they had the surface rights but did not have the mining rights. Their applications for mining rights seem to have been deliberately frustrated by the ministry. 

On the contrary, large swathes of land were issued to investors, often under very controversial circumstances. One of them, which was of great interest to us because it is from the mining area of this investor that the artisan and small-scale miners had been evicted in 2017 by the AUC mining company in Uganda that has changed its name about four or five times. I am not sure of what it is known now as we report because they keep changing their names whenever they are applying for a license. 

This particular company had in total an allocation of 414 square miles combining a number of licenses. According to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development; following airborne surveys that ended in 2012, there was a large influx of artisan and small-scale miners to the exploration areas of this company and the majority of these settled in the licensing of this company. 

There was a meeting that was held in the President’s office with the President and it was attended by hon. Benny Bugembe, hon. Peter Lokeris, hon. Evelyn Anite and hon. Patrick Nsamba.  In that meeting, the President was convinced that the artisanal and square miners were somehow preventing this company from undertaking their exploration activity. It should be noted that all their licenses are redundant.

I asked why they were not carrying out their mining activities and they said that they first wanted to clear the artisanal mines so that they have a large area where they can thereafter undertake mining activity at a very big scale. The minister is here and she will agree with or dispute what I am saying but that is what they told us in the committee. Subsequent to the President agreeing that these people can be evicted, they were forcefully evicted. About 60,000 miners were given only two hours to get away from where they were based.

After the eviction, Dr Bukenya brought the matter to Parliament and as we were beginning to hear the petition, on the 6 April 2018, His Excellency the President again convened another meeting and heard the story of the artisanal miners.

Following the explanation of what was happening, he agreed that the artisanal and small-scale miners be given 10 square kilometers where they could undertake their activity.

Unfortunately, the area that they were given was barren and it was not a mineral area. When hon. Mwijukye presented the petition for the people of Buhweju, he directed that even this matter be revisited and that is how we came to taking it up.

In our first meeting, when we called them, they said that their petition had been overtaken by events. That they had been given another area although it was not a mineral area and their prayer was that the ministry should give them an area of at least one square kilometer, which is a mineral area.

They also had another concern that the committee recommends timely and adequate compensation for the victims of torture, theft, robbery, extortion that happened in broad day light of 4th August when they were evicted.

Two, that the committee works with the ministry to fast-track the Mining Bill, 2019 and the issue of concern around the human rights violation. 

In handling this, we tried to see how best we could reach an amicable settlement between the ministry and the artisan and small-scale miners and I am glad that we have had a positive development on that. We took a very facilitative approach. 

Just as we were concluding the matter before we reported, we had a letter from the group that was leading on this petition. Mubende United Miners Assembly and they said, “MUMA leadership in consultation with the senior technical staff at the Ministry of Energy and Mineral development have finally agreed on the one square kilometer working area to be curved out of the former EL1093, that is, the AUC Mining Uganda Ltd exploration license. This is, therefore, to request you to work with the ministry to end this matter so that the petition can be withdrawn.” 

That letter is attached and I will be laying it on the Table. 

On page No.9 of the report is the issue about the human rights, which I think is not denied because the people were forcibly evicted and they lost all their property. Some of them had land titles, others had Bibanja. There was no reference to the land law and the need for compensation. They just evicted them.

The committee condemns, in the strongest terms, on page No.10 the manner in which the evictions were carried out. It, therefore, recommends and urges the Government to resist from the use of force when dealing with the populace as this amounts to violation of human rights. The committee further recommends that in future, Government makes use of existing legal framework during the execution of its duties.

It also recommends that the role of all those involved in violating the rights of the miners during and after the evictions should be investigated and if found guilty should be prosecuted in the courts of law. At the heart of this mainly is the mineral protection police unit.

The other issue is the trend of evictions, which at one point in time the ministry agreed that they were doing to formalise the mining sector but then at a later point in time the ministry denied that it evicted these people.

We recommend that Government desists from using excessive force during the executing of these duties and uses the existing legal framework. It further recommends and urges Government to fast-track sensitisation, registration and regulation of artisan and small-scale miners. This will go a long way in formalising their activities.

The committee further recommends that Government halts all the impending evictions across the country as it embarks on the sensitisation campaign of artisanal miners to have their activities legalised.

On the issue of limited recognition of artisan miners on page No.11, the committee further retaliates that Government fast-tracks the sensitisation, registration and regulation of small-scale artisan miners throughout the country in order for them to be able to easily access Government programmes and incentives geared towards the mining sector.

On the mining Act, which we have been taking about since the beginning of this Parliament and I understand from senior colleagues that they talked about it even in the 9th Parliament and they were being promised that it was coming.

We now understand that most of it has been agreed to but do not understand why it has not been presented to Parliament. We would again like to urge the ministry to expeditiously table the amended Minerals Bill to the House. 

With that, Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for allowing me present this report. I now beg to lay on the Table the letter from the President, minutes of the meetings that we had, the original petition, the revised petition, submissions by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, submissions of the petitioners and the final letter that we got from the petitioners, in effect, withdrawing their petition.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for both the reports presented on the artisanal miners. 

5.34
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good reports presented. 

Madam Speaker, in the reports, it was clearly observed that the Mineral Protection Police Unit is an illegal force because of the way it was created and the way it is operating. So, legally, it does not exist. I would like to, therefore, suggest that it be disbanded because in the report, it is very clear that legally, the Mineral Protection Police Unit does not exist.

Two, following the visit by the committee to Buhweju and the interaction between the artisanal miners and communities, and of course this report being brought to Parliament, we want to thank you, Madam Speaker. We also want to thank the committee because the artisanal miners of Buhweju have finally been given a licence because of this intervention. 

However, even though they have the licence, the Mineral Protection Police Unit has not left the mines; they have remained there. They are not only mining but also extorting money from the public. Therefore, we would like to ask for your intervention. It is true the communities have secured a licence but they cannot mine because the Mineral Police Protection Unit has remained in Buhweju, extorting money and harassing the people.

Finally, we are concerned about compensation. The ministry said they did not evict people in Buhweju and this is what is in the report. When the Mineral Police Protection Unit visited – I think they were interacting with the committee and it is also in the report – they said they never evicted people; that they only went there and people ran away when they saw the police. 

The ministry said they were not aware of the eviction but people’s properties were destroyed. Therefore, we would want our people compensated for the assault and beatings but also for properties that were destroyed.

I want to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for having received our petition and sent a committee to Buhweju that has resulted into our people getting a licence, although the police have refused to leave the mines. Thank you very much.

5.38
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for presenting the report and for their observations.

A few days ago, I had been talking about our mineral sector. It can power our economy if it is well developed and streamlined. We would not need to borrow a lot of money at high interest rates from other bodies if only we can develop our mineral sector.

I want to thank the committee for the good observations made in this report. The chairperson talked about the work being carried out, ignoring small scale miners and the local people. This is not only limited to Buhweju and Mubende. 

Much as this petition has been withdrawn, I see a possibility of more petitions coming up if this issue is not addressed. This is because the people who are mining these minerals go straight to the mining areas without alerting the local community. A case in point is the mining taking place along River Ora in Zombo, in a place called Azi. They are mining gold and nickel yet the Local Councils (LCs) are not even aware of what is going on. So, these activities must be carried out with the knowledge of the local community.

The Mineral Protection Police Unit - Earlier today, we had been talking about the Environmental Protection Police Unit. Part of the work of the Mineral Protection Police is also to ensure that the environment is protected. Mining can pose a great risk to the environment; first of all, for the people who are depending on rivers or water bodies, these areas can get polluted causing a big conflict. In many countries, this activity has caused a big conflict between the miners and the population.

In the National Environment Management Act, which we reviewed, we talked about the Environmental Protection Police. However, in that law, we said the Environmental Protection Police should not be from the regular police force. What this means is that if I am a member of the Environmental Protection Police working in Buhweju or Mubende and I get someone going against the law, but my bosses in Kampala – maybe the Inspector General of Police (IGP) or the Deputy IGP – call me, it would be impossible to disobey them.

Therefore, in the law, we said that the Environmental Protection Police should be recruited by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) but trained by the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) or the Uganda Police Force and report to NEMA. I think that is what we said in the law.

Therefore, the review of the mining policy is very important. It will help us to streamline the mining business in Uganda, so that we can generate a lot of money from mining activity. It would also help us to be at par with the global requirements of mineral traceability. At the moment, we cannot label our minerals, yet countries that are buying minerals from Uganda want to know where the minerals come from. 

Recently, I was reading a report by the Global Witness on Buhweju. That report focused on people who are mining natural resources causing further human rights abuses around the world like in Congo and other places. However, they specifically singled out Buhweju, where some mining activities were going on with some abuse.

It is important to note that Uganda is now a member – the minister may clarify on this – of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative. Therefore, anything going on in the mineral sector should be done in the most transparent manner. If these issues can be addressed, I think it will help.

Finally, the people who are mining these minerals possibly do not have alternative livelihoods. We could also explore options of giving them alternative livelihoods so that they don’t have to do the rudimentary work. We can go in an organised way so that the mineral sector gives us good revenue. The small-scale miners can also be grouped so that they generate capital to enable them do a large-scale activity in the mineral sector. 

I would like to thank the committee and I also thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the time.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development (Minerals)? 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I would like to indicate that the mineral sector, as you all know – if well organised – could actually help us in dealing with unemployment. It would also help us, as Government, to generate more revenue than we are actually getting from the other sectors today. This is our focus as the new political leaders in this sector.

I also took time to go through these issues. The people who actually petitioned Parliament – the Mubende United Miners Association (MUMA) – first brought their issues to me. Madam Speaker, it is not true that we just sat back but there were challenges with the President’s directive: it needed a legal advice. When these people were evicted, His Excellency the President had actually asked that they be given 30 per cent of the original mining area. He also directed that we should give at least a three-year extension to this company, AUC, to compensate for the lost time. 

Of course, the three years that we were giving them were outside the legal provisions in the Mining Act, 2003 because the Act only talks about an exploration licence being given for seven years. If we were to add the three years, it would go outside the seven years. 

Following the legal guidance that we received, the ministry went ahead to get a win-win situation for both the investor and the petitioners – the Mubende United Miners Association. Following that, we have since given one square mile to MUMA and they are actually happy. This is in addition to what had been given to them before, where they had stated that there was no gold but the truth is that there is gold there. 

The only challenge is that these are artisanal miners and, therefore, do not have the resources to invest in the equipment needed to do the exploration work and eventually mine this gold. 

Madam Speaker, the sector is also constrained in terms of resources: the human resource is a challenge to us and, therefore, we cannot really do our monitoring effectively. 

The other challenge that has been mentioned that I would like to agree with is – Madam Speaker, you are aware that the Minerals Protection Police has been a challenge to us. They are supposed to work under and get directives from us but the reverse has been true. We hope that His Excellency the President will be able to handle this matter. You have been hearing some of the exchanges. Even when I give directives as the political head of this sector, those directives are ignored. 

In a meeting that His Excellency the President convened between the Minerals Protection Police, the Inspector General of Police and I, he was actually surprised at what he was picking. He thought this police was supposed to help the sector deal with illegal mining but the reverse seemed to have been true. That matter, hopefully, will be handled.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to state that we have not been just sitting on the Mining Bill, 2020. We presented this Bill to Cabinet in either late November or early December – I do not quite remember. However, we could not conclude it because Cabinet felt it was a matter that should be handled when we are done with elections since most of the members were not quite keen. We hope that anytime soon we should have this Bill presented before Cabinet again and have it concluded. Thereafter, we shall be able to bring it to the House. 

Briefly, that is what I can state. We need to have a fine arm in dealing with illegal mining in this country. Some of the people we are calling artisanal miners, that people speak for, are sometimes illegal miners. Someone else does the exploration and once these people know that there is gold in place X, they go and invade it. For instance, the chairperson and his committee are aware of the challenge that we have been having in Kisita. We have a person who did the exploration and concluded it. He got the mining licence but at the end of the day, even as we speak now, over 10,000 armed people have invaded this place. Some of them even walked to my office and told me: “Let us see what you can do”. They are protected by some people who are armed in this country.

It is a challenge. We have to slowly by slowly work together to see to it that we bring order in this sector so that we get rid of some of these people we are calling artisanal miners when they are actually doing mining illegally in licenced areas. Thank you. 

MR BIYIKA: Thank you, honourable minister. Along that line of small arms and retarding the work, sometime back money was allocated to complete the 20 per cent of the aerial survey in Karamoja. Was it done? If it was not done, where did the money go? Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a concern, after hearing the statement the minister has made. Now that the Leader of Government Business, the General, is here, he could be of help to us since some of us have not been in Cabinet. He should be able to help us at that level. 

The Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development (Minerals) has just stated that the people who are dealing in this mining are highly connected to the people in Government. Mr Prime Minister, can you help us, now that the minister is lamenting: how can we deal with this situation? 

The minister is trying to enforce what you agreed on as Cabinet but there are people who are highly connected – I do not think they are more connected than you, Gen Moses Ali. Can you tell us what is being done to solve this problem? What is the best way for us to solve this problem?

You have heard the report and from the members who have come here. The minister is lamenting. Can you tell this country that you are in charge such that we solve this matter once and for all? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any other comments? You know this is a very interesting country. You have Balaalo armed looking after animals in different parts of the country with guns and it is okay.

Now, we have people invading an investor’s facility with guns and it is also okay. Really? So, who will enforce our laws? Prime Minister, what do we do about this situation? Also this environment police, when will they be legalised? Where do they report? 

5.52
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am just hearing of this matter now and it will be very difficult for me to make reasonable comments. Therefore, I ask that I am given time to follow the matter and perhaps come at a later stage but not now.

THE SPEAKER: We expect an answer from the Government and an explanation about how armed people can sit in this country in day light, invade an investor’s facility and remain there comfortably. 

MS OPENDI: Madam, can I conclude?

THE SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister.

MS OPENDI: I just wanted to respond to the area survey. It is true that this House passed a loan for this area survey in Karamoja and we have done all the necessary preparations. 

We should have done this exercise by the close of last year but we hit a snag when the Mistry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had not yet made its counterpart funding. We are just waiting for this and once it is done, we should be able to move with this survey. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, does the chairperson want to say something?

DR KEEFA KIWANUKA: Just on the point of the Mineral Protection Police Unit, which is a matter of public concern and I felt like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister will be coming back to say something about this.

However, I was of the view that it would also be appropriate if the Minister of Internal Affairs could come in and brief Parliament on what is happening with their mandate and what they are doing with minerals.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a matter of concern and as we wait for the Prime Minister to tell us how we shall manage the armed people, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and brief us about the Mineral Protection Unit, its structure, reporting channels and its composition and establishment.

Honourable members, I think we have done quite a bit for today. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.56 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 January 2021, 2.00 p.m.) 

