
Wednesday, 27 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I wish to inform you that hon. Nyakikongoro has now been discharged from the hospital; so you may ring her as she is recuperating from home.

2.56
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to raise a matter of public concern pursuant to Rule 39(1) of our Rules of Procedure. 

On the 4th day of September 2012, I raised a matter of public concern about Ssembule Steel Mills, which is found in my constituency, and which the Bank of Baroda is about to sell off by public auction over an unpaid loan that has accumulated due to high interest rates.

Ssembule Steel Mills was founded in 1971, and is the only one owned by indigenous Ugandans specialising in the production of steel materials. It employs well over 300 people, and for a number of years it was a key supplier of steel products throughout the East African region.

Ssembule was one of the success stories of the early days of the Movement Government. It even hosted four foreign presidents on recommendation by President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni that is, the presidents of Pakistan, Kenya, Rwanda and Ethiopia. Ssembule equally assisted the NRM during the Luweero Triangle War. It is on record.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, I thought you had raised the matter and you want to know why nothing has happened. Now you are starting the case again; you raised that last year. I think you wanted to know what has happened.

MR LUKYAMUZI: The Company badly needs a bailout to save it from disintegration in appreciation of its commitment as a success story for the last 42 years. It is now over six months since I humbly raised that point of concern, and it is a national concern. I would like to know what the Government of Uganda is saying about the same, because when we last raised the matter, they said that they were coming soon.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much Madam Speaker and Members. I want to thank my colleague from raising this issue again. He had raised this issue last year in September, and I wrote to the Minister of Finance, and even copied to him. I would now request that I follow up with the Ministry of Finance, since I have not received any response yet.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also want to inform the following committees that the Ministry of Finance is inviting them for a retreat on the Public Finance Bill between the 10th to 12th March 2013. Committee on Finance and planning, Committee on National Economy, Committee on Budget, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the Committee on Natural Resources. 

So, please, take note; that weekend you are going to deal with that Bill in the retreat.

Honourable members, I want you to join me in welcoming citizens from Nakifuma represented by hon. Engineer Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Kusasira, the Members for Mukono. You are welcome. 

I will let you know who the others are.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday we had a partial debate on this matter, and I think the minister and the chair were due to go and discuss with the minister of Local Government and also with the Minister for Gender and Labour.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES AND THE ELDERY (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker as you rightly said, the Bill was read for the second time yesterday and what is remaining is to debate at the committee stage. We debated the Bill yesterday and, therefore, I can’t go for the second reading which I did yesterday. 

What happened in the committee today, is that there were issues of controversy which we have harmonised.

The point that the chairperson and the committee were raising is that we could be deleting section 6(1) of the National Council for Disability Act, but it has been found that the intent of the Bill was to clarify on the functions and not to delete any functions.

This Bill intends to clarify on how election structures will be organised and that electoral colleges will be formed by the Electoral Commission, which was not clear then.

We have clarified on this and said that after changing from NUDIPU to Electoral Colleges which are provided for under the National Council for Disability Act and, therefore, which has the mandate to look after Persons with Disabilities.

3.04
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I think the minister should not create an impression that you have had a meeting and everything is okay. The issues raised by the committee chairperson, hon. Nokrach were substantial; they were virtually four; that NUDIPU is an NGO; it is regulated by the NGO Act, honourable minister, if you may want to know that. So, there is no way you can involve NUDIPU in carrying out elections of Persons with Disabilities. I thought that as a minister, it would be prudent for you to state something concretely before we go to the committee stage.

Secondly, they complained that under the National Council for Person with Disability Act, you the minister,  are appointing certain persons who are not disabled to represent Persons with Disability and this is another serious issue which you must respond to. Actually, I am one of those who think that you should not be in that position because you do not represent any disabled person in Uganda.

MS LUMUMBA:  Madam Speaker and honourable members, appointing ministers is the responsibility of the President and it is not written anywhere in any law that a member must be appointed to the ministry when he/she represents people who are supposed to be served by that particular minister. 

Is the honourable Member, therefore, in order to insinuate that hon. Madada is not disabled, and so, he is not fit to be in that ministry? Yet we are just coming up with a law on how one can be declared disabled, and yet we have ministries where people who are not professionals in those particular disciplines are heading those ministries. Is he in order to take up the role of the President?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have not yet set the parameters for appointment, they are still the preserve of the President. So, he can choose anybody and even transfer. Tomorrow hon. Madada may be in another ministry; so, I think let us leave the President’s prerogative.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I did not imply in any way that hon. Madada is disabled. But what I was saying, it is the Chairperson, hon. Nokrach, who raised it yesterday, that some of the positions under the National Council for Persons with Disabilities go to people who are not disabled.

It is the argument that they raised. That means that the criteria for anyone to represent them, he/she must have the impairments they are having. So, this is how by inference I said that it would cause nothing to our President of Uganda to get one of these competent Members of Parliament to be a minister in that area. But having said that –(Interruption)

MR OCHOLA: Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I want to thank my colleague for giving way. Th information I wish to give is that in one district which I do not want to name, somebody who expired -(Interjections)- that is the district of Serere, there was somebody who had clocked 60 years of retirement, and he was appointed to be a member representing people with disabilities in the District Service Commission on the ground that he cannot see well. But I sa the person driving. I started asking questions, is that person disabled? That is the information I wanted to give.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you so much hon. Otto for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the issue of hon. Madada. I think the ministry that he heads is that of disability and the elderly. He is not only dealing with the disabled, but also the elderly. So, let us not only look at the disabled side, let us also look at the elderly aspect because I think he is elderly.

MR OTTO: Thank you for that information, and according to information from the MP for Kajara County, then probably hon. Kajura would be the right person for that portfolio because hon. Madada is a football player; he was our chairman of the Parliamentary Football Club. So, you are still in the wrong place. 

Having said that, I would expect the minister to come and tell us the areas that they support this amendment the Members are bringing, so that we do not create an impression that the Executive is not comfortable with the proposals of the committee.

Lastly, we expect to see an annexure of the classifications of disability because yesterday we talked about it at length. So, we are not just going to pass a Bill in a hurry, we expect disability coding. We expect an annexure in this law we are about to amend so that the question is resolved once and for all. Otherwise, I do not also want to stand for a position of Persons with Disability just because I broke my ankle in a football field. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am sure that when we go to committee stage all those areas will be canvassed.  

So, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the gallery on this side we have children from Siyaboona Child Development Centre from Namayingo. Please stand up; they are represented by hon. Margaret Makoha and hon. Steven Dede. You are welcome.

3.12
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR DISABILITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

Clause 1

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chairperson, the committee had proposed deleting clause 1, particularly section 6 of the principal Act, that is 6(1), but this the area we have already agreed upon with the minister. We agreed that it should be as it is in the principal Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are saying now there is no deleting?

MR NOKRACH: Yes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, maybe we should be advised, because you are recommending that we delete, and the justification is to exclude NUDIPU from electoral functions, which is what I have just been talking about.
 
If you are now coming to say we should not exclude NUDIPU from elections, what about the committee report which has been signed by the members.

MR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, we received the committee report yesterday; between then and now, I am wondering whether the minister had an interface with the committee; and whether the committee sat this morning or what the chairman is saying is his position and not the position of the committee. 

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, I want to refer the Member to the principal Act, section 6(1)(i); that was the part we recommended to be deleted. This morning, we had a long meeting with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and they argued and convinced the committee that this phrase should not be deleted. (Interjections) The Minister of Gender met the committee in totality and not myself alone. 

The functions played by the National Council of Disability are 10; one of them, which is in the principal Act, is to assist the Electoral Commission to ensure that elections are conducted in a free and fair manner. 

At first we proposed that this should be deleted, but we realised that among the other functions of coordination, the Council is allowed to coordinate with Government departments. Therefore, this is not wrong because in assisting the Electoral Commission, the specific activity we would be doing is to advise the Electoral Commission on the issue of elections of Persons with Disability. 

The minister convinced the committee that he would come up with a regulation to spell out the specific activities that the Council will be doing when assisting the Electoral Commission. So, my committee was convinced and we accepted the position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, I think you have some amendments under the original clause 31(a). Hon. Nokrach, you had proposed some amendments to clause 2.

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, the next amendment we proposed is under clause 31(a) –

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is under clause 2.

MR NOKRACH: This is No.2

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is (2) here - insertion of a new part; and there is part 5(a) - Election provisions. Okay, speak to 31(a) please.

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, the committee proposed that in clause 31(a) in sub-clause (2), we delete and renumber sub-clause (3) as sub-clause (2). 

The justification: The provision is redundant because the gender aspect is already reflected and adequately catered for in the structure proposed in schedule A.

Under sub-clause (3), by inserting immediately after the word “facilitate” but before the word “the local government in”.

The Justification:  For clarity on who should be facilitated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 – yes minister.

MR MADADA: The first amendment where they are talking about clause 3(2), the provision that they say is redundant, that the gender aspect is already provided for, I admit. But for the second one, where they are proposing that we facilitate – that we add the word “local government”, that we object. Why? Because this law is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and we are talking about the National Disability Council. There is no way you can bring in the Local Government when we are handling a Bill on National Disability Council. I reject that amendment. 

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chair, we conceded to this because this function would be played by the Electoral Commission as reflected in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question – but I don’t think you completed everything. You did not complete the proposals for amendment. You did (2) and (3), but there is (4).

MR NOKRACH: Immediately after the new sub-clause (2), by inserting a new sub-clause (3) reading as follows: “For the avoidance of doubt, the members and officials of the National Council for Disability shall not be involved in the formation of the electoral college.” 

Justification: To avoid a conflict of interest since the principal role of the National Council for Disability is to monitor. 

d) In sub-clause (4), by deletion. 

Justification: The appointment of returning officers is already catered for under section 30 of the Electoral Commission Act. 

e) By renumbering the sub-clauses to reflect the deletion of sub-clauses (2) and (4). 

Justification: To address the deletion. 

MR MADADA: Madam Chair, under (c), I object to this amendment. The reasons are already provided that what was being deleted in (1) has been retained. And the grounds of retaining the National Council for Disability is because it is only going to facilitate the Electoral Commission to form electoral colleges, and it is not part of the officials that will be involved in the formation of the electoral colleges. 

So, this amendment does not stand. It is already provided for that the electoral colleges will be formed by the Electoral Commission with the assistance of the National Council for Disability. In any case, there is no way the National Council will get involved in the formation of these electoral colleges. 

The basis to this is that originally it was NUDIPU making electoral colleges for elections. What we are doing is just replacing NUDIPU with the National Council for Disability. It is not going to interfere, but to only assist the Electoral Commission to form those electoral colleges. So, we reject that amendment. 

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to know from the minister - NUDIPU was in the Local Government Act; and the structure of the National Council for Disability  has majorly civil servants. In the district, for example, we have the chairperson as a disabled person, but then you have the Education Officer, the CAO, and others. We need to be very clear here. What is the assistance? Because those people are civil servants who are not going to be part of the political game of election. 
So, I thought that we are removing NUDIPU and asking the Electoral Commission to handle it through the Local Government Act. I am a bit confused, because the National Council for Disability is full and hon. Odonga Otto said you appoint, but the law says we appoint these people to come and give reports of what they have done in their ministries under the National Council for Disability. I need that clarification. Thank you.  

MS KAWOOYA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want the minister to clarify. First of all, what harm does this amendment cause because the committee was very clear and said, “For the avoidance of doubt.” Then, in their justification, they say, “To avoid conflict of interest,” and I heard the minister say there is no way the National Council for Disability can participate in the exercise? What guarantee is he giving? Is it just in his mind that they will not participate? At the same time as hon. Asamo said, they have to be very clear and ensure that for allaying fears, at least it should be well spelt out. So, I want to know what harm this amendment causes and why he thinks that we should speculate that there won’t be any participation by the council. Thank you. 

MR MADADA: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the colleagues for issues being raised for more clarification. Just to give a small background about this amendment, she has talked about NUDIPU. In the Local Government Act under section 118, in order for us to be able to make representative for Persons with Disability, under that Act, it would be NUDIPU to nominate people or to organise elections for people to be there. 

What we are doing as Government is to remove NUDIPU as a civil society organisation from organising elections for Persons with Disabilities. We are even saying that NUDIPU has been assisting the Electoral Commission in organising elections for Persons with Disability. What we are doing is to substitute that by the National Council for Disability by assisting the Electoral Commission to organise elections for Persons with Disability in the local councils and in Parliament, and we are saying that since clause 6(1) which was proposed for deletion was retained, because the basis of this amendment was based on the deletion of 6(1); and if you read this Bill under (b) it is stated that, “To introduce new provisions of this Act on election of…” –(Interjections)– please, just a minute. Let me explain and then you will raise that clarification. If you have the Bill there with you –(Interruption)

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I need more clarification on what the minister has just said on the role of NUDIPU; that it is NUDIPU empowered in the Act to do the nomination - to form the National Council for Disability. Now that the guidelines given to NUDIPU provide for more temporary able-bodied persons, how sure is it that the interests of the disabled are going to be protected because without us there is nothing for us? 

MR MADADA: First of all, in response to that last clarification, the National Council for Disability is meant to cater for the interests of Persons with Disability by law of Parliament established in 2003. When you have this Bill with you, under (b), we are saying, “To introduce new provisions in the Act on elections of representatives of Persons with Disability and schedule providing for the electoral structure and disability coding.” What the amendment is doing is to now introduce the structures that are independent and are not part of NUDIPU. The structures are in (b) and we have agreed upon these structures and even the committee agreed on them. These structures are going to be elected right away from the village level where willing Persons with Disabilities will come and elect among themselves five members as an executive of that village, and when the villages meet at a parish level, they will have an electoral college to elect another five and elect the other leaders, and even at sub-county and district levels, until we come to Parliament. What we are doing in section (b) is to introduce those electoral colleges. This is the core purpose of this amendment. We want an electoral college which is for Persons with Disabilities, and which is not appointed by the minister, but is elected by Persons with Disabilities with those qualifications. If you have that Bill, that is the intent. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put – 

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I am dominating, but I want to understand; the youth council has got one structure and the women council has one structure. Does it mean the disability movement is going to have two structures? We have the council which is monitoring, then we shall have a council that is going to carry out elections. So, how do we match the two, because as already said, the council is there and it is very clear who is representing us in the council. I have already talked about disabled people, I have talked about the government and civil servants who worked, but it seems we shall have a special one which the minister has explained - the five members, right from the village to the national disability structure. So, we want to know; is it in the National Council for Disability; is it the Electoral Commission; is it in local government, so that we can agree on that because we will have two structures running parallel. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, what the honourable colleague is raising is very interesting and the minister should address his mind to it, because under section 118 of the Local Government Act, Cap. 243, it talks of elections of Persons with Disabilities. It is already in the Local Government Act. “A councillor representing Persons with Disabilities shall be elected by the National Union of Disabled Person - NUDIPU.” So, I wonder if you could address your mind to the implication of amending this law to what already exists in the Local Government Act. Maybe the Attorney-General or the learned colleagues will advise on which provision will prevail because we are amending this law but there are some rigid provisions in the Local Government Act.

Secondly, this council, you are talking of electing, five per village; five per parish. Are they going to be separate from the representatives of Persons with Disabilities in the local government because you need to come out clearly? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, the reason we did not complete either of this was that I wanted to give an opportunity to the Minister of Local Government and the Minister for Gender to agree on whether they need an amendment to the Local Government Act in respect to the elections for the disabled. That is why we did not complete the exercise. So, will you be substituting the council for NUDIPU in your other –

MR MWESIGE: As you rightly said, Madam Chairperson, the reason you postponed the third reading to the Local Government Act was to allow this Bill to be passed. Once this Parliament adopts a structure for Persons with Disabilities, the Local Government Act will be consequentially amended just to capture what you will have agreed on.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, will you create an amendment?

MR MWESIGE: It will be consequential. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I need some clarification, because the way I have heard hon. Asamo contributing, it seems our colleagues representing Persons with Disabilities are not yet really in agreement with what we are doing. Madam Speaker,  we are trying to put in place laws that are friendly to our colleagues with disabilities. I am requesting that we allow them time so that we can postpone this debate for purposes of harmonising. Otherwise, I see that there is a disparity between what the minister is talking about from what the Minister of Local Government is talking about. We should give them some ample time so that they can harmonise positions as people representing PWDs so that we move together.

MS SAFIA JUUKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank all Members. However, we tried to meet this morning to harmonise our positions, but we learnt this afternoon that the Minister of Local Government – I just want to inform this august House that the structure we are trying to create under National Council for Disabilities is not all that different from what we have been having under the National Union of Disabled Persons of Uganda. 

But as my colleague, hon. Asamo was saying, the question which we still have in our mind is: Are we going to have two parallel structures – one appointed, whereby it is a combination of disabled people and non-disabled people and the other purposely constituted for elections purposes and after elections it remains redundant? That is the question this House should help us to answer. 

However, as a representative of disabled persons, I do not want to differ so much from the other structures of the youth councils and the women councils. I would propose that we go for an elected structure similar to that one of the youth and can be used for both elections and others – you know, we can always re-define the functions of monitoring and so on.

Madam Chair, this morning when we met the minister, we had requested him to go back and define the function of the assistance because it needs to be very clear what kind of assistance is going to be given to the Electoral Commission when –(Interjection)- Can I please finish this? And Madam Chair, as we are talking now, our stand is that if we agree on an amendment that is going to replace NUDIPU under section 118 in the Local Government Act, then we just lift that amendment into the Local Government Act. 

So, in the committee report, I do not see why we do not retain that amendment of the committee that talks about – I do not have the provision here – but retaining the local government because basically the structures we have been having even before are decentralised in nature and they have been rhyming with the decentralisation structure of Government. Thank you.

MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When they were debating this National Council for Disability Act in the Seventh Parliament, we wanted it to be like the one of women and youth, but the ministry refused, saying it is very expensive and they are not ready to cater for it. They suggested that it would remain as advisory and for monitoring for the time being. But now we have come to a point where we feel we should enact a law which is similar to that of the youth and women. 

In our discussion, we raised this issue to the minister but he said that they are ready to carry out elections for the LCs I and II. And if we have to wait for the law to be repealed, it would take more time. So, he suggested a mid-way agreement as a temporary measure such that the National Council for Disability advises the Electoral Commission and helps it to establish the structures for election purposes. Then later we shall repeal the National Council for Disability. 

My suggestion was that instead of pulling us left and right, we could go with the minister’s advice; that is, using the National Council for Disability to assist the Electoral Commission to establish the electoral colleges. And we must make sure that members of the National Council for Disability do not become part of the electoral colleges, which may sabotage; let them help to form the electoral colleges consisting of only Persons with Disabilities, taking into consideration gender and different categories of disability. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, we may not be satisfying the disability constituency; it seems they have not agreed on how to move. It is apparent that more non-disabled persons are involved in their elections than the disabled themselves. I think we should give them time so that – because I think they want the other structure – so we should give them time. I do not know how much time you need, honourable minister and committee chairperson, to do what is relevant to the needs of the disabled community.

MR NOKRACH: Madam Chairperson, there is no problem if the minister could agree with us. This morning when we met, we agreed on what I have just submitted. We did not agree on the amendment in (c) because if you went to the principal Act, section 7, you would see the composition of the National Council for Disability. And this comprises of (a) one representative of the following ministries in charge of issues relating to disability as ex-officio members, Ministry of Local Governments, Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Ministry of Education and Sports; Ministry of Public Service; and  Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and then we have – in all these, there are 16 people and out of them there are only four disabled people. 

Now, in this amendment (c), we are saying that this team, which is separate – because this Bill is seeking to create a separate electoral structure, which is not among these 16 people at the national level. Therefore, we feel that for fair and free elections, these people should not get involved in creating the electoral colleges. In my view, this was fair and clear, but I am surprised that the minister is insisting on it. I am persuading him to accept so that we finish this case because it is a simple matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Ndeezi.

MR ALEX NDEEZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Our work is a bit difficult, but I believe we have a reliable and easy solution. In 2006, we established the National Council for Disability. There is a structure called the National Council for Disability at national level that is appointed by the minister. There are also structures we call lower local councils for disability at the district, municipal, division and lower levels.

Madam Chairperson, this new Bill is trying to create an independent electoral structure that is democratic for election of representatives of Persons with Disabilities at various levels. With this amendment, the committee is trying to say that the National Council for Disability, appointed by the minister at national level, should have nothing to do with electoral process and that it should not be involved in the formation of electoral structures. 

I believe and I am convinced that if we went with the position of the committee, there is no way that these members who are appointed will involve or confuse the electoral process at all. I believe this Bill has been here for a very long period of time. It was first introduced in this Parliament almost two years ago. The way the Bill is today, we cannot pass it. If we go by the position of the committee, it means we say the minister is to retain the appointed council as something to do with monitoring and coordination appointed by the minister but we also have an employment structure that participates or conducts elections altogether. So, no problem, I support the committee’s proposal and I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the committee’s proposals have changed since they brought the report. Honourable members, can I convince you to stay over this until Tuesday? Because I know hon. Asamo, hon. Nalule and the Minister of Local Government are not comfortable. I think two days are not too much. We need to satisfy the disabled that we have done a fair law, which will work for them.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, with all due respect I was of the opinion that probably the Committee on Local Government should also be involved in the further consultations because even among the Members who are to benefit from this law, they are on different sides of the coin. You have heard hon. Nokrach say that in those structures, out of 16, only four are Persons with Disabilities and that they should be disbanded. But you have just heard hon. Ndeezi say there is nothing wrong with having those structures because they will not interfere with elections.

So, to me, the disagreements among the intended beneficiaries are grave and we need to involve other fairly non-interested parties like the Committee on Local Government to join with them and probably they will agree on something because they are all on different sides of the coin. For example, my colleague hon. Ndeezi is in NUDIPU. He is one of the key people there and these people are proposing it to be abolished. So, they need to be assisted to get out of this quagmire.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also want to draw the attention of the Chair to clause 31(b). It is proposing a deletion and his justification is that it is catered for under the Parliamentary Elections Act. I want to inform him that we have councillors for disability from parish to district councils. So, if you delete this then you will have actually deleted them from those structures. So, I think you need to focus on those councillors as well and not only Members of Parliament. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, can I ask the Committee on Local Government to work with the Committee on Gender to come to some agreement so that by Tuesday we can make a law that is satisfactory to all sectors for the disabled. Thank you. So minister, move for the resumption of the House.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Chairperson. I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House considered the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Disability Bill, 2010” and passed clause 1 and stood over the rest of the clauses. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Suleiman Madada): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2012

3.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, in view of the fact that we have stood over the National Council for Disability Bill because it impacts on the Local Government Act, I would pray that we stand over the Third Reading up to Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let us stand over the Third Reading until we have received a report and settled both the Acts, because they are related. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009


3.55
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009” be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded, Government Chief Whip; seconded; seconded. It has been massively seconded.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, this is one of the Bills that have grown beards because the process of the enactment started in the early 60s.

The object of this of this Bill is to reform and consolidate the law relating to marriage, separation and divorce; to provide for the types of recognised marriages in Uganda; marital rights and duties; recognition of cohabitation in relation to property rights although that of course has been critically analysed by the committee and we shall come to it at committee stage, because I agree with their proposals. The Bill also takes into account grounds for breakdown of marriages, rights of parties on dissolution of marriage and for other connected purposes. 

The Bill is the product of a comprehensive study by the Uganda Law Reform Commission in which all relevant stakeholders were consulted and several seminars and workshops held. And this takes full account of previous similar studies carried out in Uganda including the report of the Commission of Inquiry into the Marriage, Divorce and Status of Women -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR RUHINDI: Which is the Kalema Report of 1965; the FIDA - Uganda report on the draft Domestic Relations Bill of 1980; and the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth report on the draft 1980 Domestic Relations Bill; and many others. 

In the report of the study from which the Bill emanated, the commission made several recommendations, which will result into a law that is fair and achieves social justice, addresses the issues of poverty, protects the human rights of all members of the family, is enforceable and accessible to the Uganda population, and is in line with the Constitution and the international legal obligations of Uganda. 

The Bill seeks to provide for the several types of marriages obtaining in Uganda and seeks to consolidate and replace all the following existing family laws: The Customary Marriage (Registration) Act; the Divorce Act; the Hindu Marriage and Divorce Act; the Marriage Act; and the Marriage of Africans Act. And, you will note that of course, the Muslim Law on such matters is not included here because that will come under a separate legislation. You will remember of course when the Omnibus Bill was brought here in the Seventh and Eighth Parliaments, and we had to separate the Bills.

The Bill deals with civil marriages, Christian marriages, customary marriages, Hindu marriages and Bahai marriages. 

The Bill in particular seeks to conform with the Constitution. It specifically deals with the age of marriage; consent to marriage as required by article 31(3) of the Constitution; forms of marriage; solemnisation of marriage; prohibited degrees of relationship for marriage; conditions for polygamy, cohabitation and its legal effect; marriage gifts; responsibility for maintenance; sexual rights; the offences of adultery and demanding the return of bride price and dowry; property rights and divorce; prescribing no fault divorce otherwise known as irretrievable breakdown of marriage, to be applied to all forms of marriage to which the Bill relates. The Bill also deals with widow inheritance and separation. 

The Bill, in sum, gives effect to the principle in article 31(1) of the Constitution that men and women are entitled to equal rights in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can we invite the Chairperson, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. (Members rose_) Why don’t you allow the chairperson to give our report and then you can -

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, it is true what the minister has said that the Domestic Relations Bill had many problems and indeed, the Muslims were extremely concerned because it was rewriting the whole book of the Quran. So, I am asking: Given the fact that we are now having a new legislation where the Muslims are not included, and the minister told us that they are going to bring what we call the Muslim Personal Law together with this and this has taken long - we want to know, as we debate this, when will the Muslim Personal Law see the light of Parliament?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the concerns of our Imam in Parliament are certainly pertinent, but I hasten to add that we did a lot of consultation on what he calls the Muslim Personal Law Bill to the extent that we reached Cabinet, and recommended for the print out of the Bill, but some sections of the Muslim community were not comfortable with some provisions. And, from my personal point of view, I thought we had done good justice to that Bill because all we were saying is operationalise Article 129 of the Constitution for the establishment of Kadhi’s courts and apply the Quran as far as the marriage matters are concerned. But a few sections of the Muslim community were not comfortable. 

As I speak, the Law Reform Commission is in high gear, and I would appreciate the services of our Imam in reaching out to some of these sections who are not comfortable with some parts of the Bill to finalise it, have it printed and brought to Parliament. I do not think it will take time if together, you and me engage the relevant parties. Even in a month’s time we would bring the Bill here. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, please present our report.  (Members rose_) You will contribute later, please. (Members rose_) No, we are at the second reading. [MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: “It is a clarification matter.”] Honourable Chairperson, present the report.

4.04
MAJ. SARAH MPABWA (UPDF): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009.

Introduction

The Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009 was read for the first time on 22 December 2009, and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Methodology 

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders:

    1. Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    2. Uganda Law Reform Commission;
    3. Uganda Joint Christian Council;
    4. Uganda Women Network;
    5. His Highness Prince Aga Khan Shia Imam, Ismaili Council of Uganda; and 
    6. The Bahai Faith.

Objective of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to reform and consolidate the law relating to marriage and divorce; to provide for the types of recognised marriages in Uganda, marital rights and duties; recognition of cohabitation in relation to property rights; grounds for breakdown of marriage; rights of parties on dissolution of marriage; and for other related purposes. 

Observations and recommendations

The Committee observed that:

1. 	The Bill is very important and timely in as far as it is intended to protect the institution of the family considering that the family is among if not the most important unit in a nation.

2. 	The Bill is, therefore, necessary in dealing with the rights and obligations of spouses in a marriage including the rights to property sharing in the event of dissolution of the marriage.

3. 	Although the Bill recognises the sanctity of marriage, it takes cognisance of the fact that at one point in time a marriage may inevitably breakdown. The Bill thus, makes provisions for the eventual breakdown of the marriage and ensures the equality of spouses in the unfortunate event of such a case.

4. 	The Bill recognises rights of cohabitees in sharing property after termination of cohabitation. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order please. Order! Members.

MAJ. MPABWA: However, cohabitation is not a form of marriage recognised in Uganda.

5. 	The obligation to report an objection to the marriage is put to the registrar or celebrant or the magistrate. However, some people may not want to go to the courts of law or they may be agreeable to the abjection. The registrar or celebrant should notify the applicants to the marriage.

6. 	The Bill prohibits solemnisation or contracting of a marriage in Uganda without the free consent of either party to the intended marriage in accordance with Article 31(3) of the Constitution.  

7. 	In consonance with the principles of consent, the Bill prohibits widow inheritance, but provides that where a man wishes to marry his relative’s widow, both the man and the widow will have to give their free consent before the marriage could be valid. 

8. 	The Bill prohibits a person in a potentially polygamous marriage from solemnising a monogamous marriage with another person or vice-versa. However, parties to a polygamous marriage are allowed to convert that marriage to a monogamous marriage if the husband, at the time of conversion, has only one wife. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Members.  

MAJ MPABWA: Recommendations.  The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable Chairperson and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the long journey you have walked with this Bill. 

4.10
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I appreciate the fact that this Bill has taken long to see the light of Parliament, and I am not very sure whether all the Members have, in the first place, copies of the Bill, so that when we are handling each of the items, we should be referring to the draft in the bill. 


Secondly, I would like to inquire, now that the minister talked about a certain impasse in the Islam Personal Bill, which they met following a division amongst some sects of the Islamic faith. He did not give us a timeframe when it might come, and now we are going to handle this Bill - secretly, we do not know what the other Bill will be having.

So, Madam Speaker, I wanted to propose that we be given some time to go through these very proposals of the committee -(Interjections)- Yes! This is not a mob justice Parliament. Every Member has a right to - please, let us give the quorum to our House. I think booing really - hon. Lumumba, you know this. Booing is not a culture of this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, first of all, it is against our Rules of Procedure to speculate and anticipate. So, let us separate the Bill which has not even come for first reading from this one. In the Seventh Parliament, they were together. One group complained and they were separated. So, they should not be tied together. This is one Bill, the other one will come in its own time. Those who are ready to debate, should start.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I personally appreciate three things. One, the need for this House to debate and close this matter. Two, is to appreciate the work of the committee and the time that it has taken; the nation is anxious. 

Three, I would like to request you as Chairperson and the colleagues, to act as representatives of our people and not represent individual themes. Why am I saying this, Madam Speaker? 

I happen to have gone to LDC for a diploma course and the lecturer on this particular module raised several concerns regarding this law, and they have their own views out there on how they are already predicting we are going to debate this law. 

So, the clarification that I stood up to raise here was from the minister. He is saying and he has proposed that the Muslim part is going to be brought later. Say for example, we pass this in the next few weeks and months and the one of the Muslims takes three, four months or years as could happen, how will the courts of law handle the Muslim element should disputes arise? I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister.

4.15
MRS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My concern is not very different from what hon. Tanna has just raised. I imagine if we pass this law, maybe after two or three days and then, a Muslim girl gets married to a Muslim boy. Then -(Interjections)- maybe a Christian girl gets married to a Muslim boy or vice-versa and they reach a level of divorce. What will happen? How are we going to proceed with this as we wait for the Muslim brothers to go along with their law because he may know with his consultation? I believe this will take some time. I need your guidance as to how we are going to go proceed with this.

4.16
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, it is good that question has been raised. You see, in the beginning -(Interjections)- the Bill which was brought to this House was the Domestic Relations Bill which was combining all forms of marriages, divorces, separation and so forth. 

Now, when we separated it, we took out the Islam component, which means if we pass this law, it will not apply to the Muslim  community -(Interjections)- listen to me please. Listen to me – except, as you will find out in the Bill, for those Muslims who opt to be governed under this law. That is what this Bill, I think, says. 

In the event that we take a bit of time before the other law comes into force, they will still be governed under their existing law because even now, they have a different law which is the Marriage and Divorce of Mohammedan’s Act. By the way, that law is just a skeleton because it does not codify the Islamic law on the subject matter. Actually, it is the Quran which applies. That is the status quo. In other words, for them, even us as we actually debate this Bill, the status quo remains except for some provisions of course of the existing laws which have been nullified by the Constitutional Court as you may be aware.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I also want to add to what the Attorney-General has said. The existing law – we have the Marriage of Mohammedan Act as he has said. The Marriage of Hindus Act, The Marriage of Africans Act, The Marriage of Europeans – all those laws are there. So, there is no vacuum.

4.18
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I just want to contribute towards two aspects of the Bill. I am glad I was in the committee, but I left. So, I have some of the salient issues.

I, first of all, want to thank the committee for finally saying that co-habitation is not a form of marriage recognised in Uganda because then there was an argument that if you stay with a woman for a period of 10 years or a man stays with a woman for a period of 10 years where staying has been defined – if you come to work from the same direction because proving the other one –(Laughter)- may be very difficult; you will be declared husband and wife. 

I am glad the committee has come out to say, co-habitation is not a type of marriage. This is not to condone the behaviours of certain men -(Laughter)- who just want to stay with people’s daughters and then walk away. It is actually not fair. I think something should be done about that. 

Even if you had put 10 years as a basis before you are declared husband and wife, then there was an argument that, “I will stay for nine years and nine months and then I walk away so that the law does not catch up with me.”

I think something should be done, especially to sensitise the young generation about the importance of the institution of marriage because we cannot legislate on all aspects of our lives.

Having said that, I have one serious concern; the issue of properties. The Bill is dealing with rights and obligations of spouses to include the right to property in the event of dissolution of the marriage.

I think it is not fair for a man to stay with a woman for 10 to 15 years and then when the marriage ends, the woman goes home without even a pin from the house where she has been living. (Applause) I have daughters. I do not want to see that happening to my daughters. 

But my concern is -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, your protection. My concern was, in the committee there was an argument that if you stay for a specific number of years like five, you get 40 percent. The percentage increases depending on how long you stay in the marriage. If you stay like for 20 years, it is almost 50/50 percent in case of divorce. I was challenging that argument because it makes marriage commercial. Even if your husband turns out to be a beast, you just know you are left with six years to take 50 percent of his assets (Laughter)- So, you just hang on there so that you go away with something - or your wife, either way. This is very serious because these things of making marriage so mechanical - even me,  who is married and after 10 years, I know that she has 20 percent -

THE SPEAKER: Information. 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I have is that of recent, we are seeing a lot of murder cases in families and all these murder cases are related to property. So, I would like the honourable members to know that this is a very sensitive matter and the moment we look at years, especially for the co-habitation aspect of the “marriage,” we have to be extremely careful about the implications, especially when it comes to commercially-oriented relationships. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: So, Madam Speaker, what I am actually saying is, we should find other mechanisms of protecting a spouse’s interests in marriage other than making it so mechanical. Because if I am happily married, I will also be saying, “This one is left with four years to get 50 percent,” maybe I should start planning for divorce. So, I start conducting myself in such a manner that the marriage will irretrievably break down. So, something has to be done to ensure that the institution of marriage is held by love other than the business aspect. (Interjections)

Lastly, I also want to say that the issue of marriage gifts -(Interjections)- just one second. The issue of marriage gifts – there are very many women activists who are arguing that bride price should be abolished. Their main argument is that it makes people take women like property –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR ODONGA OTTO: It makes some men think culturally that women are property and that is why we pay bride price. But on the other side, if your daughter is removed from your home, just like that and you hear she is with another man without any kind of marriage gift and exchanges, how would you perceive that? How different is that from all these kinds of activities which are taking place these days? 

So, I want to really caution this Parliament that whatever law we make, think of your sisters, your daughters and your children. Do not look at your self-interest. You can always protect your self-interest by putting your property under the Companies Act and you just walk away –(Laughter)– but think of your children and all the other people.

4.25
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this Bill which has been long overdue. I also want to thank the committee for making it up to this point. 

I pray that we are sober while discussing this Bill because it is about a foundation unit in society from which we all trace our society. Therefore, its formation contributes to national stability and prosperity as well. 

The issue in the Bill, therefore, which has caused a lot of controversy, is on property. Most people argue about property and some colleagues are uncomfortable with the Bill because they think that it can be commercialised, and make some partners to be taken advantage of them. I want to state that unlike the days of my mother and grandmother, when the ladies were home managers, today, women are multipurpose in society. They are not only doing their God given role and staying at home, we are also working. So, when we talk about properties, we are not talking about women grabbing men’s properties. This should also be of interest to our sons because the women are also working and own properties. I also know that of late there is deliberate intention and strategy – when people go for marriage, they ask, whose daughter is this and what does she own, so that when they tie the knot, they can own everything. 

So, when we talk about dividing properties, it is for the benefit of both boys and girls. As a parent, I am looking at my sons not being taken advantage of as well. Therefore, I support this Bill because it will cater for that impression that women are out to grab men’s properties. 

Secondly, marriage should not be a blind venture. People are nowadays enlightened. Even at village level, people know their rights. So, when you are going into marriage, they should not take you blindly. You should initiate this agreement and probably disclose what the other party has and agree on what can be termed as common-good. For instance, there is the issue of having combined bank accounts; you have to agree on how you are going to use the money and the property you are building.

So, the Bill is not completely disregarding this. If men have some hidden properties, they can say from the onset that I am marrying you, but this property is my side dish and you are not part and parcel of it. The Bill had provided for that, so do not be worried of that.

Further, as we are talking about this, we must know what is key in this Bill; who is the major beneficiary? It is not the man or the woman; it is the product of the marriage; the children who are very venerable. As a woman, I know that mothers will always die with their children. And we know that men wherever they are, take comfort when the mothers of their children are with the children. A woman can never eat without the children. So, be comforted that whatever we are talking about is to promote your plans for your children. 

Lastly, I want to talk about the issue of dowry. My brother has just alluded to some discomfort on this matter of dowry. You know, for us the Acholi women, know that a man can stand up and say you, “I will kill you on my dowry”, “Itooikom lima”, literary saying, “I will kill you on my own dowry”. And many women have for sure died. 

In our culture, when you are married, before you can divorce they will ask you, “Do you have the consent of the man?” Yes, it is our traditional and cultural undertaking, but this Bill is making it good by stating that once you are given a gift – because at that time you are in love, and you appreciated somebody’s daughter or son - let the dowry not be cause for holding the woman hostage when things go soar. The parents of the girl can also be held hostage because they have to pay back what they were given –(Member timed out.).

4.31
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, my concern is about the failure of the Attorney General to answer the concerns of hon. Latif Ssebagala. The point which was made by hon. Ssebagala is constitutionally important. For example, all people in Uganda are equal before the law. The concern is, noting that under Article 31 of the Constitution, marriage is a constitutional right, what explanation has the Attorney-General got to allay the fears of hon. Ssebagala, myself and others that by legislating selectively, you will not have violated the constitutional rights of Muslims. 

We need a clear answer supporting the view that you can go ahead with this legislation of marriages under the churches, when you have not provided a solution for the Muslims –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi has just come in the House, because I answered that issue adequately and hon. Ssebagala is satisfied. If he is not satisfied, let him demonstrate it by standing up. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: If hon. Ssebagala understood it, I did not understand and I have a right not to understand it.(Interjections) I would like to thank the committee for expediting the work. But the people I represent in Lubaga South - I have got Muslims who have been on my back all the time saying, “When is our concern as Muslims coming on board”. 

I am urging the government to ensure that there is no gap left in passing of this Bill, and the Bill concerning the Muslim interests in marriage. Thank you very much. 

4.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Please stand up –(Laughter)

4.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): I just want to raise four issues -(Interjections)– we are faced with two scenarios; males verses females. As we legislate on this law, what are we really looking at? In my view, the men today are being outnumbered by the women –(Interjections)– yes, the men today are being outnumbered by the women. Now, when we are saying that once the women go into a marriage with a male they are entitled to property, and considering what hon. Odonga pointed out, do you think that we shall be encouraging those who have not yet married to go into marriage? 

I know that generations come and generations go. I am looking at the aspect of age and I know that even in this Parliament, there are those who are married and those that are not yet married. [HON. MEMBER: “Cohabiting.”] And because of that, there is no one on this earth who will live more than 150 years, and  in that respect, if we can restrict marriage in terms of legislation and having stringent measures in marriage, I am foreseeing that 50 years from today, we may no longer have families -(Interjections)- yes, we may no longer have families because people will run away from such scenarios. 

I am saying that in my view, during cohabitation – when a man and woman are cohabiting they each come with their own property. I would be comfortable that when the cohabitation ends, the woman should be allowed to go back with what she came with and also the man should remain with his –(Interjections)– yes! So that there is no way that we can actually have that one –(Interjections)

MR OLANYA: I thank you so much, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Order!

MR OLANYA: The information that I want to give my colleague is, I have a scenario whereby we have other men who do not have even any single property. Then we have men who strictly survive on the parents’ property or grandparents’ property. Right now, you find that a man is around 50 to 60 years old and he does not have any single property. The property he may have is only children whom he has had with that particular woman –(Interjections)- we have that kind of scenario, especially in Acholi where I come from. 

So, the information that I wanted to give is, what will be the criteria of defining the properties of that particular person? Therefore, we need to define clearly what the property is.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification from the minister.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I want clarification from my good friend from the mountains -(Laughter)– okay, my colleague -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, can you protect me from hon. Anywar? 

THE SPEAKER: I think she is just being friendly.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, these ones do not know that the shorter the monkey, - let me stop there. (Laughter) But the clarification that I wanted from my friend is one; at first he indicated that he is married and I do not doubt that. He is functional and I know he is married.

But secondly, I want to ask him a question. Supposing that lady who is cohabiting is your daughter and somebody stays with her for 10 years and they have children and then they tell her to walk away with nothing. Supposing that was your daughter, how would you take that? How would you feel about your daughter being with a man for 10 years and walking away without anything? How would you feel? [HON. MEMBERS: “How does he feel?”]

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you are giving away your time. Honourable members, you are oppressing hon. Nzoghu. 

MS ANYWAR: I thank you colleague for giving way. Madam Speaker, I am seeking for clarification from my colleague. When he says that a man and a girl come together with properties and when they are parting, each should go with what he or she has. My colleague should clarify whether within the 20 years these two people have stayed together, there was no additional value i.e. they never added any chair or any other property.

Secondly, he should also clarify how the labour or the work done is quantified in monetary terms after 20 years.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, please conclude.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I was stating this in the interest of those who know that there are ladies and that can cohabit with men who are totally impoverished. (Laughter)

Secondly, I am looking at a scenario –(Interjections)- yes.

THE SPEAKER: Order! 

MR NZOGHU: A woman could be earning a salary and they are cohabiting with a man who is actually spending most of his time in the bar drinking alcohol.  When the cohabitation actually breaks, the man will want to share on what he did not contribute. That is the essence of my submission. Otherwise, I am not doing it in the interest of either the man, but I am also doing it in the interest of the woman. That is my view.

4.42
MS RHONA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee and the Attorney-General for their presentations. 

Madam Speaker, aware of the fact that the percentage of women and men who have an opportunity to wed is very small; and also aware of the scenarios that we are experiencing, where a couple takes 30 or 40 years without wedding – I have seen it in this House, where some of our colleagues have just wedded and this is after over 30 years cohabiting.

Aware that most men after accumulating wealth with these poor women –(Interjections)- tend to want to wed maybe the elite at a later stage, it is my prayer that the spirit of the original Bill on the issue of cohabitees be taken seriously –(Applause)- and these women be assisted if we are to reduce cases of domestic violence. 

I am saying this with experience from Kabale, which is now ranked number two in the whole country as far as domestic violence is concerned. We have had scenarios where women wait for four months and they are out of that marriage and are already in court fighting for property. What about this innocent one who has been there for 30 or 40 years and stomached all your stress, and at the end of it, this person is going empty-handed? 

As Parliament, we could look at the issue of how couples can benefit from property they have bought together because the scenario is that most women have to wait for men to die for them to begin taking charge of the rent and the other benefits that come from these properties, which has even prompted women to kill their spouses because they want an opportunity to also take charge of these resources and to be able to also enjoy them. 

If, in this Bill, we can also determine how couples can share the percentages of property, so that they can enjoy together, and  grow together in that marriage;  but not for a woman to wait for a man to die after 40 years before she can know how much was earned from the property. The woman can, therefore, also decide –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I still want to appreciate the committee for this report. It looks like apart from the fourth issue on cohabitation, the rest probably could be acceptable. 

I have a few questions to ask. I am a Born-again Christian and I strictly believe in the Bible. The Bible does not support cohabiting. If we encourage our children, instead of training them in correct morals, in the right way to grow and to become upright women; and we want to look at an opportunity to cohabit, I think we are leading this country nowhere. 

Madam Speaker, there is also unfairness. For example, I am legally married - wedded in Church; just as an example, because my husband cannot do this. If, for example, my husband chooses to get another woman and cohabits with her, you are disadvantaging the woman who came to that home first because you are going to divide that property equally. 

I do not know how you are securing the woman, because some women get into homes that have been cleared. Some women get into homes that have been worked out. Some women seek men that have been polished. But most importantly, when we came to this Parliament as Members of Parliament, we swore using the Bible or the Quran, and that shows that even our laws depend on the Bible or the Quran. 

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have just listened to hon. Osegge. She is very clear that she is a Christian and Born-again and her line of argument was running towards that. She quoted the Bible. It is the same Bible I read. 

Madam Speaker, in the same Bible, the king, the great, great grandfather of all of us, who is Abraham, had two women. In the same Bible, King Solomon who had seven hundred and –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order!

MS NTABAZI: Is the honourable member in order, just because she reads the Bible a lot, to trample on the rights of others. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Honourable members, Order! Honourable members, both Members are right. One is reading the Old Testament and the other is reading the New Testament. (Applause) (Laughter)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I do not want to go into the Bible now because if I do – I am a teacher of the Word - and that is the Old Testament, just as the Speaker has said. And today, we are living in the New Testament. Jesus came to bring the New Testament. (Interruption)

MS ATIM ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I stand on a point of order. This Bill before us, is a Bill about marriage. And marriage is between a woman and a man. Is it in order for the honourable colleague to allude that it is only women who scheme to go to already cleaned up homes to grab property and yet marriage involves both a man and a woman; and the Bill has been provided to cater for both? 

Is she in order to traumatise women that they are property grabbers in this Bill? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there are property grabbers who are men and those who are women. So, you address both of them. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Is it procedurally right, if we are debating this Bill - I do not believe we can debate this Bill when quoting or getting words from the Holy Books. The marriage that we are talking about is clearly stipulated in the Bible. We even have religious teachings on marriage. So, if we have decided to quote the Bible, then we should take all that the Bible is talking about in as far as marriage is concerned and we bring it here, period; as Muslims do. If we want to bring the Bible here, we will contradict ourselves. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, just address the Bill; leave the Bible, the Quran and other holy books alone.
 
MS ALASO: I would like to give hon. Osegge very useful information from the Bible. Genesis 16, says, “Now Sarai is Abraham’s wife.” It is only Sarah who the Bible says was Abraham’s wife. Hagar was a maid; and Abraham decided to cohabit. 

I also want to give you information from 2 Corinthians, Chapter 7. The Bible says in Chapter 7:2 “Since there is so much immorality, each man should have his own wife…” Not wives. 

MS OSEGGE: Hon. Alaso, I thank you for that handy information -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) (Applause) I thank you for the applause. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the matter we are discussing today is very important and sensitive. We are actually treading on very delicate waters. And that is so when you are dealing with a matter that is going to regulate the relationship between human beings. So, I have to caution you; you have to debate this matter in a very sober and balanced manner. 

By coming up with this law, it assists us to know what evils we intend to cure in our society. It assists us to know what the aspirations of our society are; and to know the aspirations of our society, we can only look at what is persisting today and what it is we intend to achieve in future. If we lose that focus, then we are going to land into big problems. 

It is very unfortunate that some of us who are experts on this subject -(Laughter)– I am an expert by virtue of the fact that I was a lecturer in Domestic Relations for 12 years at the Law Development Centre. Unfortunately, we did not give our input, but when I look at the summary here and listening to – 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, are you giving information or making your submission?

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I am submitting –(Laughter)- and cautioning Members because I can see we are likely to go astray. People are now bogged down by whether cohabitation is a marriage or whether it is not a marriage –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on whether we are proceeding correctly. I would really love to benefit from expert guidance as provided by the minister, but we also need submissions that flow and I understood that hon. Osegge was still on the Floor, and probably for future Hansard readers, we need to know whether she is off the Floor, because the minister is also making his expert submission. So, where are we in this particular debate? 

Is hon. Osegge off the Floor? Is it the expert submission, is it information? If you could help me follow and I am sure that even the Hansard would follow properly. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Osegge is winding up, but I just wanted to advise that on the issue of cohabitation, the report has moved away from recognising it, but is acknowledging that those relationships do exist and in dissolution, they should be rights. But they are not saying that cohabitation is right. The report is very clear. Please wind up. 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we make laws not in isolation of what we expect as a nation. As a Christian nation, while we accommodate all other faiths, we all accept that Uganda is a proclaimed Christian nation, and that means we have to uphold Christian principles. When we encourage cohabiting, the moment they know that it is comfortable to cohabit - it may not be called a marriage, but once we encourage it and it is comfortable to do it, then I think we are not offering the right guidance to this nation. 

I would rather we just encourage building and teaching correct morals and doing things the right way. You can marry traditionally, but correctly. You can marry 10 women, but not by cohabiting because there is no way you are going to raise your children while cohabiting. They will also continue to cohabit. What kind of families are we going to have?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think your time is up. 

5.00
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill touches the feelings of many people. There are those who are happily married. They may not feel it for now, but there are those who have had bad experiences in the past, and they will be interested in getting some guidance and protection from the future so that others will not follow suit. Personally, I have a family and I am married. I have no problem with sharing my account – actually, we are all co-signatories to our accounts. Our properties are shared, we can get a property in the name of my wife and in my name or in the name of the children, and there is no problem. My mother raised me and told me one thing when I was young. She said, “Reagan, when growing up, if you love me, do not hurt a woman.” 

I am trying to bring this out of the knowledge of the family. Family values are very important and, therefore, whatever legislation we make, we should not even attempt to destroy the foundation of the family. We should be able to encourage the family to remain as a unit. There is no nation without a family. You cannot build a nation without that family unit and, therefore, I want to appeal to Members that while we get excited because of our past experiences or because of our lack of experience in many of these things, we should mind the values and the importance of the family, which has evolved over generations and generations. It is guided by unwritten norms in our society and it has been able to shape many of us into what we are today. 

I have got some experience and I want to give you a brief example. Six years ago, my cousin wedded and I presided over their engagement, and after four years, they had two children, and had some family problems. They were all working in the same place – MTN. They had problems and they separated, but I told my cousin to get her house as well. I told her to leave that gentleman there. Two years down the road, they all came back and said, “I think we have all learned our lessons and we want to get back together” and I said, “No problem; so long as you can sort this between the two of you because we are external. During your engagement, the matter was between your hearts and not the hearts of others. So, if you have come to a realisation that you can make a difference, then go back and settle.” And I can tell you that they are happily married today. 

Therefore, whatever legislation we make should not undermine some of these societal values of engagement even after a period of time. We come from villages, we come from towns, and we come from different backgrounds; and we know, and we have had these experiences that even people who have separated in the past, some of them have managed to get back into happy marriages –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for at last making it possible for this Bill to reach Parliament. This Bill took long, at the same time the public out there was also fully involved and concerned about the Bill and the ingredients. First of all, when most of the people out there heard about this Bill, they were more concerned about property and that was exactly why out there, people were not happy with this Bill at all. It was associated with “dotcom” men and women, and not the traditional women we have had in the past.

The issue of property has come at the centre of marriage much more than the aspect of love. And, in looking at this issue of property, many times, with due respect, women feel that they are cheated. Up to the time when my father died, my mother never ever complained of property, because according to the Lugbara culture, if you are a married woman, you are secured by the clan; you are married to the entire clan as it were. You are only married to one person for one purpose – that of procreation. (Laughter) But the rest of the things, your protection lies in the hands of the whole clan. In that case, therefore, when you come into that marriage, the property there is automatically yours as a lady, because we inherit property through the mother. (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, my senior, hon. Wadri. The information I wish to give you and the entire House is that in the Lugbara culture, even when you come to the point of divorce, the woman can go and stay out for more than 10 years, but in her old age, she has liberty to return to that very home and be buried there. This is because she has had children and so, still gets the property and she can have access to all of them at will.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, the additional information I would like to give is that the Acholi culture does not differ very much from the Lugbara culture because they are almost one. But the additional information I am giving is that in today’s society, there are women who may not necessarily want to get married, but want to have children. So, they ask men to give them children and after succeeding in her mission, that is all. So, it is not only about procreation, but having children irrespective of marriage.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, you will appreciate today, when you read both local and international press and the Internet; you begin asking yourself where we are going. You will find a lot of young men and women posting their photos and saying, “I am 25 years old and I am looking for a woman of such and such a nature and financially stable.” So, people are now more interested in money than love. (Laughter) Even men come up asking for women who are “self-supporting”. So, where are we going?

Not only that, but in today’s “dotcom” era, why do you think men now fear women? I want to put it as blunt as that; it is because while they are interested in property – if both of you are working, at the end of the day, the property you are looking at is the property of the man where the two of you are settled. But it is also a fact that many of these working women earn salaries, but their men do not know where they are putting their investments. (Laughter) They put their investments in their parents’ homes. So, upon dissolution of the marriage, can I, who is married to somebody in Teso, leave Terego and go all the way to Teso in an attempt to claim my property? I cannot. That is why we need to be cautious when enacting this law. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you can use one more minute.

MR WADRI: The second reason this Bill has not been well received out there is because – I am sorry to say it – it is pegged to our “dotcom” women. The issue of bride price, now termed as “gifts” – certainly, we have useful societal values as to why we appreciate that gifts must be given. For example, Fr Lokodo is there, and as a cleric, before you even take somebody’s daughter for marriage, the parents have to give consent, saying, “Yes, he has already fulfilled the customary obligations and paid the cows that were required of him.” And that was one of the ways of giving stability to marriages. (Laughter) 

So, let us not demonise bride price; bride price per se is not bad; it is how we conceive it and take advantage of our women. Actually, when you are married using bride price, society holds you high. But today, if you just left my house – you are there cohabiting with a man. When you go to the altar, you will be asked how many cows were paid and if you say “nothing” they will say, “This one is not properly married.” And yet, they are talking about it as far as stability is concerned. 

Therefore, let us be very careful. Let us not forget our societal and religious values when enacting this law.

5.11
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and members for bringing us this report, which has been long overdue, more especially in the villages where people were asking us questions, which we could not answer. And, since we are coming closer to the International Women’s Day, it is paramount that we go with this information so that everybody gets to know how far we have gone with the Bill.

The Bill is preparing us for many things. It is good it is talking about marriage and divorce, because it is preparing us in the event of a disaster. Whether you like it or not – even if you run away from conflict, it will always find you. And you have to have a way out of the conflict. There is no single woman in this country who hates to be wedded; there is nobody. Every woman likes to have her own man to stay happily. But in Uganda, this law has failed to work, according to the Bible. This is because culture has surpassed the biblical way of thinking. According to our cultures, polygamy is the order of the day. Though we are talking about the Muslims who marry four women, there are non-Muslims who have even seven wives. (Laughter) 

So, there is no way we can say that this law should not be talked about. And if you looked at the percentage of Ugandans, 51 percent are women against 49 percent of the men. So, if you say that every man should go with only one wife, then you are losing it. (Laughter)

I am speaking about this because there are many Ugandans out there who we represent. I do not think we represent only married men and wedded women. A majority of the people we represent are not wedded. And Madam Speaker –(Mr Mbahimba rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information, hon. Mbahimba.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you, hon. Ntabazi for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give hon. Ntabazi regarding what she has presented – she has indicated that the number of women is slightly higher than that of men. But I also want to say that during creation, God created each person for a purpose, and He is aware that the men are less than the women. However, He also said that, “Go and multiply and subdue the earth.” He actually directly said: “You can marry and have women.” Even in the Bible –(Laughter)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you for the information. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, the reason I brought this issue – there are many issues, which cause marriages to break, one of which is of course barrenness. You may marry a woman who is committed to you and is submissive and doing everything, but she cannot have a child. So, a man is subjected to looking for another woman who will give him children. Supposing the law now states that you have to - there is nothing like that because you have wedded, what will happen?

The other issue is that -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, is my honourable sister in order to insinuate that on the matter of giving birth to children, it is pre-determined and given that it is strictly women who will fail or will not be able to conceive? Are there no men who may not be able to procreate? Is she in order to give that impression to this House?
THE SPEAKER: It is difficult for me to rule on that one. Please, conclude.

MS NTABAZI: This is biology. We are not talking about something else. The point I was trying to belabour is that even conflicts in homes arise because of property. Now, when we look at property inheritance in the villages, in reality, most of our men down there go drinking while the women are working. If you go to the shambas, you will find the women working when the men are drinking. So, we are talking from experience.

We are eliminating money in this sense and the law will assist us to share the contribution of each person equally because even if I worked as a house girl for ten years, I have a right to be paid the salary for ten years. Now, there are men who stay with women for more than ten years and after that long period, they want them to divorce and go empty-handed. This is really wrong. (Member timed out.)

5.17
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done given the context in which we are living. When you look at the dynamics of culture and the changes that are taking place at the moment, for sure, when you talk traditionally, you are just putting your head in the sand. The fact is very clear that the transformation of society is taking course and the young generations that are coming will not be like us.

When we are making a law, it must take cognisance of that fact. This is the reality of change and this change cannot be reversed and we begin talking traditionally; that is totally out.

Madam Speaker, the issue of property becomes a very important aspect because it enforces discipline. When you look at the Europeans and how they have come up with those laws, you realise that when some men accumulate a lot of wealth, of course, they abuse that wealth by taking advantage of as many women as they can. Now, they had to tag this aspect of property to make sure that everyone, whether man or woman, has to be very careful before they take any action.

Madam Speaker, when it comes to cohabitation - I have increasingly realised many of our young people do not have money. When you are talking about introductions, the introductions today are a nightmare to many young people who are earning a minimal income. We are talking about a minimum wage -(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I thank you and my colleague. I would like to seek clarification from you. When you brought the point of change and the existence of laws regulating marriage in Europe, I wanted clarification from you as to whether where these laws exist like in Europe, there are better and more stable marriages than here where these laws do not exist? What are the statistics you can present to us to justify that where these laws exist, marriages are better and divorces are less? Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: To the honourable member, of course, you have asked me a scientific question and in my response - I am going to respond. The women of Europe are very liberated and cannot stand oppression. You cannot command them because they are liberated. Our women here can stand oppression because the culture has made them like that and that is why we have increasing - we come and pretend to say these women are okay because of the culture and the Europeans are not okay; but I want to tell you that this is a qualitative aspect that we are dealing with today.

We are talking about empowered women. Why are we educating these girls? Of course, when we educate people, even the language that we are using is alien meaning that we are adopting these global standards and practices and this is something that we must bear in mind.

I was still building on this point -(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I did not have any intention of interrupting my good friend, hon. Ruhunda, but he brought in an argument of civilisation vis-à-vis family values and he was trying to weigh Africa and Europe. I do not know whether he is in order to compare the two and say Europe is more advanced when they are engaged in homosexuality as if that is a social advancement in their society. We have different values. So, you cannot compare cultural values and say the other ones are more advanced and these ones are not. Is he in order to compare the two?

THE SPEAKER: Can you explain what you meant by being ahead?

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, even right now as we speak, we are quoting the Bible, which came from Europe. Everything that is about us as I speak today, even the language we are using here in Parliament is imported. This is the fact and the reality. Even the suit hon. Wadri is putting on is European. So, I was building a very important point and I would like the Members to bear with me. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, as we debate and legislate, we must be cognisant of the fact that tomorrow’s generation will read these documents. A while ago, the honourable colleague clearly indicated that the Bible came from Europe. No, the Bible never came from Europe. The Bible came from the Middle East. When you look at the four people: Mark, John, Luke and the rest, the Bible was written in the Middle East. Fr Lokodo who is there and is my senior will attest to that. Is the honourable member in order to mislead this House about the origin of the Bible? Are you in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when the Bible was brought, it was brought by the French. They are the ones who arrived here first with the Bible. It was the Europeans who brought it to Uganda. Proceed.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was building a very important case that we are facing with the youth. At the moment when we are talking about the average income of these youths, they are earning Shs 300,000 a month. Now, for a young person earning that amount is entitled to marriage -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR 	RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am really building up this very important point because it is a crisis that we face. I talked about the introduction - these traditional ceremonies. They are very costly to the young people, and now many of these young people have reached an age where they need to settle down and some of them have chosen to cohabit. If we do not make a law that takes care of that group that is very big compared to the well-off that we see going for introduction, then we will be missing a point. 

That is why this issue of cohabitation becomes a very important aspect of this Bill, and I would urge Parliament to support this Bill such that we put order within the marriage institution. I know it is that institution that will salvage the morality they are talking about and the values. If we do not put stringent laws that can be enforced to inculcate these values in our society, we will be deceiving ourselves. (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to assure you that everybody will speak. 

5.26
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the committee for having come up with this report. I am scared about this Bill. Even the heading of the Bill itself: “The Marriage and Divorce Bill”. It would have been at least referred to as the “Family Management Bill” instead of the Marriage and Divorce Bill. 

The Bill is not realistic because it contradicts both the Christian and cultural norms. If I refer to the Bible, Proverbs 19:14 -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, marriage is a biological function that is based on emotions. There is no panacea for moderating human behaviour other than law. We are legislating in order to moderate human behaviour. In human interaction, there is agreement and disagreement. Where there is agreement, there is harmony; where there is disagreement there is anarchy. And whereas these are the two things we are trying to regulate in this period; the harmonious relationship in marriage and the disharmonious relationship in marriage. 

We are trying to make sure that we free these individuals that enter into this human relationship voluntarily and ought to exit it voluntarily. We are trying to protect the women of this country –(Interjections)- yes, because historically, the women of this country have endured injustice like their sisters all over the world. 

In a human relationship, there is the aspect of division of labour; exogenous and endogenous. While a man is out toiling, this lady is at home looking after the children. It is this companionship, this complementary aspect of labour that makes you produce wealth. 

Therefore, when you separate as a result of disagreement, each of you ought to take adequate and comparable benefit of your product of labour. Madam Speaker, this is the information I would like to give to the honourable gentleman.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, honourable minister, for your information. But in this Bill, the main objective is to create harmony between the partners - 

THE SPEAKER: There is some other information from the Prof. Kabwegyere.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I agree with the contribution of the honourable minister; only with one correction, which he started off with, that marriage is a biological function. That is not correct. Marriage is a social institution because a biological union between a bull and a cow is not a marriage. (Laughter) It is all society.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, in response to the honourable Professor, I want to say that marriage is a social contract. In any contract, be it social or commercial, there are laws to regulate the performance of the contract and there are laws to regulate the termination of the contract. Therefore, there is no harm in having this law regulating marriage and divorce.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to inform the House that it is not an innovation. In the existing law, there is a divorce Act; a marriage of Africans Act; marriage of Indians; marriage of Europeans. All those are there. So, it is not new. They are just coming together.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my reference to the Bible, when it comes to inheritance, when you look at Proverbs 19:14, the house and riches are the inheritance of the father and a prudent wife is from the Lord.  So, we should not contradict ourselves even in the laws, saying, Madam Speaker, that each and every -(Interruption) 


MR NSEREKO: Thank you my honourable colleague for giving way. My point of concern is that whereas we agree that a law to regulate human behaviour is important, it is also important not to involve issues like on dissolution. For example, what I envisage - I have looked at a situation and this has happened in Europe, where the elements and grounds of dissolution, for example, sharing of property, have become grounds to deter people from engaging in the institution of marriage. 

One, how does it arise? You are two partners in this institution of marriage. The lady desires to work; she wakes up early in the morning; she does all the work and it has started happening in this country. Women are working tirelessly and we have men that are stalkers. They sit back, they do not work, the ladies go and work or even acquire inheritance in form of property, and after three months, the man comes out and says, “You know what my spouse, I deserve a divorce,” and you have to share 50-50 - if you legislate it here today. You may say, “Why not!” However, that principle of encouraging sharing of property as a ground of dissolution of a social contract is not very good. And in this case, what do I want to show you in this picture as I inform my honourable colleague? 

What is very important in this - and I would like all of you to look at it in the future, we are only talking about property, envisaging that it will be assets. What of the liabilities, for example, loans? After all, you have been in a marriage and a man has loans to the tune of about Shs 6 billion or the lady has loans to the tune of Shs 6 billion, what happens on dissolution? 

Therefore, do you share the liabilities and the assets together? I am trying to throw questions so that as you are legislating, you clearly know what you are legislating for and that you are legislating for not only you, but for the future of this country. 

The notion to legislate for marriage and divorce should be, one, in order to promote people to enter into the institution of marriage, and in order to make it difficult for people to divorce. Therefore, is what you are bringing into the Marriage and Divorce Bill today, encouraging people to enter into the institution of marriage and deterring them from divorcing? If you have all those ingredients, then we can deliberate and legislate for the future of this country. That is the information.

THE SPEAKER: Wind up, hon. Boaz Kafuda, please.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, hon. Nsereko. As the hon. Rukutana said, we need to take these laws very seriously because, we do not want to pass laws here that are going to create more violence in communities instead of protecting those who manipulate the family relationships.

Out there, there are prostitutes, and they are aware of this law, and they are waiting for this law to be passed so that they run for property sharing. So, this is an appeal to the mothers who are here, that we have to even protect our children. (Member timed out.)

5.37
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA BANGIRANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to personally thank you for the effort you have taken to ensure that this Bill is now on the Floor of this House. It was overdue. It has taken a long time and we have deliberated on it from the time I came to this House, but now I am happy. I only want to ask my colleagues; to look at this Bill in its own perspective without emotions. 

With due respect, when hon. Rukutuna was giving information, he looked at it in his perspective. If you asked hon. Kakooza, he would bring his own experience of cohabitation. (Laughter) I am saying with due respect. 

If you look at each of us here, in one way or another, you will find that this Bill has got some aspect of personal connotations and feelings. However, I want to request that for the good of the country and the rest of the voiceless of the voiceless, if we can look at the principle of this Bill, what does it intend to cure? It is addressing the rights and obligations of spouses which have been failing and that is why society is the way it is now. It is trying to look at the issue of property. I can assure you, that three quarters of us in this House may have been victims or you are soon to be victims of these issues. 
TR-W2703.13

So, let us address the issues in the Bill. Let us look at the fact that the Bill intends to cure domestic violence. How many deaths have happened? It is either the women that have killed their husbands for property or vice versa. 

Madam Speaker, if I heard you correctly, you mentioned cohabitation. We carried out many workshops as UWOPA and in the last workshop we attended, we were assured that this cohabitation issue will not appear in the Bill, and that is what is giving all of us a hard time - we go to the Bible, the Quran and to everything. At the same time, you have guided us that the Bill is not addressing cohabitation as part of marriage. Even when you look at what the committee says, it says, “The Bill is therefore necessary in dealing with the rights and obligations of spouses in a marriage.” Now, what are we doing with this cohabitation here? 

First of all, I have a problem; honourable colleagues have alluded to the fact that women are the ones cohabiting. Yesterday, one MP said they live in many villages, LCs. What are they doing there if they are not cohabiting there? At the same time, when it comes to property, it is as if the women, as one colleague said, are the ones who are grabbing, but men in this era are grabbing women’s property. I would want to see this Bill -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are vividly aware about what our colleague, hon. Nampijja, went through. As women here, we are keeping quiet; we are suffering under these men grabbing our property. So, I would be happy if this Bill passes without any emotions so that we get a win-win situation.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, put it into your perspective. You are No.3 in this country, you are the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, you are one of our role models; God forbid, a man comes from nowhere to just come into your life with a calculated intention of grabbing your property that you have sweated for. Is that fair? I rest my case. (Laughter)

5.42
MR ANTHONY SSEMMULI (NRM, Buwekula County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for this report. Actually, I would think that this law was long overdue. However, there are some concerns I have got. What we have got to appreciate is that to have a good law, it has to be fair, it has to be equitable and ready to produce positive implications. 

When I was listening to this report, my attention went to cohabitation. What we have got to appreciate is the contribution religious institutions have made in our communities. I would think if we allow cohabitation, we are weakening marriage as an institution; then, what is the purpose of marriage? 

Secondly, cohabitation has got negative implications, we have heard. There are very many men and women who are going to be targeted - I am telling you, Madam Speaker, about this - including me. (Laughter)

What we cannot deny is why this law has taken a long time to go through. We have got to appreciate our integrity; we believe in the extended family system where we believe marriage is a gift and children are the products of that gift. I believe, if we pass this law, and most especially advocating for cohabitation, religious institutions and their purposes are going to be curtailed.

Most of the countries -(Interruption)

MS TIMBIGAMBA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. On the point of cohabitation, as a member of the committee and from the consultations we got, we have had quite a number of people, women and men, who have stayed in cohabitation even up to old age. 

As you said, and as colleagues had already discussed, marriage is a gift and a wedding is also another gift. You might find that this person did not get the chance to wed but in their marriage, they have got the gift of children. The issue is about protecting those who are in cohabitation, not by wish but by circumstances, so that they can also live to the extent that they can live. If God gives them a chance, they can wed. Thank you very much. 

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you very much for the information, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, what I would like to say is that cohabitation; one, is immoral; two, you have got to accept that cohabitation is immoral and it is contrary to customary law. (Applause) (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The honourable member just said cohabitation is immoral and contrary to customary law, but how about the aspect of trial marriage? You do not just get the woman today and wed tomorrow; you may want to stay together, to monitor her behaviour. How do you want to relate to that? (Laughter)

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. Again with trial marriage, you will be punished. That is what I know. You can have it but you will be punished. (Interruption)

MS AJOK: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give you information. I am a bit worried that when we legislate, we legislate for the whole society. It is a fact that in cultural and customary law, they have a way of dealing with cohabitees. They get a corner where they are got- Like in Lango, if you cohabitate, when children come and you decide that you want to remove your children, there is a penalty for that. The worst of it all is in case of death. If we are therefore legislating like as a nation, we need to know how our laws can deal with this group of people. Otherwise, we will have many families destroyed in a way that they cannot deal with such situations. 

It is a fact that more and more people are cohabiting. Some of them for reasons known, for example, that they do not have dowry. So many of them stay together, they work, buy their dowry, and they go and do their customary marriages and move on as a couple. The most important bit is that the institution of marriage gives respect and status in society, whether you look at it from the customary angle or the legal one. The institution must be encouraged. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR SSEMMULI: Thank you very much, my colleague. Again, under customary law, where there is cohabitation it is on condition it leads to marriage. That is the most important thing. 

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I request the august House to come up with laws that strengthen marriage, instead of coming up with laws to weaken marriage.  I rest my case.

5.50
MR JULIUS JUNJURA BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I equally want to thank the committee for the good work they have done. 

I must say that in my constituency, this particular legislation is not very popular. I have done some bit of consultations, especially from the elders, and the law seems to have a lot of question marks. I almost wanted to stand on a point of guidance, whether it was not necessary for us to be given extra time to consult. The unfortunate bit for us, colleagues, is that normally whenever there is an election, there is always no handover. Otherwise, since 2009, this Bill has always been contested in my area especially as regards cultural and religious aspects. 

The biggest challenge in this has always been regarding the issue of the right to property. Many of our marriages today have become commercialised; they actually target workers, to a point where one gets married to the other because of the target he has, and that is commercial. We have seen many cases in my village. A man gets married, gets a lot of money, builds mansions in Kampala and everywhere, he dies but even that very day of burial - the wife does not even wait for the three to four days we normally have for mourning in culture, the next day she is already back to Kampala because the deal is done. 

Honourable members, you must also acknowledge that in African tradition, there is more of an extended type of family where you find Junjura here looking after my mother, my brothers- the whole clan, more or less - but this does not reflect on how all these will benefit. My wife, for example, will take over but she may not have good relations with my mother; what happens then? These are issues which are becoming a bit tricky. You are only looking mainly at the marriage in terms of women but how about the children? These are issues which we need to consider and they have become a bit tricky. The elders are saying this law is very unpopular. 

Madam Speaker, we might be thinking that it is going to bring harmony in marriage, but we need to do research, scientifically, about whether that is true. I liked the colleague who raised the issue that where these laws have been, have they brought marriage stability. Otherwise, we might be thinking about the reverse. We need to do a lot more research about this because it might create insecurity, although I do not want to assume so. However, someone will get married and at the end of the day will decide to kill the spouse because he is aware the next thing is to share property. So, we need to be careful with these issues. The next day I will get married, aware that Madam X has money and then I may do otherwise. So, where is the harmony and security in that regard? (Member timed out)

5.54
MS ANNE AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the work they have done. I feel this Bill is long overdue, and I will be very happy and I know most of the people in Uganda will be very happy if it is passed before the Women’s Day celebrations. With this Bill, I am happy because it is going to address many issues which especially women have been going through, things like being chased away from home without any property, being forced into marriage and so on. 

I have two issues to raise on cohabitation. The recommendation No. 4 of the committee says, “The Bill recognises rights of cohabitees in sharing property after termination of cohabitation”. To me, the Bill recognises cohabitation and that is why it is encouraging sharing of property; it is promoting cohabitation – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: In the interpretation, cohabitation is carefully defined to mean a man and a woman living together as husband and wife. There is no difference either way; whether you are married in church and the other one is cohabiting, you are just legally and factually the same. (Laughter)

MS AURU: Thank you very much. He has defined it correctly. So, that drives me to ask the question: what have we been debating about? We are saying that we do not want cohabitation, yet when a man and woman meet and make up a family – (Interruption)

MS AUMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think I will do a disservice to this nation and to the august House if I do not say this about cohabitation. Cohabitation is a reality. We have people who are cohabiting and some are in this House – (Interjections) – The best thing we can do is to regulate it. 

There are people who are cohabiting against their will. I want to give an example. We have extremists in faith. Assuming I am born-again and I decide to marry a Muslim; these people will bring the dowry to give to my people to solemnise the marriage. But remember these are extremists and we have to respect our culture. Because I belong to the Christian faith, they will not accept to take the dowry. The husband-to-be is willing to give the dowry, but my parents are not willing to take the dowry. I love my husband and he loves me. Where do we put such a couple? That is why I am saying, let us not run away from the reality that is with us, and it is with us to stay.

MS AURU: Thank you. From your information, I perceive that we should recognise cohabitation as a form of marriage and I think it is okay. I want to give you an example. In my district, a Muslim married four women; three of them were recognised in his religion, but the fourth was a Christian and she had five children with him. At the death of that man, the Christian woman who was not married in the mosque was immediately chased away. (Member timed out.)

6.00
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work they have done here. The marriage institution, which we are talking about here, is the oldest relationship that exists; it is as old as humanity. It is one of the most interesting relationships that man can ever have. That is why Timothy Keller defined marriage as finding happiness in your most profound relationship. 

Marriage has got customs that have transformed in the course of development of human societies. Some cultures gave rights to both the male and females engaged in marriage. But I must say that in some cultures, it was so bad that for centuries the women folk were imprisoned, dehumanised and deprived of the rights to participate in society like their male counterparts. I want to say, Madam Speaker, that despite some challenges with this Bill, this Bill will go a long way to liberate the women in our societies and give respect and dignity to our wives, sisters and our mothers. 

I am only worried that this law might bring social acrimony in our communities, particularly about sharing of property. I want to ask, like hon. Nsereko asked, what is the spirit in this Bill? First, it should encourage marriage; that is a good relationship. However, it should not promote separation of the people involved in this kind of relationship. I think we must make sure that the conditions that successfully lead to divorce should be framed such that they discourage divorce. This will go a long way in protecting the values of our society. 

My other concern with this Bill is about the sharing of property. When you look at the sharing of property when this institution breaks down, we should look at the percentage according to contribution. Appoint shares according to one’s effort and contribution to the marriage. This will help for those who have evil intentions to terminate their marriages to take advantage of property that exists in the home. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to discuss the definition of marriage. I have seen here that it is defined according to customs of religion, but we should also look at other customs of society which are not derived from Christianity, Hinduism or the Muslim faith. There are other – (Member timed out.)

6.04
MRS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also want to add my voice to others and thank the committee for the work well done. However, I have a few concerns. 

Just as the other speakers have said, I am not comfortable with this title, “Marriage and Divorce Bill”. Once one gets into the institution of marriage, we should not assume that one has the liberty to walk out of it any time. That is why we have problems with property. Once one is married, we should encourage them to stay together unless it is inevitable or life threatening. We could give it another name but not divorce. To some people, like from the religious point of view, it is stated that only death will put you asunder. Therefore, I do not support that. 

The second thing I am a bit uncomfortable with is cohabitation, as colleagues have already pointed out. To me, it is very unfortunate that what we see going on in our country is that most of the people are cohabiting. It is important that we encourage or maybe enforce a law so that whoever is in cohabitation is encouraged to legalise the marriage. If marriage is legalised, we should discourage cohabitation so that those who are already caught up in it should legalise and nobody should be allowed to enter into that system of cohabitation. 

I know we can set up a law that will regulate people from walking in and out of marriages, especially those who are targeting property- 

THE SPEAKER: Information from the expert minister. (Laughter)

MR RUKUTANA: I thank the honourable member for giving way. My information is by way of an example that happened in 1966. At that time, the Legislature thought that the society was in danger of consuming enguli and they wanted to discourage them and encourage them to deviate from enguli. So, they enacted a law called the Enguli Manufacture and Licensing Act. In that Act, it was prohibited to consume enguli. Madam Speaker and honourable members, that law is still law on our books, but the information that I want to give is that notwithstanding that law, people have continued to consume enguli – (Interjections) - What I am pointing out is that social behaviour cannot be wished away by enacting a law to regulate it. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like to add to what hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana has said. In this very Bill, there is reference to bigamy. Bigamy has been a law on our statute books before I had milk teeth; how many people are cohabiting in that very mode of existence and how many have been brought before the courts of law? In the Army, we say never give an order that is likely to bring rebellion. 

I would like to inform the honourable speaker on the Floor that we learn from antiquity to get wisdom to regulate posterity and take profound introspection into posterity - the presence and then posterity. Society develops from simple forms of organisation to complex forms of organisation. Therefore, you should not be tied to custom without regard to posterity because every single day, society is becoming more and more complex and that is a hallmark of development, Madam Member of Parliament. So, cohabitation is a reality. (Interjections) You cannot wish it away, and so is polygamy. You can only regulate it but not eliminate it. (Laughter)  

MS GALIWANGO: I thank you. The previous speakers have indicated that cohabitation is a reality. I still want to say that cohabitation, as one of us has said, is evil. Let us encourage people to legalise marriages. What is wrong with that? Should we stop legislating just because people have to continue cohabiting? We should not encourage that because we know that people are targeting property. Why can’t we all say that we have the state marriage because state marriage is also there? We should not legalise cohabitation; we should discourage it. In fact, there should a law prohibiting cohabitation so that we can live in sanity and stop - (Member timed out.)

6.10
REV. PETTER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the members of the committee who laboured to come up with this. 

However, I need some guidance from the Attorney-General; I want to get a distinctive definition of these two, cohabitation and Christian marriage. When you read this Bill, it says that, “Christian marriage means a marriage of one Christian man and one Christian woman for life to the exclusion of others, solemnised in a licensed place of marriage for that purpose by a recognised celebrant; or solemnised by a recognised celebrant in a place directed by the minister’s licence.” That is someone like me, as a priest who has served for 25 years. When it comes to cohabitation, it says, “Cohabitation means a man and woman living together as husband and wife.” What is the difference here? 

We are now making a very important law. It is good that the Muslims have actually already lobbied for their part but for us as Christians, we are thinking that you are rendering our work useless. What are we doing now? There are people whom we have been encouraging to come to our churches to solemnise marriage; now, they are being legalised. You just pick up someone and you stay with that one for life. What is the difference here? (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you. With due respect to my OB, who is a reverend, I think in today’s Daily Monitor, there is a celebrity called Monica who has wedded a third tycoon. It started with the first one where she got property, shared and left. She got the second and she shared and left. Now she is sharing another one and they are in court. Madam Speaker, I am a victim of these circumstances. (Laughter) Yes, because I have to tell you my experience. 

If you say that you are cohabiting, from the way it is written here, that the intention of cohabiting is sharing property, I can imagine that somebody within three years or even one year – You have struggled for 50 years for property and somebody within that short time targets you to come and share that property. In addition to that, we have been saying that immorality in marriage is bad. What is the difference between cohabiting and homosexuality? All of them are immoral. [Rev. Bakaluba: “No, there is a difference.”] 

In Church, when you are a Catholic, if you have one wife to whom you are married but you go with another one, that is immorality. Even in the Koran, it is there. Even for Protestants, it is there. Why do you encourage prostitution? What are you legislating for? 

REV. BAKALUBA: I thank you very much. Ladies and gentlemen, the Speaker and the Attorney-General, religious institutions – (Mr Ssebagala rose). I will take it. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: I thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give to the honourable colleague is that when I look at page No.1 of the committee report, under methodology, they have informed us that they received memoranda from the stakeholders. One of the stakeholders was the Uganda Joint Christian Council. What I want to know is whether the Uganda Joint Christian Council is in harmony with whatever is here because we are likely to contradict with our religious leaders. Are they in harmony with what is written here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought when the chairperson was reading the report, you were listening. The report was clear; they did not recognise cohabitation as a form of marriage but they recognise that it is happening and that when it is terminated, there should be a solution on how to terminate - where do the children go; where does the property go. That is what the report says. 

REV. BAKALUBA: I thank you for your ruling, Madam Speaker. For us, as religious institutions, we think that maybe this government had a hidden agenda in coming up with this Bill. It was as if it wanted to disrupt us as religious institutions from doing our work, promoting and encouraging people to accept - (Interruption)

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the colleague for giving way. I am a member of the committee and I would like to give some information that will help some colleagues on the issue of cohabitation and property. 

If you read section 115, it talks about matrimonial property. Matrimonial property is the one which is shared, where people who are legally married are entitled to share. In section 116, it talks about matrimonial property to be owned in common. But if you read section 117, it talks about property agreement, and it says, “Two persons in contemplation of a marriage or cohabitation with each other or cohabiting or married may make an agreement with respect to the ownership of- 
(a) separate property of each spouse or cohabite; 
(b) property acquired during the marriage or cohabitation; or (c) distribution of property acquired during the marriage or cohabitation.”

The information I want to give is that for people who are cohabiting, it is not automatic that they get a right to take property. They actually enter an agreement by consent of the two parties. 

REV. BAKALUBA: Thank you very much. That is why I am saying that I do not see any difference now between a Christian marriage and cohabitation. We are moving on equal footing; so, where is our work now? You are rendering us with no work to do at all. That is our argument. The next step will be sharing property. Most of our marriages are getting destroyed because of property. Sharing property is becoming a problem. Today, we are talking about side dishes. I know Members of Parliament do not enjoy that but others have even gone into that. 

We need to fully understand the motives and intentions of this law, whether it is going to help us as religious institutions or it is going to destroy our Church and marriage institutions in our Church. Thank you.

6.20
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee. When people marry, they produce children. Once these children have been produced, they need to be loved and they need to be brought up. What we have witnessed now is that when these marriages get problems and they break down, these children start suffering. The current laws have failed to protect interests of the children. 

Just last year, I was visiting one of the schools; a man and a woman, two parents, fought at the school before their children because the father had said the mother should never visit the children at school but the mother insisted on visiting them. Madam Speaker, in this Bill, how are these children going to be protected? How are these children going to receive parental love?

We are talking of sharing property between man and woman but what about this minor? This person will inevitably suffer because of your love. Now, today, when your love has broken down, the child suffers. I would appeal that this Bill protects our children. 

Lastly –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, as far as children are concerned, we have got one of the most comprehensive laws in this country, the Children’s Act. Even as I speak, it is also under review but it takes care of children’s issues. 

We also have our succession laws in this country, and they also take care of children’s interests in matters of inheritance. We have many other laws, not mentioning case law and other legal norms that we apply in the protection of children. (Mr Wadri rose_)- Since hon. Kassiano Wadri was one time a commissioner in charge of children, I will give him the opportunity to raise his clarification.

MR WADRI:	Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the Attorney-General for accepting me to ask for clarification. It is true, in the Children’s Act and the Succession Act, there is a provision of 75 per cent of the estates of the deceased parent to benefit children. (Interjections)- Wait; allow me because I think when it comes to that, I am an authority in the Children’s Act. 

The question, which we will want you to clarify further, is that if these children are left at a tender age, when the two parents have separated or have died, that issue still becomes of concern because their fate and welfare will be determined by that remaining parent or that parent in whose custody they are. If that parent is not responsible enough, he or she can decide to use those estates for his or her own personal gain and these minors will have no way to challenge it. I think that is what our honourable colleague is coming up with. Can we come up with something tangible to protect the interests of these children, whether in cases of divorce or in case of death of one of the parents? I wish you to clarify on that. 

MR RUHINDI: Accepted, but we cannot now begin debating the Children’s Act. I think the best is, since this is a Bill to regulate the relationship in marriage and even at the time of dissolution, let us handle it. When it comes to the Children’s Act, which in any case should be coming soon, we shall that. By the way, also the succession law is under review. They should be coming soon to this Parliament. We can then attend to this issue that is being raised.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General should know that if there is anything to bring harmony in the home, it is the children. Also, in the laws that you are talking about, you are talking of the deceased; I am talking of the parents who are still living. The parents have separated, they have divorced, they are still fighting for these children and the children are left nowhere. If what the Attorney-General is saying is true, then the government needs to go out and sensitise people because what I am talking about is reality. It is actually what is happening now. (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable member. The information I want to give you is that during the long recess, I happened to meet with the local women down there and one of the issues that they threw to me and I failed to answer was the issue of children. In fact, they asked me, “Do you consider children as property in marriage?” I said, “No; children issues are being handled by another law altogether.” Then they told me bluntly that I was very wrong because this is God-given property, the first property. This is the common woman down there talking, challenging me. 

They said if you are going to separate them under the cohabitation that you are talking about, then the first property is the children. Down there in the village, they said they do not have property. Members, I want you to understand this. They challenged me that down in the villages, they do not have property except maybe a papyrus mat and one goat and if we are saying that we are going to exclude the children, then what will the women go back with? 

Their argument was that in case of courts of law, we will consider the men who maybe have more property or have more money than them to take custody of the children because the men can send the children to school. As mothers - you know that mothers have that attachment to the children - what will they remain with? Those were the questions they asked me and I promised them that I would also throw these questions to the House for them to answer about what they will do with the children in case of cohabitation and separation. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, I think let us not get into the implementation of the law before we even make it. There is also the Affiliation Act which deals with management of children in cases where situations are not – 

6.28
MS REBECCA OTENGO AMUGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You told us that this Bill has taken over 45 years or more, older than many people in this Parliament. I would like to see this law protecting both the male and the female. There is some assumption that it could only be the male who are mishandling the women but it could also be vice versa. So, let us look at a situation where a man is also suffering at the hands of a woman. Maybe, that could be looked at in the same law.

Secondly, we are dealing with a very slippery situation. Looking at culture and talking of cohabitation, in Lango when you live with somebody’s girl even for 10 years and she dies in your hands, you marry the body before they bury. Why should you reach that level? That is the question. Even religiously, they do not agree with what some Members are trying to propose, that cohabitation should be recognised. 

I think we should go with the proposal of the committee. One, by the time you cohabit, you must know the risk, and the risk may overweigh you. I think if you have property in that cohabitation, you should know where to put your property. Why do you put your property together in a relationship which is not legal? To me, that is not right. 

I think what we should also look at, which you have already ruled on, is the issue of children. A child born either in a legal relationship or in a cohabitation relationship must be protected. How many children are you taking care of in your constituencies when the parents are alive and some are working and yet you have to pay their fees? What do you do with that kind of person? 

Some of the Members of the Eighth Parliament lost because something went round that the female Members of Parliament in the Eighth Parliament were legislating or trying to propose something like a contract marriage, where you can marry for one month and leave. Many Members of Parliament lost on that. Is there something called a contract marriage? I have never heard about it. Can you clarify here?

Madam Speaker, I think when you decide to marry, you must have a commitment. I am looking at a situation in some country where I lived briefly. In that country, if you marry in the morning and in the afternoon you feel that you are incompatible, you can leave, and the woman is even given an allowance to make sure she leaves while she looks for another man. This should not reach Uganda. I think there is some commitment you must have if you decide to live with somebody. 

Finally, the Bible tells us that he who finds a woman finds a good thing. I am trying to read the Bible to find where they say that she who gets a man also gets a good thing. Thank you. 

6.32
MS AIDAH NANTABA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kayunga)): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We represent constituents or voters who are either in a polygamous marriage, are cohabiting or who are even “side dishes”, and we may not be comfortable to explicitly take it that marriage is between a man and a woman not a man and women. Allow me to use the Bible to make my submission. 

Marriage is willing, marriage is sacred and marriage is an institution that was instituted by God himself. So, I caution the honourable members to be careful when dealing with a godly institution because you may end up defying God’s commands or even blaspheming God himself. Genesis 2:18 says, “Then the Lord God said, ‘it is not good for the man to live alone. I will make a suitable companion to help him’”, not suitable companions but a suitable companion. Verse 22 says, “He formed a woman out of the rib and brought her to him.” I am still emphasising a woman for one man and – (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, please, protect me.

THE SPEAKER: Please, listen to the verses from the Bible. (Laughter) 

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, Genesis 2:24 says, “That is why a man leaves his father and mother and is united to his wife, and they become one.” 

Let me inform my sister, hon. Ntabazi. When she was making her submission, she referred to Abraham and the two wives he had. One honourable member answered by saying it was from the Old Testament. But whatever they say, the Bible is one Word that is from God and whether it is from the Old Testament or New Testament, it is all the same. 

Galatians 4:22-23 says, “Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman and the other by a free woman. His son from the slave woman was born in the usual way but his son by the free woman was born as a result of God’s promise.” God’s promise was for one woman.

Madam Speaker, allow me to read verse 30 –(Interjections)- one verse only. This is Galatians in the New Testament.

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!.

MS NANTABA: Madam Speaker, I need protection from hon. Ntabazi - (Interjection)- I am not allowing the information. Verse 30 says, “But what does the Scripture say? It says, the son of the slave woman will not have part of the father’s property along with the son of the free woman.”

Madam Speaker, if we are going to recognise rights of cohabitees, it will lead to a situation of more divorces from the people who are stably married. This will definitely destabilise very many children in this country because women will be targeting rich men who have property, get married to them and target that property for whatever period of time. So, I do not encourage us to recognise rights of cohabitees. I know it will affect a lot of my constituents and many other Ugandans, but we are dealing with a godly institution and if the Ninth Parliament is going to tamper with God’s laws, we must be careful. We should not be found to blaspheme our God because Uganda is a God-fearing country. 

Madam Speaker, our culture has been accommodating cohabitees in its own way. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, hon. Nantaba is quoting the Bible extensively and is emphasising the issue of one woman for one man, which is very Christian. However, I am aware that there are other marriages which are holy, for example, as permitted by the Quran. So it would be important if the honourable members also talked about the Islamic marriages. Therefore, I think she is out of order to emphasise the Christian marriage when this country also has Muslim marriages.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should try to legislate for the whole country – there are pagans, herbalists, atheists, Muslims, Christians and we represent all of them. They are all ours and so we should legislate for all of them.

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. However, I believe that the pagans, the Muslims, the Christians were all created by one God. When God created Adam, He did not create for him wives but one woman, Eve. So, whether we have taken our own ways, we should keep it in mind that God meant that one man should have one woman. Whether you have four or five women, it is up to you. (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not intend to disrupt hon. Nantaba because she seems to be having a lot of knowledge about ethics, marriage and religion. However, when she says that whether we are Muslims, Christians or pagans we are created by God and then, we as Muslims, took our own way apart from what was provided for by God, is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Uganda is a secular State because there is no state religion. That is why we have Muslims, pagans and Christians. I once again say, let us legislate for the whole country. Hon. Nantaba, please do not touch the Muslims; what they are doing is theirs by right because we are a secular State.

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are here to legislate for the whole country – that is true. However, I am talking about what happened at the time of creation. I do not think I am wrong because what I have said is from the Bible. When God created man, He created Adam and Eve and not Adam and many Eves. That is from our selfish intentions. (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, really, I think we need to get this clearly correct. Some of us get offended; we have our own belief in God and we do not need any lecture, and I repeat, we need no lecture from somebody who believes in the Bible. We do not want to be insulted by hon. Nantaba that because the Bible has said this, any person who deviates from that is not holy or is deviating from what God provided for. 

I obviously doubt hon. Nantaba’s interpretation of the Bible itself, but is it in order for her to continue insinuating that what she is reading is what humanity is obliged to follow?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have twice ruled that we are a secular State. Please, abandon that issue and conclude. Do not do it again because I have twice ruled on the same issue. Please, leave it and go to something else.

MS NANTABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to conclude by saying that I am reading from what I believe in, not what others believe in, and that is the Word of God from the Bible. I do not have to bow down to other books because when I joined Parliament, I swore by the Bible and not any other book. I want to emphasise that God created Adam and Eve and not Adam and many women. That is my own opinion as a Member of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable member, I have ruled several times; please, sit down. I will now have hon. Sabila. 

6.44
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this Bill currently before the House. However, I have two issues to talk about. 

When you look at cohabitation and marriage, the interpretation of cohabitation is two people, a man and woman, living together as husband and wife. When you look at marriage, it means the union between a man and a woman for life or until it is dissolved in a manner accepted by that form of marriage and which is recognised under the laws of Uganda. This, therefore, shows that cohabitation is a way to marriage. 

Not all ways or journeys lead to a destination. There are people who start a journey but never reach the destination. So, once people start a love affair, not all of them get married. In the event of this, there is cohabitation. I agree with them because when you look at clause 133, it says that if they jointly own property in their names, then that is what they share. So it is up to those people on their journey to marriage to agree because once they are cohabiting, they are not married people. That is according to the interpretation. However, if in the course of the same they own property jointly, then they are liable to divide it at the time of dissolution. So, it does not affect whoever is cohabiting but rather your conduct during your journey to marriage because not all of them get married.

There is also this issue of dowry versus exchange of gifts. In customary marriages, we have dowry and we also have exchange of gifts. This does not stop people from having dowry because that is purely customary. Gifts are not negotiable but dowry is negotiated as a condition for a particular culture. So if my tradition says you pay this number of cows or goats, then you must pay in order to take my daughter or maybe if you accepted them, then that is traditional - (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give here is that this Bill seems to outlaw bride price because when you read clause 14, it says, “Marriage gifts are not an essential requirement for any marriage under this Act.” 

Now, in relation to what he has said, if we also go to clause 61, it says, “The procedures preceding the solemnization of customary marriage shall be in accordance with the customs and rites observed among the ethnic group of one or both parties to the intended marriage.” Now, read that together with 14(1).

Madam Speaker, you realise that there is already a conflict. If you are saying that by my customary practice, we give gifts and those gifts are a must and then you are saying in 14(1) that marriage gifts are not an essential requirement for any marriage under this Act, I think there is a contradiction. This is the information I want to give. Let marriage practices according to the cultures be as to the cultures in the spirit of the constitutional provision of the right to belong to any culture or group and practice as you belong to that cultural group. This is the information I want to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think what 14 is saying is that the absence of gifts will not stop you from getting married. That is what 14 is saying.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, when you read it together with 61, it brings confusion. If in 61, in accordance with the customs and rites observed by ethnic groups you say that gifts are a must and then again in clause 14(1) you are saying gifts are not an essential requirement for any marriage under this Act, that is double standards. We need clarity.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, this issue of dowry and bride price is one which the Uganda Law Reform Commission consulted on very widely. The recommendations that are being presented to you were arrived at after very serious consideration, including from the cultures and backgrounds we come from.

When you look at Article 32 of the Constitution, in clause (2) it says, “Laws, cultures, customs and traditions which are against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or any other marginalised group to which clause (1) relates or which undermines their status, are prohibited by this Constitution.” That is our Constitution.

The essence of bride price is actually a purchase –(Interjections)- Please, listen to me. (Hon. Oboth rose_) You want to support me? If you do not want to support me, sit down. Let me first finish my submission.

I thought we are speaking English in this House. What is “price”? Define price. To me, price connotes something in exchange of a commodity – (Interjections)- bride price. Now, if you take it as dowry, all the proposal is saying is that certainly, any culture which recognises the giving of dowry as a gift to the family is recognised; to that extent, it is essential. I would not actually expect - 

I gave away my daughter but I did not ask for bride price but they gave me gifts. When those gifts are given, all this proposal is saying - you can argue against it and throw it out - is that they are non-refundable. That the other party will not come after 20 years, go to the other family and say, “if the marriage has failed, I want my dowry back”.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I invite you to look at the Bill very carefully; Part III deals with civil marriage, Part IV deals with Christian marriage and Part V deals with customary marriage. The section you are reading is under customary marriage; do not mix them. Yes, this is the Bill. Clause 14 is under Part IV. What you have is a report but look at the Bill, please. Hon. Sabila, please complete.

MR SABILA: Madam Speaker, what I observe is that the Bill is not in conflict with any kind of marriage, the way I have understood it, but it complements. What I was trying to bring out very clearly is that dowry and gifts are two different things. Like in a customary marriage, when you are talking about dowry, it is stipulated that in such a culture, you must pay this and that, but there is something that you give as a gift on top of what is provided for in the culture. That does not have to affect the passing of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, it is only that we have different traditions. You can pay Shs 50 million, for example; that is not tradition but it is out of what you want to give. That is above dowry. Dowry remains dowry and the gift remains a gift. So, I do not see any contradiction here. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.54
MR JAMES MBAHIMBA (NRM, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been listening carefully and I have been reading. I look at Uganda with so many ethnic groups and different cultures, and any society without a culture, I imagine, is a doomed one. We are speaking here because of the cultures we have gone through. 

I know we are making a law that is trying to regulate harmonious living of a couple; I appreciate that. I have been thinking and looking at this law. Somebody gets into a marriage, and our law is clear, at 18 years old and above. This person is giving his consent, that I am marrying or I am going to be with so and so and we shall bear issues, we shall have children, we shall have property. Now, here we are looking at cohabiting. Why should somebody above 18, with his own conscience, stay in that relationship for 10 or 20 years and you say you must protect that person by making a law to ensure that he continues staying in that arrangement that culturally is prohibited?

Madam Speaker, I know cohabitation culturally is also prohibited - (Interjections) - Yes. You are not supposed to stay with a woman without getting an understanding with her family. Unless you are not living in culture but in my culture, you are not supposed to stay with that person. Today, Members have said that in their own culture, even if a woman dies before you pay dowry, you are supposed to pay it before you bury. That means that relationship requires fulfilling some obligation, which is the dowry we are talking about. 

Therefore, when we say we must protect people who are cohabiting, I am asking, where is the culture? Society is built on culture. We are, therefore, saying there should be no culture – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The protection we are talking about in cohabitation is protection to the weak person, not to the strong one. Look at a situation where a man stays with a woman and the woman says, “We should get married” and he says, “next year” but year one passes, year two passes, nine years - 

THE SPEAKER: And then the children are being born and they start school.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. For nine years you are telling the woman, “next year”. So, the protection we are talking of is for this woman who has been fooled for a decade and the marriage is not coming.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Minister for Gender.

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the colleague on the Floor about the culture that he is talking about. Nobody has said that we should avoid culture, but when we talk about culture in Uganda, we are talking about progressive culture. 

Right now, when we talk about the bride price as culture, I think many of you heard about that scenario where the wife was made to breastfeed a puppy because the man had paid bride price or dowry. This woman had to breastfeed that puppy. Put yourself in a situation where that was your daughter who was being made to breastfeed a puppy. So when we talk about culture, let us not misquote the culture we are talking about. We are talking about progressive culture, culture which is developmental. I thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, hon. Mbahimba, for giving way. First of all, I would like to give you this information in support of your submission. For somebody to continue to cohabit would be as if there are no other forms of marriage. Other forms of marriage are available including the customary marriage. 

Indeed, in my culture, you do not need a lot of money. What we call the bride price would be what we call omutwalo, which can be a one shilling coin - (Interjections) – Yes, that is what it is, a coin. Sometimes it is a one shilling coin asked for by the father but the value attached to it is what takes the bride. Therefore, continuation or even perpetuation of cohabitation under the pretext that it will be expensive to have a wedding and so on does not arise, especially if there are other forms of marriage which can be recognised under this law. Thank you.

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, I am looking at sharing property. I will need more clarification from the minister and the chairperson. If I married, I got children and then unfortunately my wife dies and I again marry another woman, continue with her and we separate, how does this Bill treat the children that I had already? I already have them but you are saying we are going to share 50 per cent because I have entered into a new marriage. What about the children that I had before or the ones that the woman had before? Are they catered for in this Bill?

The other issue is that in the report, they told us that in their methodology they interacted with so many groups. Today, there are different philosophical religious beliefs that are coming up and they are also solemnising marriages. I want to quote somebody called Bisaka who proclaims that he is a god. He is living in Uganda and he has so many followers, some of whom are even Members of Parliament. In his arrangement, he has said people are supposed to marry as many wives as they can and women are supposed to leave men when they feel they should leave them. I interacted with him and I asked him, “Why do you promote polygamy?” He said, “God is not so stupid to have created more women than men yet he had provided that these people must marry and bring up children and expand the world.” (Member timed out.)

7.03
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the entire committee. My submission is on the interpretation of cohabitation. It leaves a lot to be desired. I suggest that we should add that cohabitation means a man and a woman living together as husband and wife without solemnisation. That could bring out the meaning. 

In addition to that, I would suggest that the word “cohabitation” should be removed from this Bill. The justification is that, just like section 117, it should be deleted because it is promiscuous according to culture and religions of Uganda and in Christianity. More so, that section is catered for by section 59 up to section 62 - (Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give the honourable member is that when we are debating the DRB and even this one, the Christians said this cohabitation is not good and they rejected it - all the Christians. So, I do not know who smuggled this into this Act. So, we Christians vehemently deny this cohabitation in this article. Thank you very much.

MR SSEMUGABA: Madam Speaker, I have said that section 117 is catered for by section 59 to 64. Section 59 states, “Consent to marriage that is under valid customary marriage.” So, if you want to cohabit, you are assisted by this provision to go and solemnise customarily and you become a polygamous husband because polygamy has been catered for under culture. If you do not want to become a Christian, you are a traditionalist. Since we are legislating for the entire country and for people of all walks of life, then you are a traditional person under culture, go to customary marriage and solemnise.
 
At the same time, section 59 subsection (2) says, “The consent of a parent, relative, clan elder or any other person other than the respective parties to the customary marriage shall not be a requirement for the validity of any marriage solemnised, celebrated or contracted under this part.” So, what is difficult? Some people have been advancing costs involved. If you are not well off, there are no costs involved because it is not mandatory, instead of cohabitation. Cohabitation should just be removed or expunged from this Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

7.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report but I want to request colleagues, as others have advised, that let us not look at ourselves when we are looking at this Bill. You and I may be empowered but let us look at those who are not empowered.

I also want to request colleagues who are here - I know most of you who are here are more financially empowered than your spouses - (Interjections) - I said most of you. If you are not, then that means you are among the few. 

When we are talking about this Bill, some of us fall in this category when you talk of property. Imagine what you go through in your life. You decide to fall in love with somebody, you decide to have the climax, you lock the door, you strip yourself naked, you have surrendered the whole of your life to that person. So, property and life, which is most important? Why don’t you think of life first because it is only somebody who has life who can accumulate property? So, can we really look at the issue of life first? 

For people who are cohabiting, some people think it is intentional; it is not. Some are saying it is by choice; it is not. As we talk now, in our cultures here in Uganda, it is the man to suggest which marriage to have. We do not have much say as women in this country on the choice of marriage. So, now when you say cohabitation is not good, it is not everybody’s choice to be in it. 

I want to really thank hon. Odonga Otto for the information he gave. When one is in love and says, “I want us to go for cultural marriage” and the husband says, “Please hold on, let us first wait for another year”, then children come, what will happen? Will that person run out of that marriage and abandon the children? We should not talk forgetting the communities where we come from. Let us face the reality. The majority of Ugandans are in cohabitation. So, where are we leaving their rights with the efforts they have put in that marriage - (Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Government Chief Whip for giving way. What would responsible parents do when it comes to matters when they need to recognise where their daughters are living? There would be an explanation that maybe the parents are dead, but what would a responsible woman do? 

We are leaders and we want to legislate in order to make responsible citizens respond to circumstances in which they find themselves. Your insinuation is such that people would continue to be locked up in a situation they are not interested in, and they would want a law in order to unlock themselves but they have got the potential to unlock themselves from that. Even if they do not, responsible parenting would necessitate that parents should know where their daughters are locked in problems and they could liberate them. That is the information I want to pass on.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just want to give information. There is a recent case where a man was cohabiting with a woman for about six years. It is still in court in Kayunga. After six years, the man served the woman - she gave part of her property. The woman lives in part of the apartments of the man in Kampala here. So after six years, the man serves the woman with court papers requesting for rent from the woman. What the woman did was to bring pictures to show that they are actually in love, so there is no way that the relationship between her and the man can be that of a landlord and a tenant. So, what do you do with such kind of men? You are in love, now you want to chase the woman and you turn into a landlord.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, this goes particularly to the doctor; my view is, when we legislate, we do not legislate for an idealistic society because we may not even be there yet. When we legislate, we even legislate for a society of thieves so that we may catch them. The only thing is, if I were you, I would be focusing on making this marriage of cohabitation less attractive than the other forms of marriage, so that when you are promoting the law, you sensitise the people and tell them that, “This marriage you are in is not attractive compared to that marriage which you would ordinarily have.” That is the best way of doing things.

MS LUMUMBA: I want to thank colleagues who have given information and those who have helped me answer the questions which have been raised by colleagues.

Honourable members, let us not talk like we come from heaven. Even some of our parents have lived in marriages which have been cohabitation. You cannot say you are talking for a community yet you come from a rural community where the majority are cohabiting. How are we making those people who are in the cohabitation also have their own rights despite the efforts they have put in that marriage? (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to the House is that actually, even the current legal regime, when you look at the Succession Act, provides for children. Our mothers who have cohabited for over 10 years, when their husbands pass away and they stay in this world, the law only takes care of the children and it forgets the mothers who have actually made tremendous contribution to this country. 

So, as we legislate today, we should know that actually, the community out there is affected. We can pretend about the situation. We should not legislate about ourselves but think about our mothers out there who are suffering. Thank you so much. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, hon. Lumumba. I just want to give this information. First of all, we must know that there is a continuous social change and social evolution. In the Acholi culture, for example, initially, cohabitation was not allowed. You identify a woman, a girl, and you arrange marriage. Eventually, a time came when it was not possible for some people to get married right away and they ended up cohabiting. So, what the other family does is to carry out some intelligence surveillance to find out what their daughter is doing with the other would be son-in-law and issue them with a notice that, “We are coming to that home.” When they go there, they say, “Our daughter is here.” 

First of all, that acceptance of going to the other family is a social recognition that you take responsibility for our daughter here. As a result of that, you pay a fine for co-habitation which is called luk, and you sign. You sign some understanding that, “We acknowledge that we are with your daughter and at an appropriate time...” and appropriate time for dowry in Acholi, I can tell you, can take as long as it takes. You can end up having children and all that, but you will be recognised as wife and husband by the family. 

MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, the scenario hon. Reagan Okumu is giving is, I think, part of cultural marriages. It may start in any form but that is the beginning of a customary marriage. 

Lastly, I want to request the Attorney-General to provide for the issue of dissolution of marriage for Catholics in this Bill because for Catholics, it has to be permission from the Pope. So, if we are coming up with a Bill to do with Muslims, we have catered for the Baha’i, we have catered for the Hindu; for the Catholics, the dissolution of a marriage is done by the Pope.

7.20
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this motion. I want to thank the members of the committee that made the report and I wholeheartedly support it. 

I feel that many Members of the House do not support the Bill because they have misunderstood the intent of the Bill. Many MPs have spoken about the Bill not promoting stability in marriage. I want to submit that this Bill is about regulating relationships between married couples whose stability has broken down and, therefore, they have to separate. 

This Bill is addressing, “How do we separate and how do we distribute property to the couple?” This Bill is intended to bring fairness and equity to the separated couples and not to promote stability in marriage because it is recognising that stability has broken down and therefore, how do we help them to separate reasonably, fairly and equitably. 

If we were to be legislating about stability in marriage, we should be talking about how to bring about stability in marriage - we have to be polite to each other, we have to be faithful to one another, we have to be charitable and all those kinds of attributes. That is if we were looking at how to promote stability. But this Bill is addressing itself to the situation, “how do we regulate when marriage has broken down?” Therefore, I think if this is clearly understood, everybody should be able to support this Bill.

My second point is about the division of property. I think there is an understanding that we are trying to bring some element of compensation to the people in marriage who have contributed their services and who, because they are separating, we do not want them to go empty-handed. Think of a situation of a wife or a cohabitee who has stayed in marriage or stayed together with her cohabitee for 20 years -(Member timed out.)

7.24
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two or three points to raise and all of them are related legally.

First and foremost, I am very sensitive to people’s cultures and religions. So, I do not intend to submit anything regarding Christian marriages because I think if two people, Christians, have agreed to get married under a Christian marriage, then the rules which they know better should apply. I think it would be insensitive for some of us who are not Christians to start giving our opinions. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill deals with another form of marriage, which I think all of us are entitled to contribute to, that is the customary marriage. In many customs, it is not the individuals marrying, like you would talk about in a civil marriage. It is about family, it is about communities coming together and having their daughter moving from one clan to the other. There is a long procedure depending on which tribe or culture. I am well versed with the Kiganda and Kisoga cultures. You cannot have a binding marriage amongst the Basoga or the Baganda except when you have had this formal introduction ceremony, and during that introduction ceremony, gifts are brought by the side of the would-be husband. 

What does this Bill say? The Bill says in clause 14 that marriage gifts are not an essential requirement of any marriage under this Act. That cannot be amongst the Baganda. Without this introduction ceremony and without these gifts, can you talk of a Kiganda marriage? You cannot. So once we try to codify culture, we run into problems. Even if you read the – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: What? Hon. Katuntu is a Member? 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, can I say something subject to your ruling? You realise that I had an option to write a minority report but I chose, for purposes of harmony, not to write it, but I could not append my signature to that report. That is why I am making this contribution, because we have been working together with my committee. 

The issues I am raising are about the law; they are not about the merits and demerits of it, but legal issues. So I do request that being somebody with a role to advise on the law in this House, you would give me this opportunity. But the choice is yours, Madam Speaker. I am just raising issues of law and I am addressing them to the Attorney-General.

THE SPEAKER: You raise them. Let him raise the points of law.

MR RUHINDI: Let me say something on that one. Madam Speaker, I think I am very receptive to the views so far advanced by the Shadow Attorney-General in respect of 14(1), and I would be accommodative of any view. But I would like to hear what you want to say on 14(2). 

MR KATUNTU: I do agree with the position of the Bill on 14(2); I agree with it entirely. The point I was trying to make has to do with issues of law and I do not want to go into other merits. If you are talking about culture, let us not codify it. You cannot codify culture. 

When you look at the Bill itself, it defines a customary marriage like this – (Interruption) 

MS MUJUNGU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The Member is talking about codifying culture and he is not in agreement with section 14(1). I would like to draw your attention to section 61, which says, “Preliminaries to a customary marriage. The procedures preceding the solemnization of customary marriage shall be in accordance with the customs and rites observed among the ethnic group of one or both parties to the intended marriage.” So, if one culture has to pay bride price or gifts, I think this section caters for that. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Section 14(1) is not redundant because there are marriages other than customary where you do not need to give gifts in order to marry.

MR KATUNTU: If you look at the definition of a customary marriage, it has to be a marriage celebrated according to the rites, practices and customs of an African community to which one or both the parties belong. The only prohibition is under the Constitution, the Article the Attorney-General was quoting, Article 32(2) - if that culture is against the dignity, welfare or interest of women or any other marginalised group to which clause (1) relates or which undermines their status, then that one is prohibited. 

To prohibit and say it is not a requirement for the validity of the marriage yet in most cultures it is a requirement, I think you would be going against the Constitution and different cultures. When you look at Article 60, which my colleague is citing, it is actually a sort of contradiction with clause 14(1) and as the learned Attorney-General has said, now that he is convinced about it, I think the committee will be able to address it. 

7.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, and honourable members, I think we are just meandering from one point and coming back to the same point. 

I want to start by asking a question: Do we want the product of this debate to cure the disease that initiated the thought about the Bill? I think the answer is, yes. If so, then the first question we should answer is about the dilemma on the perspective from which we should view this problem. Many people, even lawyers here, have had the problem of looking at marriage as a biological affair, a social cultural affair, or a religious affair – people have given quotations from the Bible. 

In my view, the most important problem which has triggered the thought to make this Bill and come up with a law is the sharing of property at the end of a marriage. If you want to get a universal formula to solve this problem once and for all, without any debate about differences in culture, then look at marriage as a business enterprise. There are business laws where you cannot ask about religion, culture or nationality. 

We have the following to justify this: in a business, there is a memorandum and articles of association, defining the roles of the business partners beginning with the investment you put in - what is your contribution or  what is your share like? Then what – (Interjections) – listen first. We would like to get a view on how we should approach this problem. How do we approach this? In a business enterprise, shareholders have shares and shares define what you get as profit, the property and the liabilities when the business is dissolved. (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I just want simple clarification from my colleague, hon. Fungaroo. If you are seeing it as a business, what would be the business because other businesses are clear  - collecting rubbish, tarmacking roads or making clothes. So what would this particular business that you are talking about be, before we – (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Fungaroo is right because what is going to happen, the moment you put property here, it attracts the element of commercialisation. One the law passes as it is, we are going to force our children and daughters into contract marriages. 

What will happen? The moment I start thinking about having a choice with someone, I will first declare the properties that I have and say they should not touch them, and you sign an agreement in front of a lawyer that by the time you came to me, I had this. This is how the commercial business is coming. If we say that we are promoting contractual marriages, it is okay and I do not mind. We have contractual marriage and not cohabitation–

MR RUHINDI: Just simple information. Hon. Anywar said something in her submission which seems not to have been captured by Members, the issue popularly known as prenuptials. You do not have to enter into a contract marriage; just simply agree, that you have come into this family and you have found me with this property and if there is any disagreement, this will not be subject to court sharing arrangements or anything of that sort. That is perfectly in order and legal. 

Let me also say this, although hon. Katuntu has gone out; when he was disagreeing with 14 (1), I was saying we can consider how we can review it for as long as in that review he agrees with 14 (2), non-refundable. However, he should also be candid enough not to allow haggling as if it is a business, where families sit and begin haggling for two days. You start from 50 cows and go to, as if really – (Interjections) - Okay, agree that dowry will be essential to the customary marriage but allow the other party to review that dowry.   

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I am looking at the Bill and the report of the committee. When we look at page 5, paragraph 4 of the report of the committee, it says, “Delete the words, ‘not essential requirement’ appearing in the head note”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of deletion of clause 14(1). So, I take it that clause 14(1), which hon. Katuntu was submitting on, was deleted.

THE SPEAKER: So do not go to 14(1) as they proposed to delete it, and please conclude. 

MR FOX ODOI: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Fungaroo for giving way. I am completely lost from the submissions of hon. Fungaroo and I request him to clarify on one issue. In marriage, there is a cardinal unifying factor called conjugal rights, which is the right to have sex. If you treat marriage as a business, what value will you attach to sex? How will you quantify it as a business? 

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, the direction that my colleague is taking us to is dangerous because when you now bring marriage as a business entity, you have to include things like depreciation. What are you going to depreciate? (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the clarifications that my colleagues have asked for here are derived from the content of the Bill. The problem that I am trying to cure in my debate is not about the content yet. I wanted to help you to get the perspective from which to seek the solution you are looking for. 

I think and believe strongly that if you have problems that have brought you here and have made you sit wholeheartedly here to have them answered, the only solution is to look at marriage as a business enterprise. There are laws - and this is my view - governing the formation and dissolution of a business. There are rights and obligations and liabilities of the partners. This question of the fear of second and third marriages does not arise in a business, no matter what. 

When you do a business, they say that what you bring in will determine what you have there. The first and second wives will be measured in terms of what they brought into the business and that is the only thing. Somebody who dies in a business enterprise has a right. 

Here in the situation you are debating, there is no question of the will of the dead woman. In sharing the property, there is no discussion of the will or in whose name the dead woman wrote her will. In a business, there is a provision for this. 

I would like to rest my case here. If it cannot work as a business enterprise, then drop the problem of writing the law. Drop this thing completely because you cannot find a solution. The only way is to look at marriage as a business enterprise and you will solve your problem.

7.43
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are making a very emotive and controversial law and when it is passed, it is going to have very serious repercussions in the villages. But at the same time, we make laws that are ineffective. Hon. Rukutana gave the example of the Enguli Act; it was ineffective and up to now, it is still ineffective but it was made in 1966.

Some time back, we also made a law to do with defilement and we put 18 years but largely, any village you go to in Uganda, children of 15 years are married because the law is ineffective. I would like to appeal to colleagues that we make an effective law which we can implement. 

I would like clarification on clause 115, from the Attorney-General or the minister, on matrimonial property. I know that traditionally, the Ugandan peasant woman has been protected in terms of property, even when her husband dies. My mother was such a woman. My father died long time ago and the land is family property and it was protected for her and her children. She was married - This thing about cohabitation, you have to define it properly because we have disagreement on that. She was protected and the peasant woman was protected by the law in marriage, but as long as she remained in the family.

There are societies where land is communal or it is family land. We might cause wars in villages if, for instance, a peasant lady says she is being divorced and thus owns 50 per cent of the land. It is not clear whether customary land is going to be part of the matrimonial land. 

As long as you have a matrimonial home, then according to 115(a), they have rights over that. Suppose that matrimonial home is on this communal family land and the time of divorce comes, do they share this land? If they share the land, will the clan allow a foreign man to come and stay on that land? If you do not clarify that, you are going to have wars and this Bill will be passed but it will cause confusion in the villages. This is very emotive; it affects all of us directly.

Largely, this Bill is taking care of the middle class and people in town, but let us think a little bit more about the people in the villages. Thank you very much.

7.47
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think this Bill came about mainly because of the vulnerability of women but as we go on to pass the Bill into law, we need to go very cautiously.

We were in the Eighth Parliament when we went to consult women of Acholi and Lango and the meeting was in Acholi Inn. The women sometimes had different views from ours. So we must be concerned about those women. It is not true that many of the women are cohabiting.

This Bill also recognises two forms of marriages, polygamous and monogamous. When we go for civil or Christian, Baha’i or Hindu, those are monogamous. When we go in for customary marriage, that can be both monogamous and polygamous. So we must be concerned with those. 

Somebody actually said that even some women in Parliament here cohabited for about 30 years and went in for marriage. That is wrong. I personally would want to say that sometimes we go in for two types of marriages; you first go in for customary, which I did in 1982, and then we decided with my spouse to take our marriage to be blessed by God, and that was last year. There is nothing wrong with that; I was married long time ago.

MS AMONGI: Thank you very much for giving way. The information that I would like to give my colleague is that customary marriage is recognised under this Bill. However, if you want to convert, that is another provision in the Act – (Interjections) - It is there; I can read it for you. What she is saying is that women in this House have not been cohabiting; you marry officially through tradition and would want to now marry under maybe civil or church. Under this Bill, you can marry traditionally but if you want to convert the traditional marriage into a church marriage, the Bill caters for it.

The second piece of information I want to give is that in this House, there are women who are cohabiting; I am one of them. (Laughter) So, please, do not say there are no women in this House who are cohabiting.

MS AOL: I think for the first information, we are on the same page but for the second information, that is okay; it is better we go into formalising marriages.

Dear members, we must recognise that family is actually the foundation of humanity. A nation is a nation because of family. So, we must make sure that we pass a law which will try to consolidate the institution of family. We should pass certain clauses - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I have noted the Members who have not spoken and they will be the first to speak tomorrow. Let me give their names: hon. Amongi, hon. Bayigga, hon. Atiku, hon. Nauwat, hon. Ayepa, hon. Mandela, hon. Ssinabulya, hon. John Mulimba, hon. Abia Bako. Those will be the ones to speak tomorrow. The minister will not be on the list; he is automatic. Let me take down those who will speak tomorrow. There is Kahwa, Theopista, Flavia, Fred. 

7.52
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to be very brief. I took special interest in this Bill even before I came to Parliament because I was a disc jockey on radio. I remember the first time we came to Parliament and we were electing the Speaker. May I be protected, Madam Speaker, there is another debate going on in the House.

THE SPEAKER: Order, order. 

MR ANYWARACH: When I was going to vote for you, Madam Speaker, we picked you together with the Prime Minister. I whispered to you and said, “Now you are becoming the Speaker, but please protect the sanity of marriage; one, do not do away with bride price.” I think in the happiness of the election, you said “yes, yes” and we went ahead and took you to the chair. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am not the mover of this Bill; the mover is the minister.

MR ANYWARACH: Well, I am just giving background information.

THE SPEAKER: No

MR ANYWARACH: Okay, it is withdrawn. I continued from the 14th December of last year to consult my constituents and those in Nebbi District in general, and of course, Zombo District. I had radio talk shows where people would call in and I had only three specific questions. The specific questions that I asked were:
1. Should bride price be outlawed? The overwhelming answer was “No”, including from the kids who are not even fathers – (Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, this Bill started in 1965. It is written here. Is the honourable member in order to impute that you are the one who introduced this Bill when it actually started in 1965? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is completely out of order.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. What I said is that I whispered to you to protect the sanity of marriage. I did not say you introduced it here. These are two different things. 

The second question was on refund of bride price. You would hear people say “Yes”, “No”. The women would say “No” to the refund of bride price or gifts, as we opt to call it here in clause 14(2). The men would go ahead to say “Yes”, and the justification by the men was that in case a woman leaves you, what would you be left with to marry the next woman -(Interjections)- This is according to the Alur culture, and I speak without fear. (Laughter)

Secondly, in Alur culture, the refund was only of the mother gift. If the mother gift for example was a cow, the offspring of the cow would not be taken back. The reason was that even when their daughter came, you made her old - she gave birth and so on. So, when you are divorcing, the woman goes alone and leaves the offspring with the man. The consensus seems that clause 14(2) is in line with what the people want. The people do not want refund of bride price.

On cohabitation, whether it is a “yes” or “no”, they would say “no”. The question of cohabitation being with us and the need to legalise it or protect it is like saying prostitution is with us, theft is with us and so we should protect it. That is not called for. As a Christian, I do not support it.

There is a contradiction in the clause, clause 14(1) against clause 61. You are saying clause 14(1) has been deleted. That is a provision which is general for all types of marriages. So, if you had put clause 14(1), it would contradict clause 61. 

There is clause 64 against clause 69. Madam Speaker, these clauses are also contradictory. If you are giving conditions for declaring a marriage void and you are not listing the gifts or the bride price, and yet according to certain cultural practices it would have been recognised, then there is already a problem. 

Clause 63; in my culture, we have a kingdom which has designed certificates of customary marriage. If you are going to marry, you give information to the subcounty chief. Where are we leaving these very established kingdoms with their certificates of marriage? They should be considered. 

On clause 114 – 

THE SPEAKER: But what about those who do not have certificates? 

7.58
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for coming up with this report. As hon. Aol, has just said, by the time they went to Gulu in the Eighth Parliament, I was in the district council and we were the people they consulted. I remember that we refused outright some of the issues that they brought to us and we gave them our suggestions. I did not know I would come to Parliament. Also, when we were soliciting for votes, our constituents were so bitter, most especially in Lira. The majority were saying if you go there to vote for marriage on contract, then do not come back to us. 

We just hear about many of these things but we have not gone to the nitty-gritty of the Bill itself to analyse and see a number of things. Some of them need to be corrected. Some of them need to be taken up because they are not bad at all.

Madam Speaker, in our discussion of the Marriage and Divorce Bill, if I remember we discussed about the title. We did not want it to be “the Marriage and Divorce Bill”. We said if it could be “the Family Relations Bill”, it would be appropriate. Nobody would be arguing against it. 

Secondly, the issue where hon. Betty Amongi said that when you are married customarily and you wed, that it is a conversion, I disagree with that. Conversion would only apply if you are changing from one religion to another religion. But in a situation where you are marrying in the church, I would think that this Bill should only cater for the position of the other women. Where are we going to put these other women and how are we going to cater for them. We should not wait for a situation where somebody remains with only (Interruption)

MS AMUGE: Honourable member, what hon. Betty Amongi said is already in the law in the Marriage Act. It is in the old law. So she is not making a creation in the conversion from one type of marriage to another. It is not a new thing; it is already in the old law. Thank you.

MS JOY ONGOM: It is okay. Some of us have not yet internalised some of those laws. But we are saying in a situation of conversion, a situation where a man has three wives and then he now goes to marry in the church – he has converted and he now wants to wed - where are we going to put these other two wives, the property and the rest of it? 

In our culture, we are not going to leave the issue of giving dowry. When we are marrying customarily, it means that bride price has to be paid. For us, a woman is valued in that marriage if there is some dowry paid. But we are saying that if it is paid, there should be no claim at all because in the course of the marriage in that home – at least I produced children – there is wear and tear, there is depreciation. Why should you claim the dowry and then take it back to marry a fresh wife? We are saying there should be no claim. 

For people who are saying this marriage may be a contract marriage, I think there is a law that will cater for that in 77 and 78, which stipulates clearly that you as a woman who has been married will never leave that man; you will only leave on condition that the man does not fulfil those few articles - (Laughter) (Member timed out)

8.03
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for bringing up this report. This is a Bill that is overdue; it should be passed. 

I only have a few reservations as I had indicated earlier, about the interpretation. If we are giving cohabitation the same meaning that is given to those who are married, I will have problems with it and I will not support it. How would you define a man and a woman who are cohabiting and you define them as husband and wife? God forbid that! They might be acting as wife and husband but we should find something more appropriate. You could say, a man living together with a woman but not married under this Act. 

I am aware that some interests have been declared in this House, so we shall have –(Mr Ruhindi rose_)- My boss, you want to give me information? Who am I to refuse?

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Oboth, I am wondering where you are leading as far as your submission is concerned. In terms of names, like Shakespeare said, what is in a name because a rose by whatever name called smells as sweet. Now, whether you want to call that cohabitation marriage, or whatever - in any case, what is it that those ones who marry in church do that those who marry in cohabitation do not do?  

MR OBOTH: That is not justification, with due respect, to have or to baptise cohabitation that we know. I would like to ask the learned Attorney-General; what is cohabitation in your local language? If you told me that you had a name for it in your local dialect, I would respect that. Whether in Lusoga or Busagala, it does not exist. 

MR RUHINDI: In our language, it is marriage. 

MR OBOTH: You see; we cannot be self-defeating. We are saying we are not recognising cohabitation and then leave the same meaning. I find that quite difficult. Whereas I acknowledge that there is need for this law, the problem comes, when sharing property are we also protecting the woman in the house or we want to protect the cohabitee? This law should be able to protect everyone - (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, if I could be protected from -  

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. About what hon. Oboth said on protection of parents, he is actually talking about something very important. At university, as I speak, you might be having children who are students; are you aware that they are cohabiting? If they have sharing property in mind, are you aware that they can as well come after you to take part of that property? Thank you. 

MR OBOTH: In any case, I would be comfortable, Madam Speaker, to know what constitutes cohabitation. Is it just doing what married people do? Is it going and making a few trips to the house? Is it about having children with this woman, that every woman you have a child with you are cohabiting and you are now married and are husband and wife? I think we should be able to do a little more and improve on this law.

Whoever is talking about the issue of bride price, who really knew the difficulty that the white man had when they got the Japhadolas giving gifts? They never had any appropriate word for what was happening. That is why they called it bride price. There is no equivalent word of bride price in my language. Ukwolinyor is different; it is a relationship. Whereas I do not agree with the connotation of bride price, giving marriage gifts is okay but I do not agree with the refund – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: The genesis of dowry or bride price is that it was not a price but it was compensation because you removed labour from one family. A girl was seen as part of labour in the family because she contributed to the welfare of the family, but because she was being taken from the family, they compensated parents because they were taking away that labour. That was the basis of dowry. You can read about it. That is a fact.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR OBOTH: Let me conclude. Hon. Otto Odonga, I know you were going to give me a very friendly one but the issue of bride price should not derail us. It has never been a cause of suffering for women, generally speaking, but it can only be for the record. I have information, I have done research myself. There are places where women are not – (Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, this Bill arose from research done by the Uganda Law Reform Commission and one of the justifications in that research, which I can lay on the Table tomorrow, was that when they went around the country, everywhere they went the majority of the women whose rights were being domestically violated in the homes stated that they could not leave the home because if they left, it would mean that bride price would have to be paid. In most cases, the bride price would have already been used by their brothers to marry. So, for fear of destabilising their brothers’ marriages, they have to suffer. 

Is it in order for the honourable member to justify that bride price is not a cause of domestic violence? I am quoting the Uganda Law Reform Commission report, which I will lay on the Table tomorrow. I am going to speak tomorrow; I will lay it on the Table and that will so clearly state that bride price is one of the causes – (Interjections) - Yes, it is one of them but you are saying it is not. Is he in order to state an issue which is not a material fact?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know this Bill did not just come out of the blue. In fact, I invite you to read the Kalema report of 1965 documenting the incidences of violence against women and the need to reform family law. You are out of order. 

MR OBOTH: As I conclude, I want to correct that it is not the sole cause of violence. There are places where we have seen people shoot their wives. I have done research also but we have seen other places, especially in Europe, where people gun down their wives; do they pay bride price? We should find better reasons to put a case across but not to downplay our culture. 

There are some good aspects of this culture and, of course, I know what hon. Betty Amongi said about the refund. The refund removes all the dignity from a woman. So, I do not support that. I have seen in my own culture where women cannot move out because they fear the refund, but I am here to support the Bill in the aspect of stopping the refund of bride price.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 37 Members have contributed so far and because the Bill is important, I will allow 16 Members tomorrow, whom I have already named, to speak and then we go to the second reading. I want to thank you so much. House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 8.13 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
