

Wednesday, 10 February 2021

Parliament met at 12.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning’s Special Sitting, which, as you know, has been convened to pay tribute to a number of distinguished Ugandans.

We have in the Gallery, members of the Inzu ya Masaba Cultural Institution, who have come to join us to pay respect to His Royal Highness, Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba. Those present are:

    1. Mr Geoffrey Wilson Wepondi, the Prime Minister
    2. Mr Omar Njofu, Head of the Kenya Chapter
    3. Mr Alfred Wamurubu, the Minister of Finance
    4. Mr David Waniala, Minister of Foreign Affairs, and
    5. Mr George William Alenyo, the Legal Officer. You are all welcome. 

We also have members of the Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council who are here to join Parliament of Uganda as we pay last respects to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka, the founder and leader of the Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council in Kagadi District. They are:

    1. Omukwenda Amulika 
    2. Omukwenda Musimbi Bisaka
    3. Omukwenda Saboomu Walugembe
    4. Omukwenda Tibahwerwayo
    5. Omukwenda Mugisha Mbabazi
    6. Col Ndahura Atwooki
    7. Muhumuza David, MP elect of Mwenge
    8. Omuhereza Mugisha, RDC
    9. Omuhereza Arinda Akugizibwe
    10. Omuhereza Munyankore Atukunda, and
    11. Omuhereza Musiime Sanyu.

You are all welcome. 

We also have the family of the late hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha. They are here to join Parliament as we pay respects to the late hon. Sarah Ntiiro Nyendwoha. Are the relative here? Please, get me their names. We have Joseph Ntiiro. You are welcome.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE CULTURAL LEADER (EMERITUS) INZU YA MASABA CULTURAL INSTITUTION, HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS, THE LATE SAUL KIPIRO BOB MUSHIKORI UMUKUUKA II WE BAMASABA, FOR HIS DEDICATED SERVICE TO THE BAMASABA AND THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Can I propose that we use 30 minutes in total for each tribute?

12.06
THE DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Cultural Leader (Emeritus) Inzu Ya Masaba Cultural Institution, His Royal Highness, the late Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba, for his dedicated service to the Bamasaba and the Republic of Uganda, moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the news of the demise of His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba, which occurred on Monday, 04 January 2021 at his palace in Mbale;

WHEREAS that His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba was a cultural leader emeritus of Inzu Ya Bamasaba Cultural institution from 2015 to June 2020 and was, at the time of his death, due to hand over to the next cultural leader;

RECOGNISING that His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba has made immeasurable contribution to the country in general and Bamasaba Sub Region in particular and is credited for having-

    (a) developed the Bamasaba cultural anthem, a symbol of unity for Bamasaba and East Africa;
    (b) introduced the cultural football competitions in Masaba land for social development;
    (c) diligently presided over the North American Masaba Cultural Association and Organisation that fostered unity among the Bamasaba in the diaspora;
    (d) advocated for unity between Bamasaba and other people in Uganda; and
    (e) encouraged and united the Bamasaba in enhancing the actualisation of the East African Community;

APPRECIATING that His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II We Bamasaba was a diligent leader who initiated social, economic and cultural transformation of the Bamasaba and the people of Uganda through various educational, health, environmental, social, cultural and economic programmes and has served Uganda with dedication and patriotism.

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:  

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the Bamasaba and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen of this country. 

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II we Bamasaba, has rendered to the Bamasaba and the people of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members of the House. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is the justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late cultural leader emeritus Inzu ya Bamasaba Cultural Institution, His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II we Bamasaba.

Madam Speaker, on Monday, 4 January 2021, we received the sad news of the sudden demise of His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II of the Bamasaba, which occurred at his palace in Mbale. 

Umukuuka Bob Mushikori was born in 1948 in Busayi, Bududa District. He had his early education at Bushikori Nursery School that was built by his grandfather and went to Nanyere Primary School, before joining Nabumali High School for his secondary education.

The late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori obtained a Certificate in Public Relations from the East African Central College, Nairobi, Kenya; Certificate in Administration of Mechanised Accounting from the University of Toronto, Canada; Certificate in Canadian History and Canadian English Literature; Certificate of Political Mobilisation from the South Korea Political Academy; a Bachelors and Master’s degree in Political Science in American Politics from the University of Henderson, Sacramento, USA.

From 1967 to 1968, the late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori worked at Pakwach Railway line as a commercial officer, before being transferred to Masindi Railway as the Officer in charge of Transportation. 

He was a member of the National Security Agency during the Obote II Government. In 1980, he was also in the youth wing of the Uganda People’s Congress. 

In 1985, the late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori ran to Nairobi as a refugee after Gen. Tito Okello Lutwa took over the Government. He was later taken by the Canadian Government, together with his family and offered an opportunity to pursue environmental studies at the University of Toronto. 

Thereafter, he worked at the Municipality of Toronto in the Department of Solid Waste Management, until his retirement at 65 years. The late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori then returned to Uganda at the invitation of His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, through the late Speaker of Parliament and Mbale Municipality Member of Parliament, the Rt Hon. James Wapakhabulo.

While in Canada, the late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori was among the founder members of the North American Bamasaba Cultural Association, an association that bonded together the Bamasaba in the diaspora on issues of development.

Madam Speaker, the late Umukuuka Bob Mushikori made a big contribution to the country in general and to the Bamasaba in many ways. He developed the Bamasaba cultural anthem as a uniting factor for all the Bamasaba. He also introduced the cultural football competitions in Bugisu for social and economic transformation of the sub-region.

His Royal Highness Kipiro Bob Mushikori was a married man. We sincerely extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, relatives, Inzu ya Bamasaba and the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister.  I invite the Leader of the Opposition to make her submission.

12.19
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition fraternity and the people of Gulu, I hereby present a statement of secondment to the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Royal Highness the late Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II we Bamasaba and the cultural leader emeritus, Inzu ya Bamasaba Cultural Institution, who passed away on 4 January 2021.

With deep sorrow, I wish to join fellow countrymen and women to state that we have lost a developmental leader. He was an exceptional leader who truly loved his country. He was consistent, principled, God fearing and an embodiment of peace.

He used his rare God given qualities to foster unity in his community. This is demonstrated by the distinguished leadership he provided to the North American Masaba Cultural Association; an organization he diligently presided over and gave direction to. Through that organization, he successfully brought together Bamasaba in the diaspora.

Madam Speaker, since his enthronement in 2015, he has been instrumental in introducing cultural football competitions in Masaba land, which has helped to promote and identify talents among people.

On behalf of the opposition, I join the rest of Ugandans grieving the demise of his Royal Highness at such a critical time when his experience and wisdom is needed.

To the family of the late, the Inzu Ya Masaba and the people of Mbale, please, accept my condolences.

Madam Speaker, the demise of his Royal Highness is a big blow to our country and the Inzu Ya Masaba, especially at such a time, when he had just handed over the throne to John Amram Wagabyalire.

We have lost a leader who was irreplaceable, with an impeccable track record and we shall dearly miss him. Your Royal Highness, your departure is hard to contend with and unbearable because you left us in a lot of pain. However, because you fought a good cause and left a very good legacy, we say fare thee well, your Royal Highness, Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can I invite hon. Makamot for the Independents?

12.23
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Madam Speaker, I raise to second the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to His Highness the Umukuuka Bob Mushikori, the cultural leader of the Bamasaba Community in Uganda.

On behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament, I would like to say that the late His Highness Bob Mushikori is someone that I refer to as a father. I lived in Canada between 2000 and 2015, before I came to run as a Member of Parliament. I knew Bob in the community at the time, when he formed the North American Bamasaba Association. I attended the event.

Bob Mushikori is not only a leader of the Bamasaba Community, I consider him to be a national leader. This is a man among the Ugandan-Canadian community that made a lot of contribution. Other than working for the Government of Canada, he was always there for the community.

Personally, at the time, when my father was not able to make it, when I was being called to the bar, this man stood as my father on a function in Canada. I have seen him in very many events and I know him as a very eloquent, loving person and a person who loved Uganda very much.

For a man who had lived in Canada for a very long time to come back to Uganda and become a cultural leader speaks volumes to the kind of person he was. He loved home, his community and Uganda. Therefore, I rise to state that we have lost a man, whose shoes are very hard to fit in. I know that he came back at a time when Uganda needed a lot of this wealth of experience that he had.

He served in the Government before, just like the Prime Minister clearly stated. He had hybrid experience from abroad; he studied in Uganda and abroad. I believe this is something that we and the community badly needed at this very time. 

A lot has been said about what he did for the cultural institution but I would like to state that we have lost a very important personality in Uganda. The Prime Minister’s motion to pay tribute is quite in order and so, I second this motion on behalf of the Independent Members of Parliament that we pay tribute to him.

We convey our condolences to the bereaved family, friends of Bamasaba and Uganda about who His Highness was and recognise his dedicated service to the Bamasaba community, Uganda, and the international community. I beg to second this motion. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let me invite hon. Wamai. Members, the rest of you will have three minutes to contribute. We shall have hon. Wamai, hon. Nambeshe, hon. Aogon, hon. Masiko.  Please, use strictly three minutes.

12.28
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale, the entire Bugisu, the Bamasaba in Kenya and my family to convey sincere condolences to the family of late Mushikori.

I knew the late Bob Mushikori personally for quite a number of years. As you have heard, this is a man who gathered all the Bamasaba who lived in Toronto and in the whole of Canada to get together to try and look at the issues of Bamasaba and Uganda.

It is not easy when you live abroad to make a decision to come back to Uganda. For you to live in a country such as Canada and many other countries, where people ran to during the difficult times and decide to come to Uganda is not easy. However, Bob Mushikori, like many of us have done earlier, decided to come back to Uganda because of the love for his country. He left all that he had in Canada and decided to come back to Uganda. His home in Canada was a public place, where Bamasaba and all other Ugandans in Canada would gather to discuss the issues of Uganda. The late Bob Mushikori had love for Uganda, as a country and so, he decided to come back, as we have been told.

The institution of culture is quite different for the Bamasaba. The Bamasaba have got sectors and the Umukuuka is elected for five years. We have got those from Inzu ya Mubuuya from the south, Inzu ya Wanale from the central and those from Inzu ya Mwambu. The first Umukuuka came from Inzu ya Wanale and that was the former High Commissioner to Canada, Wilson Wamimbi. 

The elections are held among the people of Bamasaba to elect the next Umukuuka. That is quite different from other cultural institutions, which we know in this country. So, the Umukuuka is elected by the people and he leads for five years. 

After Ambassador Wilson Wamimbi, Umukuuka Mushikori Bob was elected. He came in with good ideas. I understand –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Use one minute to conclude, please.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. He was a great man but being a social person, it really became very difficult for Bob Mushikori to carry out those institutional norms. He was a popular and friendly person; he was a man of the people. However, as a cultural leader, you are supposed to be in one position to be looked after in your palace, which was a little difficult. 

Bob Mushikori was a friend. We used to meet quite often to discuss issues of Bugisu but of course, when death comes, it takes away loved ones. I call upon the Bamasaba to remain united and emulate what Bob Mushikori did - football, the anthem and bringing the Bamasaba together. 

He attended most of the funerals that took place in Bugisu. He never missed them. He never said that since he was Umukuuka, he would not attend the funerals of those that passed on. 

We shall greatly miss him but death is inevitable. We have to accept that all of us shall go, some time. May the Almighty God grant his soul peaceful rest. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambeshe, please, use strictly three minutes.  

12.33
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. His Royal Highness Saul Bob Mushikori Kipiro is my uncle. We come from the same clan and I must say that the glowing tribute and all the condolences that are being submitted here are partly comforting me.

I was invited to North America courtesy of his effort, and I was indeed captivated by his mobilisation skills. He aggressively mobilised the Bamasaba in the diaspora, not only in North America but the entire United States and even those from the Far East, Europe and all over the world. Courtesy of his efforts, the North America Bamasaba Cultural Association was constituted. 

What captivated me most is when, on his own initiative, he licensed his courtyard at his home in Toronto as a cultural ground for circumcision. Actually, the pioneer candidates for circumcision were his own children. He circumcised them from that courtyard in Toronto and every other even year, there was observance of the Imbalu cultural celebrations at his courtyard. 

Madam Speaker, what we shall miss most is the battle or efforts that he had dedicated in restoring ibyeffe. That is a term in Lubamasaba. Just like ebyaffe in Buganda and ebyaiffe in Busoga, in Bugisu we also have ibyeffe. We have the whole Bumageni expanse, which is a vast expanse of land that is hosting the army barracks of Bumageni, including the school and other properties. 

He had championed the recovery of those properties. For almost close to a year, we have had ground rent and other rental fees in arrears of close to over Shs 1 billion, which has not been paid. This is because of the standoff between the Mbale District Local Government and Inzu ya Masaba. These are properties that are jointly owned by the Bamasaba and we shall miss his efforts to restore them. 

Nevertheless, I call upon those that are still active in the Inzu to ensure that this matter is followed up expeditiously –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we have very little time. We have three tributes. Maybe some people can speak during the other ones. We need to finish by 1.00 p.m. 

12.36
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second this motion to pay tribute to the late Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II of the Bamasaba.

Madam Speaker, you might be aware that we, the Iteso, are neighbours to the Bagisu. There is no way I could stay back while my neighbours are facing this kind of situation. That is why I have decided to come and stand with them in solidarity. 

At one time, we had a protest on the Tirinyi Highway over the state of the bad road. By then, I was with hon. Nambeshe, my neighbour here. When I learnt that he had lost the Umukuuka, I made sure to come and condole with him. 

Looking at the cultural institution of Bugisu, I notice that there is one thing that has interested the Itesot - the cultural dances and the songs that we use during campaigns. There is one particular song whose title I do not know but I enjoy the beat. Whenever we go to the political arena for campaigns, the Kadodi dance is what takes over. It is there nearly throughout the country. I do not know if it is only in Teso but I think it is catching up with the whole country now. 

For you to touch the hearts of the voters of Kumi Municipality during the time of campaigns, you need to play Kadodi songs and everybody will pour out to the streets. I believe this is all because of the mobilisation done by the cultural leader, emeritus, Umukuuka Mushikori. 

The Bamasaba are people whom I have known to be very clean; they maintain cleanliness. I married someone from Busiu in Mbale and my wife is very clean. I am talking about what I am aware of. 

I am not here to waste time but I am here to pay tribute to a man whom I know has contributed greatly to his community. We were told that he also studied the history of environment but he decided not to take up political seats. He decided to stay back and mobilise for the community, putting up football associations. How I wish we decided one time to rise up and put a – (Member timed out.) 

12.40 
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to second the motion to pay tribute to the Umukuuka, Sir Bob Mushikori II of Inzu ya Masaba. In a special way, I would like to thank all people who stood with us during the burial. I thank the President of the Republic of Uganda for the support extended to Umukuuka while he was sick and during the funeral. 
I also thank all the people who attended, especially from different kingdoms of Uganda. We are grateful.

His Royal Highness Mushikori was a promoter of culture and indeed, the Prime Minister testified to it and said that he was a vehicle of unity among the Bamasaba in Kenya, Uganda and in Diaspora.

He spearheaded the composition of the Bamasaba anthem, which is a symbol of unity, but it also promotes the tourism potential of the Elgon.

It was the dream of Sir Bob Mushikori to see that his subjects were transformed. He spearheaded development like they have talked about promotion of sports. That was his link with the youth in his kingdom. He also promoted girl-child education.

We also remember him for spearheading income generation for the kingdom. At one time, he asked H.E the President to allocate the undeveloped land of Mageni Barracks to be allocated to the kingdom so that he establishes a five-star hotel to promote tourism and attract people to Masaba land but in return generate income for the kingdom.

The Bamasaba Kingdom cuts across Uganda. We have those in Kenya and actually for the fourth Umukuuka, we anticipate having him from Kenya.

However, Article 246 of our Constitution seems to restrict the operations of cultural institutions within the boundaries of Uganda. It says: “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the institution or traditional leaders or cultural leaders may exist in any area of Uganda in accordance with the culture, customs and traditions, or wishes and aspirations of the people.” 

Therefore, it is my prayer that the Constitution be amended to allow the cultural leaders reach out to their subjects across Uganda. The law restricts them within the boundaries of Uganda and yet, the Bamasaba are unique. We even have our subjects living in Kenya.

As I conclude, this is a message to us the Bamasaba. We have a big task ahead of us. We have to ensure that the installation of the next Umukuuka is completed so that the Bamasaba stay united. As leaders, that is a big task –(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. As I invite hon. Masika, honourable members, you know the Constitution is really for Uganda. Maybe we should deal with the issue of East African Federation, which will allow us to - because Uganda cannot make laws to govern the Kenyans. However, we acknowledge the linkage. Therefore, work for the federation.

12.43
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Namisindwa, I would like to pay tribute to our fallen great leader Bob Mushikori. He was a friend, a good leader for Inzu ya Masaba. When I was in China, he extended his hand to make sure that we make our cultural institution known in China, Canada and other places.

I visited him and he wanted imbalu promoted all over the world and it has been so because many people have now seen that imbalu is important. It came from Bugisu, perhaps from Israel then Bugisu.

The President of Uganda came to Mbale last time perhaps because he had heard about the kadodi song. When it hits, it does not know whether you are white or black. The spirit in you will start dancing immediately. Even goats and cows dance to its tune.

Therefore, we planned with him that a big place like Namboole be built in Mbale so that the Bagisu can play kadodi there to exhibit to the whole world, every year, to attract tourists. From this, Bugisu and Uganda would earn a lot of money.

Last time, the President requested the Bagisu to give him this song so that it can act as a symbol of tourism in Uganda and this is in the process, even before our leader passed on. We request his successor him to make sure that we promote what he has left behind. Thank you very much.

12.46
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to sincerely thank you for giving us an opportunity as Bamasaba and Uganda at large to express our condolences to the fallen Royal Highness the Umukuuka we Bamasaba.

A lot has been said about the work of Umukuuka but particularly, I would like to appreciate the fact that he lived in Canada and returned with many ideas for the development of Bugisu land.
It is unfortunate that we have lost him at a time when he has championed very many developmental projects. Permit me mention the cultural centre, which is supposed to be constructed at Mutoto Cultural Site. As this proposal is on, we still have a challenge of having that area de-gazetted because it is a forest reserve around Mbale City, so that we can have this great idea of a cultural centre and a powerful satellite hotel constructed in memory of the late Umukuuka.

The other issue my colleague hon. Nambeshe mentioned is about the Mageni land. At the time of the demise of Umukuuka, work was in progress to have this land returned to the cultural institution of Bamasaba. The Ministry of Defence needs to take note and expeditiously hand over this land plus the compensation, which had been promised by the President to the Bamasaba so that we can kick-start the development we are talking about.

Madam Speaker, as we mourn our cultural leader in the country, we still have challenges running these institutions. You know they bring us together as Bamasaba, Basoga and other tribes. These cultural institutions were brought on board but they still have a challenge of facilitation. I think to-date, a cultural leader is paid something like Shs 5 million, which is far below what would be good enough to sustain his livelihood. I appeal that the Government revises this so that we can have these people enjoy their livelihood –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the Minister of Gender.

12.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY) (Ms Sarah Kanyike): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In recognition of his immense contribution, the Government accorded His Royal Highness SK Bob Mushikori Umukuuka II, an official burial in accordance with Circular Standing Instrument No.3 of 2005 on the guidelines for handling political leaders and other dignitaries in the event of their demise. 

The Government went ahead to make a contribution towards burial arrangements and organised a scientific burial in respect of the COVID-19 SOPs. Madam Speaker, I have to inform you that the preparations for the burial of His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II we Bamasaba were spearheaded by the national organising committee chaired by my ministry in collaboration with the Office of the Prime Minister and a local organising committee set up by the Inzu ya Masaba cultural organisation leadership.

In view of the COVID-19 situation, Government gave guidance to ensure that the Ministry of Health’s COVID-19 SOPs were strictly adhered to during the burial process. In accordance with the guidelines for official burial, the following ceremonies were performed before and during the burial of His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, the Umukuuka II we Bamasaba: 

    1. An official statement was aired on TV and other electronic media. The Office of the President prepared the statement. 

    2. The procession was escorted by Uganda Police. The casket was carried by uniformed pallbearers drawn from the police. 

    3. A funeral service for the deceased was held at St Andrew’s Church of Uganda, Mbale, and the body was transported in an official hearse to the point of burial. The burial place was Shisabasi Village, Busai Parish, Bududa Sub County, Bududa District. 

    4. The chief mourner at the burial of His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II we Bamasaba was His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, who was represented by hon. Mary Goretti Kitutu, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. 

As I conclude, honourable members of the august House should note that the contribution of the late has already been mentioned by everybody. The official burial was done by Government. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we take the vote, I would like to reiterate one thing that was raised by hon. Nambeshe and hon. Woboya, that there are still unresolved issues relating to the ownership of property, which belonged to the ancient kingdoms. I am aware that the issues in Bunyoro, Tooro and Busoga have not been concluded and we are now being told that even in Masabaland, the issues have not been concluded. 

I would like to urge the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Prime Minister to ensure that the properties of our kingdoms are returned so that they can enable them to generate resources for their sustenance. 

I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to His Royal Highness Saul Kipiro Bob Mushikori, Umukuuka II We Bamasaba for his dedicated service.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is instructed to extract the tribute and the Hansard and pass them on to the Prime Minister of the Inzu Ya Masaba.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE OMUKAMA RUHANGA OWOBUSOBOZI BISAKA, THE FOUNDER AND LEADER OF UNITY CHURCH IN MUHORRO TOWN COUNCIL, KAGADI DISTRICT

12.55
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka, the founder and leader of Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council, Kagadi District, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

“Whereas Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka, which occurred on Saturday, 15 January 2021 at the Aga Khan Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya;

NOTING THAT the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka was the founder and leader of the faith of Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council, Kagadi District, with a congregation of about two million followers both within and outside Uganda;

AWARE THAT the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka advocated for and encouraged unity amongst his followers and the people of Uganda;

APPRECIATING THAT the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka initiated social, economic and cultural programmes for his followers and encouraged his followers to embrace health programmes such as immunisation, maternal, infant and reproductive health and HIV/AIDS prevention and control programmes;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, the congregation of the faith of Unity Church and the entire country for the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda

2. 	That Parliament takes cognizance of the distinguished service rendered and the contribution made by the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka to Uganda.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members of the House. Give us the justification.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: This is the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka.

Madam Speaker, on 15 January 2021, the country received the sad news of the death of Owobusobozi Bisaka who died due to multi-organ failure in Aga Khan Hospital, Nairobi, Kenya.

Owobusobozi Bisaka was born on 11 June 1930 at Kitoma-Kiboizi Village in Bujuni Parish, Buyanja County, Kibaale District in western Uganda.

His parents were Petero Byombi and Agnes Kabaoora. Both of them were staunch members of the local Catholic parish of Bujuni. Owobusobozi Bisaka lived and grew up with his grandparents from the age of eight years. His grandfather, Alifonsio Wenkere worked as a catechist in Bujuni Catholic Parish for over 50 years but it was his grandmother, Nyakaka who taught him about God.

Madam Speaker, Owobusobozi Bisaka enrolled for secondary school education at Mugalike S.S in 1944 and later qualified as a teacher. He started serving diligently in the Catholic Church and more so, as a choir master. Given his very good vocals in music, it is against this background that Owobusobozi Bisaka composed a number of Catholic Runyoro hymns.

The late was a teacher at Muhorro Primary School, Ikoba Girls’ Primary School, Parajoki Primary School and was a choir master in Muhorro Catholic Church and also served as a secretary and chairman of the Muhorro Catholic Parish Council.

In 1948, Owobusobozi Bisaka applied to join a minor seminary but he was not admitted. Owobusobozi Bisaka, therefore, changed his attitude towards the church and thus became very critical of the Catholic faith.

In 1975, he announced his new revelation that changed his life. In 1980, he started a new church called the Faith of Unity Church and also declared himself as “god” or Owobusobozi meaning, “the mighty one”.

Madam Speaker, the late Owobusobozi Bisaka has been an advocate for unity and development in the region. He has been pivotal in the initiation of social, economic and cultural programmes in areas of supporting all Government programmes such as the fight against HIV/AIDS, immunisation and wealth creation at household level in the region.

He started a secondary school and set up a technical institute, which have helped hundreds of youth to acquire practical and marketable skills free of charge. He recently contributed Shs 200 million towards the fight against the coronavirus pandemic.

Owobusobozi Bisaka was a married man. We sincerely extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, the Faith of Unity Church, Bunyoro Kingdom and the people of Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition?

1.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the opposition fraternity and the people of Gulu, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka, the founder and leader of Faith of Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council, Kagadi District. 

The late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka was known for his musical gift and skills, which led to his appointment into the Catholic Diocese of Hoima’s liturgical committee as a choir master of the parish in Muhorro. He was a composer of liturgical hymns for the church, a practice that soon brought him recognition and popularity.

In 1975, Bisaka composed a hymn, “Nkaikiriza Ruhanga murungi”, meaning, “My God is good”, hence its popularity within and outside the Catholic Church in East Africa.

He was also known for having a sacred duty to fight Satan and unite humanity through preaching unity, using healing to draw people together and capture their attention resulting in bringing many sick people to be healed, hence the formation of Faith of Unity Church, whose core doctrine is about the divinity of Bisaka.

It is with great sorrow that we have lost such an important person in the country. I, therefore, take this opportunity to join the rest of Ugandans grieving the departure of a national leader who played a significant role in our country; of bringing people together in unity. Such roles should not go unrecognised in this nation.

Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka, your life has ended but your legacy will continue to sparkle, especially on those who value honesty and humility. May his soul rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. I do not see the leader of the Independents. Hon. Tinkasiimire, hon. Eric Musana, hon. Ssenyonga, hon. Kisembo; three minutes each, please.

1.09
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi, whom I got to know when I was a boy.

He is among the people who taught me to read the alphabet at Muhorro Primary School, very humble and kind teacher. As I was being initiated in my religion, he taught me mugigi, that is, catechism. We used to love many of his songs which he composed in the Catholic Church.

We will remember this great man from Bunyoro, second to Kabalega, for very many things. Among them, he greatly helped our people to understand our creator. In the new religion that he founded, he authored a book. It was not just an unguided religion but a truly guided religion where he authored a book titled, “The Book of God of the Age of Oneness: We are One in the Lord God of Hosts - Disunity has ended.”

Madam Speaker, I will seek your indulgence, since I am holding copies of the book of this distinguished Ugandan, for you to allow me lay them on the Table for future reference about this great Ugandan. I-

THE SPEAKER: Can you read out the titles of the books?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: With your indulgence, Madam Speaker, the book is titled, “The Book of God of the Age of Oneness: We are One in the Lord God of Hosts - Disunity has ended”. It is authored by Owobusobozi Bisaka. I beg to lay it on the Table.

Before he died, in July, I had a formal meeting with him where he asked me to make a petition to this House to turn the area where he has greatly developed into a healing city. I requested the Department of Research Services of Parliament to do for me research on where Muhorro village was before, where it is today and where it will be in the next ten or twenty years.

Very soon, I know you will be in that seat, Madam Speaker, and with your indulgence, you will allow me to present a formal petition for his wish for Muhorro-Kagadi to become a healing city. I thank you, 

Madam Speaker. May the soul of Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi rest in eternal peace.

1.14
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka, one of the greatest men we had not only in Bunyoro, Uganda but in Africa at large. 

Owobusobozi Bisaka was known as a senior Pan Africanist, philosopher who loved the African continent and promoted Africa with its identity and many aspects. He loved the African culture and Africans. He never believed in those other things that come from the western world that would take away our original identity.

Madam Speaker, Owobusobozi Bisaka trained a number of people in many aspects. If we talk about unity, he promoted unity not only in Bunyoro but also across Uganda. This has been reflected in the recent Independence Day celebrations where President Yoweri Museveni awarded him a golden medal, recognizing what Owobusobozi Bisaka has been standing for in promoting unity in this country.

We look at the joy the people of Kagadi have with Owobusobozi Bisaka, especially in the development aspects like establishing institutions such as schools, technical institutions, health centres and many other economic projects. This has brought a lot of love and joy, not only among the believers but also among other people in the region.

Madam Speaker, our humble request is that if there is a way out, like hon. Tinkasiimire has proposed, this big book could also be integrated into the education sector or syllabus. It would be of great use and the faithful of Unity and other believers would be very happy.

Finally, we recognise the Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka for his power in fighting Satan. That is the greatest achievement, love and hope we have for Owobusobozi Bisaka. We and other followers believe that Owobusobozi Bisaka died but his legacy, spirit and effort still live on. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.17
MR JOHNSON SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to join my colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi.

I am unlike others who come from his area but this is a leader you could see at many events on television and you wondered where he got all that power from to be able to control and manage a big team without disputes and wrangles. Therefore, for a country to lose such a man is a great loss. On my behalf and on behalf of the Buganda area, where I happen to be the chairperson at the moment, I would like to convey our condolences to the entire family of Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi and his believers. 

It is true that the country is going to miss him. However, we are sure that the legacy he has left behind will continue to fit in his ways so that the entire group of supporters and believers, as we have been seeing on television in hundreds, does not disappear and may continue to develop and prosper as we develop our country Uganda. I thank you.

1.19
MS SPELLANZA BAGUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion paying tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka as moved by the Prime Minister.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for finding space for this motion on the Order Paper. I also thank Government for accepting to give him a state burial as well as the Prime Minister for moving this motion. 

I rise to second the motion because this was a charismatic, very disciplined and consistent leader who managed to mobilise millions of people to join him in his faith and sustained it for a long time. 

Owobusobozi Bisaka will be remembered for these attributes: discipline, unity, hard work, creativity, innovation, Pan Africanism and patriotism. He imparted all these to his followers and whoever cared to listen to him. 

Owobusobozi Bisaka, in his teaching, emphasised unity and hard work all the time. He made a calendar where his followers and those that managed to listen to him and followed suite, would work all through the month except for three days, which they reserved for worship and prayer. This means they had more time to work. Wherever you find his followers, they are very hard working, disciplined and developmental. 

He established these projects, which I would like to use this opportunity to ask Government to support and sustain. This will help his good ideas to continue to guide and help those that will come in the future. He established schools, a university, health facilities, a skills training centre at Kapyemi and advocated for the Kapyemi healing city, which we are all looking forward to.

I request the Government not to leave these projects to end with him but continue to support them for sustainability and for the benefit of our people. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you very much. 

1.22
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to speak to this motion. I would also like to join my colleagues to thank the Prime Minister and the Speaker for allowing us pay tribute to the Omukama Ruhanga Bisaka and others. 

I would like to thank God for this strong man of Uganda who preached unity that we think about so much. 

His religion was also in my district and people worshipped and believed in him; they were united. You would ask yourself how he managed to get that power. They prayed on 2nd, 12th and 22nd of every month. They just had those three days for worship. I had never seen this anywhere else; people really believed in him. Up to now - because I talked to some of them - they still believe he has not died. 

He had managed to bring these people together. Many people followed and continued joining his religion. The number increased day and night, the reason I call him a strong man. He was hardworking and a very knowledgeable person. He had a lot of wisdom, which is one of the reasons he managed to bring these people together under one religion, which had its own features that I have not seen in other religions. 

I would like to thank God; he has left a legacy behind. I pray that the Government continues to support his followers so that he is always remembered for these special attributes. 

All of you will recall that some time back, we had somebody called Kibwetere in Kanungu, who burnt all his followers. At first, when this religion came to Kanungu, people were worried but then, later, we saw it as something that brought people together and the people under him were hard working. They have enough food in their households and they tried to work together and believe in one thing. 

If they decided to do something in the church - for instance, I recall one time, they told me that Owobusobozi Bisaka had told them that nobody should ever forget about Museveni and all of them should vote him and nobody else. This is not common in many other churches; that they move with one idea and go with it to ensure that it works. I would like to thank him and God –(Member timed out.)

1.25
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise in support of the motion to pay tribute to our late leader, Owobusobozi Bisaka, the founder and leader of the Unity of Faith Church. 

I must state, first of all, that the late Owobusobozi Bisaka was my maternal uncle. He loved me very much and I dearly miss him. 

Secondly, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stated in the motion, the late Owobusobozi Bisaka was a choir master in the early 1980s when I was a child in a primary school in Muhorro. I was a member of his choir and so, he was my choir master. He taught us very many songs and good Catholic values, which I still cherish. 

One of the songs he taught me, which I will never forget, is in Runyoro and let me literally translate it. It stated that it is good to acquire earthly wealth but always remember that earthly wealth vanishes and heavenly riches are much better. That song still inspires me a lot. 

Madam Speaker, the late Owobusobozi Bisaka was an ardent supporter of the NRM Government. He mobilised all his followers not only to support Government programmes but also to participate actively in them. The NRM Government will miss him. 

The late Owobusobozi Bisaka taught believers and the community important values of unity and self-reliance. Many of the believers of the Faith of Unity have learnt to be self-reliant. They work very hard and for that reason, many of them have improved their household incomes and have come out of poverty. I would like to commend him for that. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that the late Owobusobozi Bisaka and some of the leaders of the Faith of Unity – many of whom I represent in this Parliament – had a desire that the remote area in Kapyemi be turned into a satellite city. They want Kapyemi to be turned into a faith-based tourism city. 

They also informed me that the honourable Minister of Tourism, hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, had visited the area and had started this initiative. It is their desire and wish – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us close with hon. Kasirivu. Please, use only three minutes.  

1.28 
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE VICE PRESIDENT (Mr Baltazar Kasirivu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion as raised by the First Deputy Prime Minister to pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Bisaka. 

I have a few things to say. First and foremost, hon. Musana talked about him in regard to fighting Satan but it was actually fighting witchcraft and making sure that people, who had been affected and were suffering with witchcraft, were helped. That made the community and the people support his religion. 

Secondly, he was a very big supporter of the NRM and President Museveni and he made sure that most of his supporters supported NRM. We pay tribute to him because of that.

He was a friend of very many, including myself. One time I visited him when we were making plans to extend electricity to that area. I made sure that electricity was extended to his place and he declared me his Member of Parliament. Whenever he wanted anything from the Government, he would invite me and give me the assignment to make sure that such a service was extended to his place. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Omukama Ruhanga Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka, the founder and leader of Unity Church in Muhorro Town Council, Kagadi, as proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us now move to the tribute of hon. Sarah Ntiro.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. SARAH NTIRO NYENDWOHA, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT IN THE UGANDA LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL

1.30
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received with grief the sad news of the demise of hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, which occurred on Monday, 22 October 2018 at Mengo Hospital, Kampala, at the age of 92;

AWARE THAT hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha was the first woman university graduate in East and Central Africa and had an illustrious career, serving in various capacities, both in the public service and private sector in Uganda;

RECOGNISING THAT hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha diligently served Uganda in several key positions, including the following-

    (a) Teacher at King's College Buddo in 1971, Duhaga Junior Secondary School in Hoima in 1958, Gayaza High School in 1955 and Kyebambe Girls' Secondary School in Fort Portal in l954;

(b)	 Joint administrator of the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Social Sciences (1976-1978);

(c) 	Director of the East African Posts and Telecommunications Corporation (1976-1978);

(d) 	Assistant Secretary in the University Secretary’s Office and clerk to Makerere University Council, handling matters of the University Council (1971-1976);

(e)	Secretary to the Teaching Service Committee, Ministry of Education, from 1965 to August 1967;

(f) 	Member of Parliament in the Uganda Legislative Council from I958 to 1961;

APPRECIATING THAT hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha was an advocate for and championed girls' education, women’s rights, women empowerment, women civic societies and was a diligent leader who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen of this country.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha rendered to the people of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several Members of the House.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on 22 October 2018, the country woke up with grief to the sad news of the demise of the first woman university graduate in East and Central Africa, the honourable Dr Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, aged 92, who passed on at Mengo Hospital, Kampala.

Hon. Ntiro was born in Hoima District to Erasto Nyendwoha Akiiki of the Bakwonga clan and Jane Nsungwa Nyendwoha Adyeri from the Babiito clan in 1925. Both her parents were teachers and therefore, they started grooming her early.

Dr Ntiro started school in kindergarten at Duhaga Girls’ School in Hoima, where she studied up to Primary 4. In 1938, she joined King’s College Buddo where she studied for eight years, from Primary 5 to Secondary 6, from 1938 to 1945. At the end of these years, she sat the Makerere College entrance examinations and was admitted to Makerere College to train as a teacher. She completed three years doing Geography, English and Teacher Training. She was denied the opportunity to study Mathematics because the Mathematics tutor declined to teach Mathematics to girls.

Hon. Sara Ntiro did her teaching practice at Kings College, Buddo and Kyebambe Girls’ School and later, received a teaching certificate. 

In 1951, she joined Oxford University, where she graduated with a Bachelor’s Degree in History. She became the first East and Central African woman to graduate from Oxford University at a time when no tertiary institution granted degrees in East Africa.

Hon. Ntiro started teaching at Kyebambe Girls’ School in Fort Portal. In 1955, she joined Gayaza High School and later left to join Duhanga Junior Secondary School in Hoima, where she taught for two years, before she resigned from active teaching service in 1958.

In the late 1950s, when the British announced that they were to grant Uganda Independence, hon. Dr Ntiro started her civic education sessions at the Hoima District Headquarters to discuss democracy and elections. 

She served in the Uganda Legislative Council from 1958 to 1961, where she tabled a Private Member’s Bill on the registration of marriages and was involved in women’s organisations like the Uganda Council of Women from 1965 to August 1967. 

She worked at the Ministry of Education as a Secretary to the Teaching Service Committee.

in 1971, hon. Ntiro joined Makerere University as an Assistant Secretary in the University Secretary’s Office, the Clerk to the Makerere University Council handling matters of the University Council.

In 1976, she was transferred from the Office of the University Secretary to the Joint Administration of the Faculty of Arts and the Faculty of Social Sciences, where she worked until October 1978. 

While at Makerere, she was also a Director of the East African Post and Telecommunications Cooperation. 

Hon. Dr Ntiro’s championing of women’s rights in Uganda has come a long way. Soon after her arrival at Gayaza High School, she discovered that her salary was to be less than that of her male colleagues. In protest to this, she offered to work without any pay for one year to repay for the sponsorship of her studies. After one academic year, she told them she would resign and find employment that would pay her not as a woman but as any other employee. 

Her action yielded results. In response, the Headmistress reported her action to the wife of the Governor, Sir Andrew Cohen, who approached her at the school. She stood her ground and after the meeting, she received equal pay for equal work done. This was how she broke the barrier of inequality in pay. (Applause)

In 1978, when in exile in Nairobi, hon. Dr Ntiro did not stop her advocacy for education. She established an Education Consultancy of Higher Education for African Refugees, Family Planning Associations of University Women and many others. 

Hon. Dr Ntiro has left a commendable track record and an illustrious career in service. For instance, there is the Ntiro Girls Vocational Secondary School in Hoima, which is a government aided effort to instil in other girls the same spirit that God gave her; an award of a woman of distinction from the foundations of activists for women education in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, we sincerely extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, the relatives, the academia, Bunyoro Kingdom and the country at large. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. I invite the Leader of Opposition. 

1.05
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, on behalf the Opposition fraternity and the people of Gulu District, I hereby second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, Former Member of Parliament in the Uganda Legislative Council, which occurred on Monday, 22 October 2018 at Mengo Hospital, Kampala at the age of 92.

The late hon. Dr Ntiro, at the time when girls were only good for marriage, her parents found nothing strange about sending their child to school. 

In 1945, Makerere College admitted its first female students and she was amongst them. I remember where she testified to us that she was not allowed to be in the Mathematics classroom. 

In 1951, she joined Oxford University and graduated with a Bachelor’s degree in History in 1954. She became East Africa’s first female graduate. 

Madam Speaker, she served in the Uganda Legislative Council from 1958 to 1961, where she tabled a private Member’s Bill on the registration of marriages in 1961. From 1965 to August 1967, she worked at the Ministry of Education as secretary to the Teaching Service Committee and was instrumental in starting the Teaching Service Commission.

Uganda has lost a great woman whose life’s work was devoted to fighting for equality for women. She was an inspiration and a mentor for both men and women in Bunyoro sub region and the country at large, encouraging them to focus on education for transformation of their societies.

On behalf of the Opposition and the country, I take this opportunity to send my deepest condolences to the family of the deceased for the loss of their strong pillar in the society, who has been a role model to the young generation.

May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I invite hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Eric Musana, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, hon. Veronica Isala and hon. Noeline Basemera.

1.51
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Masindi District and the women of Bunyoro and Uganda, I join my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha.

Hon. Sarah Ntiro tells the story of women emancipation and equality in Uganda. The Prime Minister has just elaborated the history and some of the achievements of hon. Sarah Ntiro.

Hon. Ntiro’s niche was to train as a mathematics teacher but because of the gender imbalances and inequalities at that time, she was denied to attain this qualification. However, Sarah Ntiro was very assertive that when she entered the lecture room and the tutor refused to teach, she resisted moving out. When she realised that this was going to cause the whole class to miss out on the lecture, she decided to give way. This shows us how Sarah was very courageous, a warrior and fighter for equality of women.

Madam Speaker, when Sarah Ntiro taught at Gayaza High School while still in the teaching profession, when she realised that her salary was going to be less than what her male colleagues were getting. She refused to receive the pay and decided to volunteer as a teacher for a whole year. That is when the Governor came to know about it and they agreed to pay Sarah an equal as the male teachers.

This takes us to what pushed her to move a Bill for equal pay. Hon. Ntiro is one of those Members who immediately introduced, when she was appointed to the Legislative Council, a private Member’s Bill on equal pay for men and women. This is the story of the women in Uganda, Africa and the world at large. We applaud hon. Ntiro for this courage and for fighting for women’s equality.

Hon. Ntiro was very instrumental in starting the Teaching Service Commission, whose services we are enjoying to-date. Hon. Ntiro’s life and work was devoted to fighting for equality for women. She was among the few Members who founded the Forum for African Women Educationists (FAWE) in Uganda. During the 2000 meetings, the Dr Sarah Ntiro Lecture and Award was started. 

I would like to quote one of hon. Sarah Ntiro’s statements. Hon. Sarah Ntiro wished all the women of Uganda well and she stated thus: “I would still like every woman to know that you can fight any battle, if it is worth listening to.” In a 2012 Financial Times interview, she continued to narrate that she might have been born to the right parents at the right time but she was also a warrior for women’s rights.

When I realised in 2002 that the schoolgirl dropout rate in Masindi District was very high, I contacted hon. Sarah Ntiro. Because she was very passionate about girl education, she committed to come to be a role model in Masindi District. We moved around all the primary schools. She talked to the school children, to the parents and the leadership of the district. By the time hon. Ntiro stopped moving around, the school girl drop-out rates in Masindi District had reduced.

Today, we are enjoying hon. Ntiro’s efforts in mentoring, being a role model and encouraging the girl-child to remain in school. No wonder –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use a half a minute to conclude.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, no wonder, when the schools were closed during COVID-19, we got very many cases of girl-child pregnancies. The girl-child wants to go back to school as soon as yesterday. This was hon. Ntiro’s wish.

Lastly, I would like to call on the Government that for such senior citizens and more so, senior citizens who are women, we should put in place a system or mechanism, which will keep these people’s names and their works in memory. This will also teach other people who may not have seen or talked to hon. Ntiro but want to emulate what she did. In so doing, their contribution will be remembered forever. 

I would like to propose that hon. Ntiro – I know that many regions have constructed schools but we would like to have those institutions, which Government has got a hand in. Those ones will stand the test of time. I am talking about institutions like Makerere University. We can easily choose either a hall, dormitory or library under the gender department and name it after hon. Sarah Ntiro; for instance, a Sarah Ntiro library. This will help the world and the country at large to know and cherish hon. Sarah Ntiro’s works. 

May hon. Ntiro’s soul rest in peace. Thank you.

1.58
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, former Member of Parliament Uganda Legislative Council. In terms of age and connection, I have only read about Sarah Ntiro and have heard about her from other people.

If it was not for her legendary record, I would have walked away to go and do other things. However, because of the kind of contribution that we read and heard about her, I decided that I must stay back and pay tribute to such a heroine who has done such a wonderful service to this country - the great nation of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, you will also allow me to first appreciate you and your office for having showed that resilience. You can imagine, yesterday we were busy here up to late. Today, again, we have held three motions in a row and yet we have work coming up at 2.00 p.m. It is not a simple achievement and I would like to believe that you are now hitting beyond 100 per cent record of performance. I thank you very much; it is not something we take for granted.

The late hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro - if you go to the records - was that first woman to graduate from Oxford University and yet most people have found it a challenge even to graduate within Uganda. What a woman! She was a great person, an inspiration to the women of today, to the children of the day, the girls of today and this age.

She managed to break the jinx; I was touched when the Rt Hon. Prime Minister talked about the late being denied an opportunity to study mathematics just because of she was a woman; what a dark past. It was very bad. 

Without her, I would like to believe that we would not be where we are now. These are the pillars, the changing points who turned things around for the good of this country; balancing the women and the men, the girls and the boys.

Madam Speaker, in Teso, our past was bad and it used to be very bad indeed. In terms of education, when somebody had some cattle to sell for fees, they always chose to prioritise boys over the girls. However, the rise of people like hon. Sarah Ntiro has changed everything not only for the place where she came from but the entire country.

I am told she lived for 92 years and that is not a short time. I think God rewards people who work very well and are legendary with long life. The human rights activist who worked for women, a person who dedicated herself to serving the nation without reservation, moving a Private Member’s Bill in terms of registration of marriages; that was historic. And serving as a clerk to Makerere University Council is not a mean achievement.

Madam Speaker, somebody to offer to work for free for a year, does not easily happen in Uganda today. And she also fought for women emancipation. She was a true activist and supported women education. We will dearly miss her. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

2.03
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise here to pay tribute to the granddaughter of Bunyoro; Dr Sarah Nyendwoha Ntiro, a senior educationist, a doctor that we all young people see from that we achieved a lot.

Dr Sarah Ntiro has contributed a lot not only in the emancipation of women but she has been very practical. I would like to give only one example; Dr Sarah Ntiro together with one NGO in Kagadi called Uganda Rural Development and Training, led a team in establishing an all-women’s university called African Rural University where she has been a member  and member of the university council.

Dr Sarah Ntiro did a lot in establishing and unifying this university. Imagine in the whole East Africa, we did not have such a university but she was rather very practical; not just speaking but also putting in practice what she truly thinks and knows. This is why we praise all her actions.

We remember Dr Sarah Ntiro for breaking several barriers that existed in society especially these injustices that were against women and the other not about women but also on the other categories of society. You would see that where injustices would come up, Dr Sarah Ntiro would say that we want equal opportunities for everyone.

Imagine getting this first graduate not only for Uganda but across East Africa; it gives us a lot of hope that even the African or the girl-child education can go on and receive this. The only gift we can give to all of us who are alive and the young people is to put in practice - to put up what she has been training; what she has been putting in place to make sure that the girl-child education goes on. Also we see how we move on improving the literacy levels not only in Uganda but Africa –(Member timed out.)

2.06
MS VERONICA ISALA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for his tribute. On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Kaberamaido and also mainly on behalf of the senior active women of Uganda, I would like to support this motion and say a few words about hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro.

Madam Speaker, I will ask for two extra minutes because I knew this lady and I would like to do justice to what I am about to say. I first met hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro in the 1970s in Kenya. What a wonderful and an accomplished lady from Uganda; a great daughter of Bunyoro coming from Hoima.

At the time when very few women were going to school, Dr Sarah Ntiro impressed the whole country - indeed the entire East Africa - by going to school at the coveted Kings College Budo. She qualified as a teacher but she did not just stay as a teacher; she qualified as a teacher and taught and mentored many in that discipline.

She also came out very clearly as a human rights activist and most of her work has already been read out by the Prime Minister, and some have been attested to by people who spoke before me.

In many disciplines, Dr Sarah Ntiro was the first; first woman graduate, first woman legislator, first woman this, the first and the first. And we have to thank God those firsts and those that have followed her. She was a mentor of many, an example to follow and somebody that every woman should look to and be a friend to or copy from. 

Madam Speaker, I continued to Magdalen College at Oxford in 1978. I looked for hon. Sarah Ntiro for tips. When I asked her what I should do and what I should not do, she told me to go and tell them that I am her daughter, because she left many marks on the walls of Oxford and everything would be well for me. Madam Speaker, indeed, that is exactly what happened. 

She fought for women empowerment, emancipation and the growth of the women family in Uganda, East Africa and I dare say Africa at large. What lesson do we get from a woman who lived up to 92 in the person of hon. Ntiro? This is a woman to emulate. She left all her marks and we should follow them. 

However, I would like to say that looking at what she stood for, - the law on administration of marriage - we still have issues of laws of marriage in this Parliament. In this House, the Bill on marriage and divorce stopped in plenary at clause 23. In honour of this great lady, for the journey that she started, can we do her an honour – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude. 

MS ISALA: Madam Speaker, I was saying, can this Parliament, please, do this country an honour and do this lady a service by turning this Bill into law? 

I would like to end by saying 92 years is not the age we mourn a person. Those are years of celebrating a person’s life. Therefore, I join you and the Prime Minister in celebrating the life and times of this great lady. May the Almighty Lord rest her soul in eternal peace. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.12
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Mitooma to, first of all, thank the Prime Minister for this befitting motion to pay tribute to hon. Sarah Ntiro Nyendwoha, the first East African graduate and former Member of the Legislative Council. 

Even with all the accolades aside, when you met hon. Ntiro, you could see a woman of substance. I remember I first met her at All Saints Cathedral. She was a committed member of that church and worshipped the only true God, the creator of heaven and earth, whom all Ugandans acknowledge as the guiding principle of our nation when we say, “For God and my country.” I hope all Ugandans still remember that there is only one true God, the creator of heaven and earth. 

The love for God drove hon. Ntiro to serve her people with dignity and distinction in the Legislative Council. She was indeed a champion of women’s emancipation and rights. In moving the Registration of Marriages Bill, hon. Ntiro wanted women to be recognised. She wanted their rights to be recognised in the homes because, as you know, the African tradition is that women simply got married and everything belonged to the man; women were just property of the man. However, in registering those marriages, the women would be recognised as partners and somehow owners of property. We can never thank her enough. 

She was a member of several women’s organisations and was a committed member of the women’s movement. She did not waste any effort in mentoring other women and girls. 

Hon. Ntiro was a true embodiment of dignity, integrity, selflessness and unwavering focus and unity of purpose. She was indeed a true ambassador of women power. Our girls should learn from the lessons of hon. Ntiro that when you love God and are committed –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to close. 

MS KAMATEEKA: When you love God and are committed and dedicated to whatever services He has put before you, not even the sky is the limit. Therefore, hon. Ntiro holds the light for all women in Uganda now and in the future. Indeed, we thank God and bless him for her life. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.16 
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise in support of the motion to pay tribute to our great leader from Bunyoro, the hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro. 

First of all, I would like to thank you for allowing this motion on the Order Paper. I would like to also thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving the motion. In Bunyoro, we regard the late hon. Sarah Ntiro as an icon for girl-child education and this is not only in Bunyoro but for the entire country. 

Dr Sarah Ntiro was a fighter, a courageous woman and very resilient. I believe that at the time she grew up and studied, women emancipation was at its lowest. We are told, right from the mover of the motion, that she was the first female graduate in East and Central Africa, which is not a mean achievement. She managed to go through and overcome all the hurdles that affected girl-child education, especially at that time. I would like to propose that in her honour, this Parliament and Government grants Bunyoro the long awaited Bunyoro University in Hoima to give more chances to the people of Bunyoro, especially the girl children, easy access to university education, so that we have more graduates like the late Dr Sarah Ntiro. 

We have been informed that during her tenure as a member of the Legislative Council, hon. Ntiro tabled a private Member’s Bill on the registration of marriages. Therefore, she was a strong supporter of marriage and family. I would like to pray that in her honour, this Parliament expedites the process of enactment of laws that promote strong marriages and families. I know there are a number of Bills that are still lying in this Parliament that have not been processed in support of marriage and family. It is my prayer that in her honour, we process and enact these laws. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, and pray that the soul of our gallant leader, the late hon. Dr Sarah Ntiro rests in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I would like to thank the Prime Minister and the Leader of Opposition for consistently being available to pay tribute to the great Ugandans. 

I would like to add that last week, His Majesty the Omukama of Bunyoro sent me a delegation to inquire about the fate of the Bunyoro University because he is aware that in September 2015, the House resolved to establish three universities; the one of Bunyoro, Rwenzori and Namasagali University. Unfortunately, none of these have come to fruition. Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think you need to take this up so that our people get the services they require.

Secondly, I am personally very happy that finally a tribute has been paid to Dr Ntiro. I have been really troubled that a woman of such distinction could not be honoured. I am really grateful to the Prime Minister that finally a motion has been brought to honour her.

Thirdly, at a personal level, I first heard about Sarah Nyendwoha then, in 1966. One of my uncles, Mr Gideon Ibanda Byandala, was her classmate. During the state of emergency in 1966, he had come to Kampala but I think six o’clock found him still in Kampala so he could not travel to Iganga. He came to our House in Naguru. He was talking about his classmates and mentioned Sarah Nyendwoha. That is the first time I heard about her. I am happy to have known her in real life. She has been an inspiration to all of us. I therefore put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House pays tribute as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the tribute in respect of Omukama Ruhanga Bisaka and Dr Ntiro and to extract the Hansard for both of them so that they are sent to first, the Church of Unity and his family in Muhorro; and the one of Dr Ntiro to her family. 

I would like to thank the Members of Parliament for sparing time this morning. We have a sitting in the afternoon and we shall reconvene at 3.15 p.m. 

(The House rose at 2.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 February 2021 at 3.15 p.m.) 
