

Tuesday, 5 February 2019

Parliament met at 2.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Last Friday, we were able to approve the National Budget Framework Paper in accordance with the laws of Uganda. I thank the committee and all Members for the work they did towards meeting that deadline. 

I would like to also thank the chairpersons of all the sectoral committees, members of Parliament and the staff for handling that appropriately.

Yesterday, Monday, 4 February 2019, I led a delegation of elders from the Busoga Region to the National Crops Resources Research Institute (NaCRRI) at Namulonge, to benchmark on the best practices in a bid to fight poverty in Busoga Region.

On my behalf and Parliament, I would like to thank the leadership of the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) for the good job they are doing. The scientists at NARO are in the final stages of testing a landmark anti-tick vaccine, fully made in Uganda and they said this vaccine will be applicable throughout the African Continent. They are also developing a vaccine to control Swine Fever, Foot and Mouth Disease and others. 

This will bring us foreign exchange ad also generate a lot of revenue to the Treasury. Indeed, I would like to encourage Members to visit that place.

They are also carrying out trials on cassava such that we can produce varieties of cassava, which are resistant to cassava brown streak and mosaic disease. I actually thought there was only one variety of cassava but I saw about nine varieties being developed there. They have also improved varieties of maize, potatoes and even rice. You need to go there so that you can understand it. 

Their efforts in improving productivity and providing solutions to our challenges should be embraced. Therefore, I would like to direct the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to visit NARO and engage with the institution so that we can lobby for that cause.

Honourable members, one of the things they raised was that they are very unhappy about section 35, which we passed under the Genetic Engineering Regulatory Bill, 2018. They said they are worried about issues of strict liability and they feel demotivated because we are punishing them for being inventive. I told them that I was going to wait for the assent and then we shall see how to move. That is one of the major issues they raised.

Of course they also complained about the brain drain; many of our good scientists have gone because of our inability to adequately remunerate them. Therefore, I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to support our scientists to remain here because they are really doing a good job.

Secondly, last year, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) agreed to have the 4th CPA Conference hosted in Uganda, from 22nd to 29th September 2019. The organising committee is making good progress. The necessary procurements and arrangements are being put in place to hold the conference. The Secretary-General of CPA is arriving in the country this afternoon, to assess our level of preparedness for hosting this conference. If you meet him in the lobby, just say, “Hello” to him. 

Honourable members, the other item is to do with Female Genital Mutilation (FGM). Tomorrow is the international day of zero tolerance against FGM. Our country has never conducted any activity towards that issue. Therefore, I would like to ask the Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association (UWOPA) and the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to design some activity so that we can raise awareness as we wait for the action plan from the Government.

The last issue is to do with scratch cards. I was on three radio talk shows last week and each time I was on a radio talk show, people called in saying that they still do not have scratch cards. This is a big problem to our people. Tomorrow, I will invite the Uganda Communications Commission and our legal advisors to find a way of dealing with that issue. The Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, hon. Frank Tumwebaze, said he has no powers to handle those companies and UCC has also said it has no powers to handle those companies. 

We cannot have a situation where we are disempowering our people; we are going to look at that and then we shall come back to Members to see if there is need to change the law. Otherwise, we cannot just cut off our citizens from communicating. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, we have a lot of issues of national   concern but the more we bring them, the more answers we need. Henceforth, they will be handled on Thursdays because under our rules, the first two hours of Thursday are for backbench business. Therefore, we shall move all those to Thursdays and the answers will come thereafter. Today, we shall not handle them. Next item.

On what matter do you rise, hon. Karungi? 	

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry but I have a very urgent issue of national importance to raise -  

THE SPEAKER: No.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE MINISTER FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I expected my colleague, hon. Musumba, to be here. Could you give me one minute to call him? I am sorry I came straight from a meeting to Parliament but I do not see him. Allow me call him to bring the Bill.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

(i) STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY ON THE WEALTH CREATION INITIATIVES SUPPORTED UNDER STATE HOUSE

3.08
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This statement arises from a matter raised by the hon. Agnes Taaka, Woman Member of Parliament for Bugiri District, on Tuesday, 22 January 2019.

In her concern, she sought to know about the youth related wealth creation initiatives managed under State House, as well as the roll out plan for such initiatives to cover other youth countrywide. It is for this reason that I rise to present a response to this august House touching on the following –

    i) A brief introduction;
    ii) Coverage of these initiatives;
    iii) A detailed explanation of the youth related wealth creation initiatives supported by State House; and
    iv) Plans to roll out the initiatives to other parts of the country.

Madam Speaker, the existence of the Presidency is provided for by Articles 98, 99 and 108 of the 1995 Constitution as amended of the Republic of Uganda. 

Article 99 of the Constitution vests all the executive authority in the President, whose mandate enjoins among others, promotion of the welfare of the citizens. Therefore, the youth related wealth creation initiatives run by His Excellency, the President, are hinged upon his constitutional duty to promote the welfare of the citizens, especially those who are most vulnerable to poverty.

Madam Speaker, the presidential initiative projects cannot to be seen as an end in themselves but rather as part of the grand plan for the Government of Uganda to promote sustainable and productive employment for its citizens. Under these interventions, specific focus has been made to address the challenges causes by youth unemployment in urban areas.

Coverage of the initiatives

Although the overall reception of these wealth creation projects has been overwhelmingly good, the coverage of these initiatives has been fairly limited. For example, there are only four presidential demonstration farms in Kawumu (Luwero), Baralege (Lango), Arua and Mayuge. 

On the other hand, the “Skilling the Girl Child Project” has also been restricted to Kampala areas. This small coverage is due to the highly restrictive resource envelope. The Presidency has, therefore, not been in position to reach out to all parts of the country.

Wealth Creation Projects Supported under State House

Madam Speaker, His Excellency, the President supports a number of presidential initiatives aimed at stimulating production, employment as well as socio-economic transformation among Ugandans. These include:
    1. The Poverty Alleviation Initiative, which involves establishing model villages and demonstration farms;
    2. Skilling the Girl Child project; and
    3. Support to the youth, through provision of common user facilities and start-up capital.

The above-mentioned interventions arose out of the President's concern to tackle unequal development in the country. The President, therefore, saw it fit to help marginalised groups through the provision of equipment and subsidised agricultural inputs, mind-set change, provision of start-up tool kits and capital.

The President's direct intervention has been influenced by two reasons namely; proximity to his residency and historical considerations - the detailed information and performance on each of the projects is provided here below:

    1. The Poverty Alleviation Initiative

This initiative started in 2003 as a project aimed at improving household incomes, productivity and value addition at parish level. The project seeks to transform selected villages across the country into self-sustaining entities through best practices in agriculture, market-led production, value addition and innovations. The initiative also aims at improving food security and quality of life at the household level.

One of the most successful model villages has been Kisozi. It was established in 2011, comprising of nine villages bordering the President's farm, with a total of 1,796 households. At inception, inputs like in-calf heifers, crossbreed bulls, goats, banana suckers, cereals, coffee seedlings and farm tools were given out. Over time, this village has become self-sustaining.

The detailed list of the model villages and/or presidential demonstration farms is attached to this paper as Annex 1.

    2.  Skilling the Girl-Child Project

This project is geared towards poverty alleviation and job creation among girls in the country. Currently, the project runs in five divisions of Kampala. The learners spend six months training in a number of skills such as tailoring, hairdressing, bakery, weaving, knitting, embroidery and shoe making. So far, the project has covered 5,158 girls who have been provided with basic tool kits and start-up capital. A detailed list of the number and attendant cost for training the girls is attached as Annex 2.

    3. Support to the youth through the provision of common-user facilities and start-up capital

Under this initiative, young people in organised groups who are found engaged in economic activities such as car washing, carpentry, metal fabrication and mechanics were supported with common user facilities. Groups in carpentry were provided with equipment comprising circular saw machines, surface planers, bow saw machines, spindle moulder, belt sander, compressor, cross cutting machines, manual staple guns, panel cutters/groove cutters, among others.

Madam Speaker, groups engaged in welding were provided with computerised hydraulic shear machines, computerised hydraulic plate bending machines, welding generators, compressors/ bench stand drill, grinders, welding machines and others. A detailed list showing the group name, location, number of members, economic activity and cost of the support extended, is attached as Annex 3.

Plans to roll out the Presidential Initiatives

Madam Speaker, the Presidency has a plan to roll out the presidential initiatives highlighted above to cover all parts of Uganda. Specific emphasis will be laid on addressing the immediate challenges of youth unemployment in both urban and rural areas. The only impediment to the implementation of this roll out plan is the highly constrained resource envelope.

Before I conclude, allow me to draw your attention to the annexes. Annex 1 has the model villages and demonstration farms. This is budget neutral because inputs were got from the presidential farm at Kisozi and given to the youth. We also have the demonstration farms including Kawumu Demonstration Farm in Luweero, Baralege in Lango, Arua and another demonstration farm in Mayuge. The total cost of the input that has been incurred is Shs 145,742,000.

Annex 2 is about skilling of the girl child - it has been extended to the divisions of Kampala as shown below. We have 5,158 girls being trained. The total cost for the training including the equipment that has been given for the start-up capital is Shs 5,158,000,000. For the equipment that we bought, the total cost has been Shs 1,981,000,150. 

Annex 3 is the common user facilities. They are located in various locations as shown. The total cost here has been Shs 6,467,341,200. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the presidential initiative to support wealth creation has been successful in the few areas where it has been pioneered. I only appeal to this august House to appropriate additional resources to Vote 002 - State House - to support His Excellency, the President's efforts in turning the youth into employers and wealth creators. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see hon. Taaka; that was her question. However, honourable minister, your definition of the qualification as proximity to the President’s residence – so, in Namayingo where there is no residence, there is no proximity. Historical consideration – so, this is not a national programme.

3.21
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the honourable minister and I take cognisance that the Presidency must be handled with a lot of care, particularly given the people who are around him because they can turn into a security threat. I understand that.

However, I also acknowledge that even the people who stay thousands of miles away from the President equally want the service that the President is extending to the people neighbouring him.

Now, the fundamental question is: what plans do you have to the communities, which are distant from the President’s residence access similar services, which the people who are around the President are accessing? I thought the honourable minister would be telling us more about the rollout plan so that the people from Karamoja, Kasese, Kabale and so on can also benefit from this initiative.

Secondly, we appropriate money to ministries - I have seen the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Ministry Of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries all relevant in this. Who evaluates these programmes? You implement, evaluate and appraise yourselves. 

I know that for heaven’s sake, it is in good practice of project management that whoever implements must not be the one to evaluate themselves. Therefore, honourable minister, how do you evaluate yourselves to the extent that you are saying that the project has been successful?

Finally, the numbers that you have given are too minimal compared to the current population in this country. Then, if we feel that these numbers are benefiting well - I know that they are the same communities, which even benefit from the scholarships from State House. The same people benefit from being recruited into security services. Therefore, you find that the communities around the President are the sole beneficiaries while the communities far away are not benefiting.

Honourable minister, I feel you should extend this and say this programme is going to benefit radius X. That is when we will know that we are all Ugandans. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we need to continue. It is not a national programme. This is a limited programme; I do not think we need to waste time on it.

3.25
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for this statement. Honourable Prime Minister, every ministry where services are provided and which is headed by you, the Prime Minister, has a counterpart in State House.

For the Operation Wealth Creation activities, which are connected to NAADS and originated from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, there is now Operation Wealth Creation in State House; which means there is Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in State House. When you look at education sponsorship - these are things which are supposed to be under the Ministry of Education and Sports. Also the Inspector General of Government has a branch in State House.

Madam Speaker, with all this I can deduce that we are running two Governments and two parallel Cabinets, one under Ndugu Rugunda and the other under somebody in State House.

With all these duplicated expenditures, I would like to submit that the team led by Dr Rugunda where the President has a vote of no confidence should be put off and all this money should be appropriated under State House so that we have one Government directly under the supervision of the President instead of the one where we have a Cabinet for which we appropriate money while the President seems to lack confidence in them. This thing of creating desks in State House is directly a show of no confidence in you, the ministers. 

3.27
THE MINISTER OF WILDLIFE, TOURISM AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I have two comments to make. The first comment is to thank you for your communication. Your communication put an emphasis on the sentries of science in economic transformation.

Indeed, just as you have pointed out, research done by NARO - if you can imagine for one moment; if they discovered vaccination against ticks how much they would save the peasants of the money they keep spending on Acaricides; it is incredible.

Therefore the transformation of this country hinges on science. However, the valid point you have raised is that internationally research is allocated almost 1 per cent of the total budget. It is the main constraint. The lack of application of science and technology is the main constraint in economic transformation. Therefore, I thank you, for your observation.

Madam Speaker, the second observation - (Interjection) – no, I am just making two comments – 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Let the honourable minister speak.

PROF. KAMUNTU: There are two points I would like to make. One is the in appropriation of the National Budget. There is a national standard and 1 per cent of National Budget is research. Similarly, a sector like tourism, contributing nearly 10 per cent to get less than one per cent of the total budget; it should get 5 per cent –(Interruption)

THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister is complaining about the 1 per cent for tourism but it comes from them, the Cabinet ministers. I would like to say that in Uganda, we have two Governments. One Government is in State House. Actually, State House thinks that the taxpayers are the few people who benefit from the resources sent to State House. They forget that we are all taxpayers. We should serve Uganda equitably, not selectively. 

We have complained that the scholarship from State House does not serve our people equitably. Why should we insist on appropriating the little resources that this country is able to raise for just a few to benefit? This is very unfortunate and history will judge you harshly for not considering the other population of Uganda and leaving our people more wanting and vulnerable. Those who are vulnerable are even made more vulnerable; this is bad. 

Let us have one Government. You find the Inspector General of Government (IGG) in State House giving no confidence to the one who is out. Why should we do all this?

Then there is agriculture in State House giving no confidence to the formal agricultural ministry, which is out and trying to –(Member timed out.) 

MS MBAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate all your concerns and to respond them. 

We have various programmes that are aimed at empowering the youth under various ministries. For example under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we have the Youth Livelihood Programme that reaches out to other districts in rural and urban areas; we have programmes through Operation Wealth Creation and this is a supplement to all those initiatives that are run by the various ministries.

It is not true that these programmes are not monitored. We have a Directorate of Economic Monitoring under the Presidency to monitor all these programmes.

State House –(Interjection)- I will not take any information -

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS MBAYO: Madam Speaker, honourable members have really showed concern as to why State House does not roll out to the rest of the country. I said it is because of the resource envelope constraints that we are not able to roll out to the whole country. I beg to submit. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE ON THE CONTINUED INTERDICTION OF SOME CIVIL SERVANTS, NAMELY; MR APOLLO KAZUNGU, COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES AND MR GODFREY SASAGAH WANZIRA, DIRECTOR, CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL, IN CONTRAVENTION OF THE CIVIL SERVICE STANDING ORDERS

3.34
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, at the Fifth Sitting of the Third meeting of the Third Session of l0th Parliament of Uganda held on Thursday, l7 January 2019, hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi sought clarification on the continued interdiction exceeding the prescribed six months of some civil servants in contravention of the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders. 

Hon. Wamakuyu pointed out that Mr Apollo Kazungu, Commissioner for Refugees and Mr Godfrey Sasagah Wanzira, the Director Citizenship and Immigration Control have been on interdiction since February 2018 yet the Inspectorate of Government concluded investigations against them. He prayed that Government reinstates the duo to their positions.

By definition, interdiction refers to temporary removal of a public officer from exercising the duties of his or her office while investigation over particular misconduct is being carried out. It is part of a disciplinary procedure and a disciplinary action in itself.

The Government Policy on length of interdiction 

Under Regulation 38(1) of the Public Service Commission Regulations, 2009, where disciplinary proceedings are being taken or are about to be taken or if criminal proceedings are being instituted against a public officer, the responsible officer shall interdict the officer from exercising his powers and performing his functions.

Regulation 38(5) of the same Regulations further stipulates that where a public officer has been interdicted by a responsible officer, investigations into the conduct of the public officer shall be expedited and brought to conclusion within a period of six months from the date of interdiction for offences requiring or involving the police or a court of law.

Further, Regulation 38(9) states that where there is failure to conduct investigations within the stipulated time above, the officer shall be free to appeal to the Public Service Commission to have his or her interdiction lifted.

Section F-S (8)(b) of the Public Service Standing Orders also reiterates that where an officer is interdicted, the responsible officer shall ensure that investigations are done expeditiously in any case within three months for cases that do not involve the police and courts and six months for cases that involve the police and courts of law.

Regulation 28 of the Education Service Commission Regulations presents similar provisions for interdiction in the education service.

While on interdiction, the affected public officer receives not less than half of their basic salary in accordance with Regulation 38(2) of Public Service Commission Regulations - (Interruption) - and segregation per the ministry or Vote.

The responsibility of management of interdiction in accordance with the provisions of the Public Service Commission Regulations, the Education Service Commission Regulations, the Judicial Service Commission Regulations and the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, the responsibility to interdict, investigate and make recommendations to the Service Commission for an appropriate action, including lifting interdiction, in respect of a public officer in issue is vested in the responsible officer of a Ministry, Department, Agency and Local Government where that officer is stationed.

Specific to the two mentioned cases, the permanent secretaries of Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Internal Affairs respectively are responsible for management of the disciplinary processes for the said officers. The Ministry of Public Service has provided policy guidance and support to enable conclusion of these cases.

Madam Speaker, notwithstanding the aforementioned legal and regulatory provisions, Government was advised by the Solicitor-General that for cases involving Court, a responsible officer has no control over what goes on in the Courts of law and how long the court procedures will take before the matter in the Court is concluded.

The other guidance was that a delay in the conclusion of a matter in the courts of law cannot lead to the automatic lifting of the interdiction.

In addition, what goes on in the Courts of Law are not investigations per say but hearing and evaluation of the evidence from which a final decision is arrived at since it is likely that at the time when an accused person is charged to the Courts, the investigations have been completed.

Lastly, Regulation 38(7) of the Public Service Commission Regulations which obligates the responsible officer to make appropriate justification and recommendations on the lifting of the interdiction upon conclusion of investigations by a ministry, department or police does not cover instances before a Court of Law.

In conclusion, the legal, regulatory and policy provisions on the length of interdiction in the Public Service were to ensure a speedy process of managing a disciplinary process in order to protect the rights of public officers from victimisation by their superiors or system inefficiency.

Responsible officers take the responsibility to manage disciplinary processes involving interdictions, in liaison with the respective service commissions, to achieve the prescribed speedy process of concluding investigations and have the cases disposed of within the prescribed timeframe of three and six months respectively.

However, for matters involving the Courts of Law, responsible officers lack control to drive the process. This also partly affects cases being handled by the police especially when criminal investigations are still ongoing, which partly explains why many cases of interdiction exceed six months.

The way forward, is that my ministry is strengthening the supervision and inspection functions to ensure that disciplinary processes in general and investigations after interdictions are dealt with promptly and decisively by responsible officers.

Police is urged to conclude investigations and submit reports in time and the responsible officers must follow up with police on cases regarding officers under their jurisdiction to ensure they are expeditiously concluded.

Madam speaker, we have annexes that are attached. I beg not to go into the details. It is a list segregated by the votes. I beg to submit.

3.46
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Elgon County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for his attempt but he has not answered the question. He instead gave us the regulations and the law.

Can the minister tell us the status of those two officers’ cases? They are neither in Court nor at the police. What is the status other than telling us stories? You are referring us to responsible officers who are the accounting officers but they do not sit in this House. Can you please tell us?

3.47
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. When he defined interdiction, he said it refers to a temporary removal of a public officer from exercising their duties of office while investigation of a particular misconduct is being carried out.

Madam Speaker, the understanding of interdiction is that it is an administrative step taken to get rid of the officer from their office to allow investigations take place. Why then is it taken as a disciplinary procedure or action in itself? 

Further, the minister practically emphasizes - I think it is Regulation 28 - that while on interdiction, the affected public officer receives not less than half of his or her basic salary in accordance to Regulation 38 and the others, as mentioned.

This in effect means that as long as the person is on interdiction, the salary will be affected. Why would the salary be affected when there is still an investigation going on to find out on whether or not the interdicted officer is guilty? Thank you.

3.49
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The regulations that have been cited by the honourable minister do not apply to the circumstances that were asked by this Parliament.

There are two issues, Madam Speaker. First, if somebody has been interdicted and three or six months have elapsed as per those regulations, that person must be reinstated.

Secondly, even if there is a court case as the minister submits, it is the responsibility of the prosecuting officers and usually, the interdicted officer is the complainant. Therefore, they have the responsibility to liaise with police to ensure that matters of this nature are expedited within six months.

If you do not take that initiative, Madam Speaker, from experience as a legal practitioner, there will be adjournments and delays. Therefore, ultimately the officers who are on interdiction will continue to suffer.

Therefore, what the minister should be telling this Parliament is how far the investigations have gone especially with regard to matters that are at police. If you do not take that initiative, the police will take more than three years to carry out an investigation - and it is happening.

Therefore, I think the minister is doing a disservice to the officers who were interdicted and I think the rules are being applied selectively, subjectively and improperly in as far as these officers are concerned.

3.50
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In an attempt to respond to the issues raised, the minister also failed to recognise the other category. I will give an example of the Uganda Police Force. There are officers who disagreed with their superiors and have been on interdiction for over five years. 

A case in point is one of my constituents called Julius Zziwa. There are no proceedings taking place anywhere, including in the Police Tribunal. The point we are making is that we would like the honourable ministers to interest themselves into such types of cases in order to find suitable solutions. 

For instance, in the Uganda Police Force, there are many officers who have been on “katebe” for a very long time. It is after there were changes that some of these people surfaced. There are many; they are being paid by the taxpayer. Some of them have even competed in politics yet they are still serving officers and have registration numbers. 
Therefore, we would like you to interest yourself in such types of cases. If you want information, we can avail it to you so that the next time you come to speak, you have all the facts. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Let me just give some information. Honourable minister, you brought here a document - go to Annex page 3, it reads, “List of staff on interdiction under the Ministry of Internal Affairs: 18. Godfrey Wanzira Sasagah – Status: nothing…”  

When you go to Apollo Kazungu, you claim that you have written to the Inspector General of Government (IGG) and the Inspector General of Police (IGP) but he has never even been charged to Court. He has been reporting to the police for one year without being charged to Court.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural point under Rule 49 of our Rules of Procedure concerning a matter on questions by Members and answers by ministers, which are not subject to debate. However, in my opinion, that is if the minister has actually answered the question - the question posed by hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi on the status of these two officers was very clear and unambiguous. However, the answer given by the minister has not only skirted around the question but has also not answered it. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, what do we do with an answer of this nature? Should we not strike it out with the contempt it deserves? Should we not order the minister not only to come up with a proper answer to the question but since he has also volunteered information on other deserving cases, take him on each and every case? 

The Ministry of Public service has been known to hold vendettas on some civil servants; I speak with experience. There is a former Chief Administrative Officer who had issues with the former minister because the fellow had just got a PhD. He was retired with the excuse that he was not needed in the Public Service. 

Madam Speaker, shouldn’t we project this statement and order the minister to come with the answers relating to the questions? Then, we should also take the opportunity to consider this as a ministerial statement - the one he will bring -and consider each of the cases as given if possible?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason the minister has said nothing is because there is no reason for these people to be on interdiction. Honourable minister, comply with the regulations and return these people to work. You have failed to say anything because there is nothing and that is why you are quiet. You return them to work and report back to this House. 

STATEMENT BY MINISTER ON THE SUSTAINED HAVOC ON AND DISPLACEMENT OF THE PEOPLE OF APAA BY UNKNOWN MILITIA

3.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA): Madam Speaker, hon. Obiga Kania, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, will make the statement on behalf of Government. Thank you. 

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, this statement is in response to the question that was asked last week in which you directed the Government, through the Prime Minister, to make a statement on what is termed to be the sustained havoc on and displacement of the people of Apaa by unknown militia.

Apaa is an area in Adjumani District in a place called Zoka Forest and this is the statement in response. 

Madam Speaker, there is a contested border between Amuru and Adjumani districts concerning the area generally referred to as Apaa. This area was demarcated between 7th and 11th September 2016 by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in conjunction with the Ministry of Local Government.

On 15 October 2017, the demarcated area of 40 square kilometres was handed over by the Ministry of Local Government to Adjumani District.

However, some political leaders have rejected this handover, which is the root cause of this conflict manifesting itself into incitement by some leaders, encroachment on the forest and poaching in the game reserves neighbouring this area and illegal logging in the area generally. Moreover, from time to time, people are ferried from elsewhere to accomplish these activities.

Recent acts of lawlessness and action taken by Government

The recent acts of lawlessness were in a small area in Apaa called Zoka 'C’ Itirikwa Sub-county, in Adjumani District, between the Acholi and Madi area. 

In July 2018, His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda directed that Zoka Forest Reserve should not be encroached upon and all illegal activities in that forest reserve be stopped.

On 16 January 2019, the RDC of Adjumani District together with a security committee went to investigate reports of illegal logging, charcoal burning and construction of makeshift grass thatched houses in Zoka Forest Reserve. On their way out, the suspects of the illegal activities in the forest planted nails in the road, which deflated the tyres of some of the vehicles in the RDC’s convoy.

On 17 January 2018, two huts belonging to families from Madi were burnt. In return, the Madi community burnt 48 huts belonging to the Acholi community in that area. It is important to note that no property and food items have been found burnt in those areas. Eighteen suspects in this arson activity were arrested and detained at Adjumani Police Station for investigations and further management.

There are no unknown militias operating in the area whose presence has been brought to the attention of the security forces. The Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) also carried out operations to evict encroachers in the forest reserve. These acts of evictions and fights between the communities forced some members of the Acholi community to relocate to makeshift huts within the Zoka 'C' area, where the security forces have provided them security and the area is now calm and secure. All efforts are being made to continue to secure the people and the area.

In July, 2018 H.E, the President appointed an inter-ministerial committee, led by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to make comprehensive efforts to resolve the settlement and other related issues in relation to Apaa. The committee has made its recommendations to the President and the President will make a decision.

In conclusion, we advise that in the meantime, politicians and other leaders from the area should provide responsible leadership, promote harmony and restrain from inflammatory activities. Issues of settlement, tribes and boundaries should be clearly separated. I thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, can we assume that there is now calm in the area?

MR OBIGA: Madam Speaker, there is total calm in the area, as I speak. This Parliament is free to send its investigators and we shall guarantee the security of that group to reach that area and investigate the matter. Thank you.

4.04
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for making an effort to give us a statement on the situation in Apaa. The situation is calm but the internally displaced persons are in the camps. Therefore, can the minister tell us why those people are in camps? 

I would also like to assure this House that it is not the Acholi people or people living in that place who destroyed Zoka Forest. It is the security forces or the wrong elements, who are destroying trees everywhere. They are the ones who went and entered that forest. The people in our area know the boundary of Zoka Forest and have never laboured to enter the forest.

I remember this same issue was raised sometime back and the leadership knows very well the people who entered into Zoka Forest and the people who are destroying the forest.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had a lot of debate on this issue. The other community has their side and this community has their side. I would like to take the proposal of the minister that we send our own committee to go and establish what is going on.

4.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Lt Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the august House that there is calm in Amuru District – (Interjection) - I am talking from a point of knowledge and not hearsay. 

I was there on the 31st January and 1st February and I addressed residents. We have put a battalion there to ensure there is peace and we have urged people –(Interjections)– come on -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, give each other time. Let the minister tell us. You asked what the Government was doing and he is telling us.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the people of Amuru demanded for more security – (Interjection) - yes, you can call the LCV chairperson or anybody from there. We urged the people on either side to stay calm until Government comes up with a solution. 

You can pick the phone now and call the LCV chairperson – (Interjection) - you do not need to come here and tell lies. I I was there.

Madam Speaker, we hold Government offices in public trust and you have asked me to speak as the minister representing the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. The chairman of the district is a member of the FDC Party; you can call him live in this House and you will be ashamed. 

Madam Speaker, I assure the entire nation and this august House that there is calm in Amuru.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want a quarrel between this community and the other community. Let us hear the final word from hon. Akol.

4.08
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, when we are elected to this House, we become members of Parliament for this country and not MPs for a specific constituency where we come from. For that matter, when making my statement, I am not speaking as a Member of Parliament for Kilak North where Apaa falls but I am speaking as a Member of Parliament of Uganda. 

The situation has been that Adjumani members of Parliament speaking to Amuru Members of Parliament but allow me to speak like a national Member of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, first of all, the statement from the minister is not correct. This is because Apaa is not located in Zoka Forest and I think my witness will be the Prime Minister of Uganda, if he is to speak the truth. We have been on the committee together with him and we have verified that Apaa is not in Zoka Forest. Another witness could be the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs who has just spoken here. If he was in Apaa, it means he was not in Zoka Forest.

Secondly, when the minister was giving his statement, he said they did the demarcation in Apaa for the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani and he said that this was done between 7th and 11th September 2016. This statement contradicts the report that was given by Dr. Chris Baryomunsi, the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Housing), who came to the Floor of Parliament and said they did the reopening and demarcation of the boundary in Apaa from 13th to 18th September 2015. Who, of these two ministers, is speaking the truth?

That is why as members of Parliament – who are national Members of Parliament but happen to come from Amuru – we are saying no border demarcation has taken place. The activity of declaring that this place is in Adjumani was done wrongly because there is even a court injunction and this case is coming for hearing in the High Court of Gulu tomorrow. Why should the Government lye on the Floor of this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think those are the issues our committee should establish – whether the hearing is there and whether there was a demarcation or not. You are making your case but I think we need a committee to deal with it.  Honourable members, I don’t want to encourage this debate.
Let us take the minister’s statement. 

I have been informed that there is an outbreak of measles and I am going to talk about it. However, this debate should end, really. Deal with the emergency but do not talking about the conflict.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, the emergency issues I am dealing with are very sensitive. I was not happy when a national Member of Parliament said that people are burning their own houses in Apaa.

THE SPEAKER: Now that is for the committee. The emergency I would like to hear is; are people sick? Are they dying?

MR DULU: Madam Speaker, if you go the Uganda Wildlife Authority or Uganda National Forestry Authority, they will tell you that the border line between Amuru and Adjumani is the same border of the gazetted area. How come my colleague is telling the august House that the minister’s statement is wrong and that Apaa is not in Zoka Forest? Apaa is in Zoka Forest. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dulu, that is what the committee will establish. Let me invite the Government to address the outbreak of measles and cholera in that area.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. You have guided, after listening to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, buttressed by the Minister of State for Defence and Veteran Affairs and colleagues from the conflict areas and so, isn’t it procedurally right that we insist that – to get to know whether the Government is speaking the truth about the status quo – we maintain the guidance you have given that a committee of Parliament goes and establishes the facts about what is prevailing so that we avoid seeing MPs from the conflict areas exchanging here?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have heard the minister’s statement but there are still areas of dissatisfaction. There are still areas where we need to investigate and establish the truth. In the circumstances, we shall establish a select committee to go and address that issue.

In the meantime, can the Government address the issue of the outbreak of cholera and measles as well as the schools and food?

4.16
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Madam Speaker, I rise with a lot of pain. I raised a point of order but I was not picked; I rose on a procedural point, I was not picked. Anyhow, my concern is on the report. There was a very big allegation on individuals, for example, the second Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Moses Ali, myself and hon. Mark Dulu that we are part of these incidences in Adjumani yet no mention was made about it in the report.

Secondly, the minister raised the matter of ferrying people from Pabbo. I request to know, for the timbering, the measures the minister has put I place to deter people from being ferried by people who want this conflict to continue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he did not even mention the word “Pabbo.” The select committee will establish all those issues. Let us go to the next item.

MR OBIGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine was a written statement to which you can refer. I have said, “People are ferried from elsewhere.” I never said that people are ferried from Pabbo or any particular place.

Secondly, I also want to be on record to the effect that there are no camps as it is stated here. What is in my statement is that when these communities fought, some members of the communities fled and settled near where the security forces are deployed; that is in my statement. Whether you define that as a camp, it is purely your interpretation but my statement said they went and settled.

Finally, I want to commend the Woman MP for Nwoya for having confirmed that there is calm in the area. Thank you.

STATEMENT ON THE OUTBREAK OF RABIES IN BUHWEJU, BUSHENYI AND RUBIRIZI DISTRICTS AND THE ALLEGED SHORTAGE OF RABIES VACCINES IN THE COUNTRY

4.18
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, this is a response to Parliament in regard to the reported cases of bites of human beings from suspected rabid domestic animals.

Madam Speaker, rabies is a viral disease, which affects both animals which include cats, cattle, and dogs and humans (all warm-blooded animals). The disease is mainly transmitted through bites by infected animals. Humans are mainly infected through dog bites and these may be domestic or stray dogs. Humans may also be infected through bites of other animals of the dog family for example the foxes and bats. The virus is maintained by reservoirs such as bats, foxes, skunks, coyotes and raccoons.

Transmission of the rabies virus usually begins when infected saliva of an infected animal is passed to an uninfected animal. The most common mode of rabies virus transmission is through the bite and virus containing saliva of an infected animal which gets into the bite wound.

People commonly get rabies from the bite of a rabid animal. Scratches, abrasions, open wounds, or mucous membranes contaminated with saliva or other potentially infectious material, such as brain tissue from a rabid animal can also lead to infection.

Prevention of the disease in animals

Madam Speaker, rabies control is a public good; therefore, Government procures 500,000 doses of rabies vaccine annually and distributes to districts on request. Each district takes adequate doses to meet the needs of the district. 

Local governments are responsible for requisitioning, collection and safe storage of the vaccine and for mobilising and sensitising animal owners as well as vaccinating all susceptible domestic animals particularly dogs and cats. Vaccination should be repeated every year. The list of districts that took the vaccine since 2017 is herewith attached.

Local governments are responsible for enforcing Cap. 44 of the Rabies Act, which gives powers to administrators, veterinary officers and the police to seize, detain and destroy stray dogs.
Local governments are responsible for laying poison targeting to destroy all stray dogs.

An effective strategy for combating rabies and dog bites in Uganda requires strong collaboration and coordination between human and animal sectors through the One-Health approach. This approach is also recommended by the 2015 Global Rabies Control Strategy.

Sensitisation of the public on vaccination and confinement of dogs and cats as well as treatment of victims of animal bites and where they should go for further management is a responsibility of all of us.

Current Rabies situation in the three Districts

Rubirizi District

According to the District Veterinary Officer (DVO), Dr Mugaya, no case of animal bite has been reported to his office since September 2018. The last bite reported was from a wild animal on someone who had gone to tether goats in the field.

Bushenyi District

There have been no reports of dogs biting human beings in this financial year 2018/19, according to the DVO of Bushenyi, Dr Roberts Natukunda. 

The district received 2,000 doses of rabies vaccine in August 2018 and has vaccinated all dogs presented for the exercise and the district still has 260 doses in store.

Buhweju District

According to the DVO, Dr Baterana, they started getting reports of bites by stray and wild dogs at the beginning of January 2019. The most affected sub-counties are Bihanga, Engaaju and Karungu, which are neighbouring a forest. The last case was reported on 18 January 2019; the victim received anti rabies treatment from Mbarara Hospital as it was out of stock in Buhweju Hospital. 

The Chief Administrative Officer has instructed the Buhweju District Health officer to order and stock for anti-rabies to prevent human cases of rabies. The district last requested for the rabies vaccine about two years ago. In Annex 2017/2018, Buhweju did not order for rabies vaccine.

Madam Speaker, on prevention of human rabies, I would like to mention that human beings that are bitten by rabid animals should go to the district main hospitals that stock the Government provided human anti-rabies vaccine. Each person receives five injections on day 0, 3, 7, 14 and 28.

Secondly, human anti rabies vaccine is available at the Uganda Medical Stores, provided by Government.

Challenges of Rabies control

Some DVOs have not collected the rabies vaccine to create vaccination campaigns to vaccinate dogs and cats.

Some District Medical Officers have not collected the human anti-rabies vaccine to stock at the district hospitals from the National Medical Stores. This has been confirmed by the Minister of Health.

The animal rabies vaccine is current out of stock since December 2018. However, the procurement process is expected to be concluded by end of February 2019 and they will be availed to the country by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not see hon. Olive Katwesigye and so, I will ask hon. Mwijukye if he as a supplementary question.

Honourable members, in the meantime, I would like to request you to join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Pepea Africa Initiative, which organises the East African Spelling Bee Competition. 

The last competition was conducted in December in Dar es Salaam. One of our children, Favour Busingye, a student from Kampala Quality Primary School, was the winner in the whole of East Africa. Favour, can you stand up? His parents are up there and his head teacher is here. Dr Wekesa, the one who organises the contest and the persons with disabilities who participated in the competition are here. Congratulations, Favour! Thank you for making Uganda proud. You are welcome. 

4.30
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. He has laboured to explain what rabies are, what causes it, where we can find the vaccine and how many shots we can take. 

However, the concern of hon. Katwesigye was that although we know where the stocks are - we went there but we were told that they were out of stock and that we have lost four people and we still have other people who are sick. What should we do?

Our concern was not where to find the vaccines; we know. However, in the circumstances, what do we do? People are dying and yet the vaccines are out of stock. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.31
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): I would like to thank the minister for the good explanation. 

Two months ago, a wild dog bit 13 people in Amuru Town Council. When the medical personnel tried to look for the rabies vaccine, they failed to get it in Amuru. They went to Nwoya District and also failed to find it and they had to go to Gulu. 

After getting the explanation from the minister that some District Veterinary Officers (DVOs) are not picking vaccines from the National Medical Stores, I feel this concern is very important. Many of our people at the districts do not know emergencies. They need to be encouraged to keep on stocking drugs in case of any emergency. 

After listening to the minister, we shall advise our district people. Let them be alert from time to time because anything can happen and such vaccines are very important for the betterment of our people. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I would like you to take an interest in the annexure. Actually, Amuru collected 6,000 vaccines on 19 January 2018. I am not sure they have used them all. So, honourable members, take an interest in the lists.

4.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you. The minister has indicated that at times the vaccines at the National Medical Stores are not collected. When I was still serving on the Committee on Local Government Accounts, we went to several districts across the country. One of the things the District Health Officers told us was that sometimes, the National Medical Stores can even deliver medicines that they have not ordered for, as long as they feel those medicines are needed in a particular area. 

I would like the minister to explain to this Parliament whether the ministry or NMS are aware that rabies is a problem across the country. If they are aware, why does NMS procure the vaccines and then they do not deliver them when the districts have not collected them? I would like to say that in Kasese, at a particular time we looked for the rabies vaccine and we could not get it. We went to the neighbouring districts - Kabarole and Rubirizi - but the vaccine was not there. 

This is a big problem, therefore, for the people who are particularly far away from Kampala. Why can’t Government make it deliberate so that whether you have requisitioned for the vaccines or not, they are still delivered? Honourable minister, explain to us why you do not deliver the drugs yet you know rabies is a problem? 

THE SPEAKER: We are now swaying from the issue. 

4.35
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Island County, Buvuma): Thank you. I have failed to understand the economics of vaccinating stray dogs. Last year, this country celebrated Rabies Day and it was celebrated in Kyotera. During the celebrations, it was noted that 85 per cent of the dogs do not have owners; they are stray dogs. The ministry spends money on vaccines for 85 per cent of the dogs, which are later released back to the streets. 

Of course, there are other restrictions against termination of dogs, so we appropriate money for vaccination of dogs. Actually, districts are receiving more doses for vaccination of stray dogs than for cows. Which economics is this we are practising? Where is the market for the stray dogs? We must devise other ways if we are to eliminate rabies but we should not continue spending money.

4.37
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Madam Speaker, Buvuma is the biggest consumer of these vaccines. For whatever reason, some districts have more dogs than others. (Laughter) Recently, the law allowed us to – (Interruption)

MR GODFREY ONZIMA: Thank you. Rabies is caused by stray dogs. In some districts, announcements will be made so that on a particular day, people with dogs keep their dogs indoors or tie them because that is when stray dogs will be poisoned. Therefore, instead of wasting money, why don’t we do away with these sick dogs? That is the clarification I want from you.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Recently, the World Health Organisation banned the use of the chemical which was being used to kill stray dogs. Therefore, we cannot now use any chemical to kill the dogs. The only way we can go around this problem is to attract those stray dogs, caress them and vaccinate them. That is the only way we can now deal with the problem. Otherwise, you cannot use that chemical anymore; it is banned all over the world. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

4.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Physical Planning (Amendment) Bill, 2018” be read the first time.

In accordance with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, I would like to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications duly signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Urban Development, dated 31 January 2019. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Several Members have seconded the motion. The Bill will therefore be sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. You also have the Road Fund Bill; please work on it quickly so that we can attend to this one. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

4.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Ndugu Otafiire, is now engaged in very constructive discussions with the Judiciary on how best to improve the provisions that are in this Bill. Therefore, on behalf of the minister and Government, I request that you give us a little more time. 

I am fully aware that this Bill has taken a long time and the Judiciary, Government and the country are waiting for it. Nevertheless, it is crucial that we produce good legislation that will help with the administration of justice. Therefore, I seek your guidance and decision to allow for the postponement of the discussion of this Bill.

THE SPEAKER: For how long, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: I consider two weeks appropriate, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like the Prime Minister has said, this Bill has taken a long time and so everyone is waiting for it. The committee met the Executive side, the Judiciary and all the stakeholders concerned before they came up with a report, which is due to be presented in this House. If the Government still feels that that was not enough, at the time of us going to the committee stage, they can be able to bring those amendments, if they find it still necessary to bring them. 

We cannot continue for a third year with this Bill as the Judiciary is waiting. I hope it is not because of the statements that were made during the Judiciary conference that the Prime Minister is now telling us that they are still consulting and that is why the minister is not here, because of those quarrels. We can handle them here when we are handling the Bill at the second stage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take into account the absence of the sector minister. This matter is deferred for a fortnight.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

4.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to indicate that some three weeks ago, Government was ready to proceed with this Bill but Members from the Opposition requested for some time to harmonise some positions with us. They came up with new issues and we have been trying to harmonise those new issues but we have not finalized. I would like to beg that you allow us at least a week to harmonise our position.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a precedent is being set here; a report is presented and then people go out and say that they are harmonising. It is our report; you cannot amend our report! They should come here and argue out the issues. They cannot amend that report. Our report is as it was brought here.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, that time when the Leader of the Opposition requested for some time, Government was ready. I indicated to the presiding Speaker that time that we had wished to proceed. However, he said that allowing them time can even help to save parliamentary time if we harmonise some issues outside the House.

Madam Speaker, a lot of issues were raised and as a Government, we had to reconsider some positions. I just beg, kindly, that you allow us one week to harmonise our position and we shall be ready and come back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: I have no problem with giving you one week, but I have a problem with adjusting the report. I have a problem with that. You cannot adjust the report.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, we do not have any intentions of adjusting the report because we do not have the authority to adjust the House report.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, welcome back. It is so good to see you; welcome.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for your prayers. I am back on the road. 

Madam Speaker, there is something cropping up which has never been a practice of this House. If a Bill becomes property of Parliament, it ceases to be property of the minister and it goes through the processes as per our rules. If you want to disable Parliament - The judgement of the performance of Parliament is the Bills passed in that session. 

When a Bill goes to the second reading and a report is produced, what are those ministers doing? You have had enough time. The rules say the Bill stays with the committee for 45 days but this Bill has been with Parliament since 2015. Why don’t you apply the rule of the two Es and P - effective, efficient and perfect? If you want to be effective, efficient and perfect, you do things in a timely basis. You have had all the time. By the time the Bill comes to Parliament and goes through the first reading and the second reading and the committee meets the stakeholders, what impact are you going to make after that, unless we are going to amend the rules because some people have an interest? 

Madam Speaker, are we proceeding right in having the report read on the Floor of the House and then the minister comes and says that they are harmonising? What are you harmonising? We should have harmonised in the committee and not on the Floor of the House. This is already property of Parliament; it has been put on the Order Paper and it needs to be processed. I do not think that we shall perform and be judged according to such practices. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think there is a deliberate strategy to disable this House. We went for Christmas with about six reports ready but just getting them to the second reading, we have to beg and appeal.

Honourable members, to say that members of the Opposition, who are members of the committee and also members of this House, wanted to consult! They are here and even on the committee; what are they going to discuss outside?

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I am part of the fracas, but in my role as the Shadow Attorney-General, we did look at the Bill and the report of the committee and we found something that had to do with the constitutionality of some of the provisions. Therefore, we brought it to the attention of the minister that instead of allowing us to battle on the Floor on constitutional provisions, we could agree to look at it again with the Attorney-General from the ruling party and come up with a final position. It is that kind of consultation that is ongoing. 

We brought to the attention of the ministers the particular clauses that had issues with the provisions of the Constitution. They requested for time to consult and come back. Therefore, let us give them that one week because we would not want to shoot it down. We all want to have good laws for the benefit of not only Kampala but also the country.

THE SPEAKER: My problem is that these matters have been on the Order Paper and this is the second month. Reluctantly, I defer this matter for another week.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

4.52
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I have been in a meeting with the committee. I would like to report that they are not yet ready. They are supposed to be signing the report and they have requested for few more days so that it is read for the second time and the committee reports. We beg for a few days and then we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: We agreed that where a committee delays excessively with a Bill, the mover can come and we proceed without the committee.

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that I move the motion tomorrow and proceed without the report if it is allowed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INDIGENOUS AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE BILL, 2015

4.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move that the Bill entitled “The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by a number of Members. What is the justification?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, traditional medicine has since time immemorial been used by our population and it has been part and parcel of treatment for our people. However, as a country, we have never had any regulations in place, leaving room for unscrupulous people to take advantage of the population.

Traditional medicine has been an important source of healthcare for a majority of the population, not only in Uganda but also in other parts of the world. There is an increasing interest and focus in this area. The Bill that we are proposing is the Indigenous and Complementary Medicines Bill and it is intended to define what the indigenous and complementary medicine practice is in relation to traditional medicine.

It also proposes to provide for the registration of practitioners and practices of indigenous and complementary medicine. We also intend to ensure that there are minimum standards to be maintained in the practice of this indigenous and complementary medicine. We intend to ensure that those who have these medications and claim that they cure various diseases must first go through our institutions, specifically the National Drug Authority and the Natural Chemotherapeutics Research Laboratory, and be given clearance before they can go out to advertise.

The indigenous and complementary medicine law will help us bring order in this area. We are aware that there are various people who have medicine that can cure various diseases. However, there are others that are taking advantage of the population. This Bill is intended to regulate this sector so that we can stop the fraudsters from defrauding our population. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the chairperson of the committee. The procedure is that the mover moves the motion and then the report of the committee is read.

4.57 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015 was read for the first time on 12 March 2015 and referred to the Committee on Health for scrutiny. In accordance with rule 185 (c) of the Rules of Procedure, the committee considered the Bill and now reports. Before I read the report, I would like to submit a copy of the report and copies of the minutes that the committee made while interacting with the different stakeholders. I beg to lay. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to read a summary of the report. The background of the Bill is well illustrated and the minister hinted on the issues. The objects and benefits of the Bill have also been outlined. 

We used the standard parliamentary methodology of interacting with the different stakeholders, who are outlined in the report. We also did some benchmarking to two different countries, with facilitation from the Parliamentary Commission. I beg to start with the general observations, which are on page 6.

Compliance with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda

It is clear that the enactment of the Bill will ultimately operationalise the provisions of the Constitution in objective XIV and XX and also Article 20 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The Bill is within the scope of the right to health.

Compliance to International Health and Human Rights Frameworks

The Bill is in line with World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines concerning promotion and protection of health. It is also in line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 25(1).

Alignment to the Uganda National Health Policy

The enactment of the Bill would unlock the potential of provision of traditional and complementary medicine for the population, thus strengthening the national healthcare system.

Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)

The Indigenous and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015 provides for alternative medical services that enhance accessibility and affordability to medical care as per the Sustainable Development Goal No. 3. Therefore, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law since it addresses critical concerns of Sustainable Development Goal No. 3. 

Lessons Learnt from Study Visits 

We had a study visit to Ghana and the committee recommends – 

i) 	That Government of Uganda should prioritize funding to the Natural Chemotherapeutics Research Institute so as to enable it carry out its mandate of promoting research in natural products and plant medicines;

ii) 	The introduction and inclusion of particular courses in herbal medicine and training in universities and tertiary institutions. 

iii) 	Integrating traditional and complementary medicine in the national healthcare system.

From India, we learnt a bit on governance, dual practice and legal frameworks. They had entrenched serious sanctions to deter quacks and malpractice within the sector by providing for the application, registration and licensing of practitioners, and the process of inquiry and prosecution of perpetrators of malpractice in the traditional and complementary medicine sector.

The committee recommends – 

i) 	the maintenance of the council as proposed in the Bill.  
ii) 	establishment of traditional and complementary medicine structures at all levels. 
iii) 	provision of the necessary and basic traditional and complementary medicine academic, financial, efficacy and quality assurance standards;
iv) 	facilitation of training in traditional and complementary medicine in training institutions;
v) 	Support of integrated large scale multi-centric clinical research and collaborations in initiatives such as research fellowships, and Think Tanks for traditional and complementary medicine in institutions. 

Specific Observations and Recommendations 

The Title of the Bill

The committee recommends that the title of the Bill be amended to read, “Traditional and Complementary Medicine” and the justification is given.

Objectives of the Bill 

We recommended that a clause on the objectives of the Bill be amended to include regulation of herbal medicine as well as to define the scope of traditional and complementary medicine.

Interpretation

The committee recommended that the interpretation clause is amended to define the mentioned terms in order to avoid ambiguity in interpretation.

The Council 

The committee recommended that the council as established in the Bill should be maintained. However, it should be subjected to the supervision of the minister.

Recommendations on the Composition of the Council

a) 	Two representatives of traditional medical practitioners as defined by this Bill;
b) 	Two representatives of complementary medical practitioners as defined by this Bill;
c) 	A representative from National Drug Authority;
d) 	The Commissioner of Health Services in the Ministry of Health; 
(e) 	The Director of Research, Natural Chemotherapeutics Research Laboratory.

Qualifications for Registration

We had concerns from stakeholders, who were uncomfortable with the qualifications. The committee recommended that the Bill should be amended to reflect the following:

a) 	The council should be given the mandate in consultation with the minister to determine the courses that the different practitioners should train in;

b) 	The required training and knowledge in the practice should be specified and undertaken by all persons intending to practice traditional and complementary medicine;

c) 	Upon conclusion of training, a certificate of proficiency should be issued to enable the trainees register for the relevant practice with the council;

d) Practitioners should specify the kind of practice being registered, whether traditional or complementary.

e) 	The council should have an annual publication of registered traditional or complementary medical practitioners.

Powers of Entry and Inspection 

The committee recommended that the Bill should be amended to provide for the mandate of inspection to be for a qualified staff of the council who has knowledge and expertise in traditional and complementary medicine.

False Advertisement and Exploitation of Patients 

The committee recommends that a clause be included to prevent practitioners from advertising their practice except where the contents of their adverts have been authenticated and authorized by the council.

Dual Practice 

The committee recommends that an individual who is qualified should be allowed to exercise their freedom of professionalism as long as they meet the requirements for both practices.

Use and Non-use of Medical Titles 

The committee recommends that the practitioners of traditional and complementary medicine should desist from using the title “doctor” or “nurse” without the prerequisite qualification as will be determined by the council.

Offenses and Penalties 

The committee recommends that – 

i) 	The Bill should be amended to provide for prohibition of advertisement of a practice and referring to oneself as “herbal researcher” without authorization.

ii) 	The Bill should come out with sanctions against malpractice such as adulterations of traditional or herbal medicines.

In conclusion, considering the benefits of the Bill such as integration of traditional and complementary medicine into the healthcare system, creation of employment, research, training in clinical practice, sustainable development and protection of agro-business medicinal plants, and in pursuit of Sustainable Development Goal 3, the Bill is vital. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that this Bill entitled, “The Traditional and Complementary Medicine Bill, 2015” be passed into an Act of Parliament subject to the amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and members of the Committee on Health. Honourable members, the Bill has been signed by the necessary minimum number of Members; you are free to make your contributions.

5.08
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, woman representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for this initiative. 

Madam Speaker, many of the people in our communities have suffered a lot of risk because herbal medicine is accessible. At times, manageable situations that would have been handled in hospital are neglected because people prefer this medicine. Therefore, regulating it will help our people.

Secondly, these days in public places, for example as you travel from Adjumani to Kampala, you will find people selling what they call herbal medicine for different functions. They have convincing language and people buy the medicine. I know a case where a man reported that his body reacted to the liquid that he took. Therefore, I feel that regulating herbal medicine is very important for the health of our people.

Lastly, as we process this, I request the minister to come up with a specific strategy on the already existing supply. This is because these people are already in the market everywhere and they are moving to our villages and selling these products. How best are we going to handle this situation as we continue to process this into law? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.10
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the minister for the report. 

I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. Traditional herbal medicine is got from the environment and it was being used before we got modern medicine from Europe and elsewhere. Personally, I feel that research should be carried out; if we do not do so, we may not get this medicine because it is getting extinct. We get most of this herbal medicine from forests, swamps, valleys, mountain slopes and gardens. However, with environmental degradation, deforestation and clearing of swamps, where shall we get these medicines from? 

There is a medicine that we locally call “murondo” in my language and it is got from the root of a tree. It increases our appetite for food and it helps us in curing certain illnesses in our intestines. However, it is fast disappearing because of degradation of the environment and clearing of trees and swamps.

Madam Chairperson and honourable minister, how viable will this herbal medicine be when our environment is being degraded? Thank you very much. 

5.12
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson. I come from Butaleja and we are specialists in this kind of medicine. I talk with confidence because we are consultants in traditional medicine. 

There are diseases which modern people, who have gone to school, cannot cure, and this has to be on record. Honourable chairperson, when you talk about minimum qualifications, you should know that to be a traditional herbalist, it does not matter how educated you are. Therefore, I would like to request that the issue of minimum qualifications, sijui what, is deleted.

Madam Speaker, we have elders in our constituency –(Interruption) 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I think this might be the first time I am rising on a point of order in 2019. Hon. James Waluswaka is my very good friend. He has just spoken something in a language I do not understand. For purposes of the record, I do not know whether it will not be right to expunge that part of his submission. Is it in order for him to use another language that is not accepted in this House?

THE SPEAKER: What language did he use?

MR AOGON: He said something like “sijui”. 

THE SPEAKER: Swahili is the second language of this country. Proceed.

MR WALUSWAKA: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. That is why the people of Butaleja will die with you, if it means death.

Honourable members, traditional medicine is very critical. Honourable minister, you talked of advertisements. In Butaleja, people who do these things do not advertise – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR WALUSWAKA: In Butaleja, people who practice herbal medicine do not advertise themselves in the media - on radio or television. However, they also do not request for money; they heal you and it is up to you to appreciate them. With the issue of advertisement, Madam Speaker, we have seen fake people advertising and people taking funny medicine. 

Otherwise, honourable chairperson and minister, we would like to totally – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Oshabe to take the Floor, I would like to say something. Honourable members, we should take this issue of local medicine seriously. Last year, I went to Bunyaruguru and I visited one of the camping sites. I was just taking a census to see how many people visit the place in a year and I was told that a certain muzungu visits it every year. He usually collects samples and goes away. I asked them how long he had been coming and they told me for about seven years. I thought this man might be stealing our medicine. For them, it was a casual thing. 

5.17
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Waluswaka had almost scared me when he started talking about matters related to sorcery and witchcraft. However, when I looked at the Bill, I realised that it is purely about herbal medicine. I would like to request the Members to think about herbal medicine. 

Madam Speaker, one of the best countries in medical research is India. Kerala State, for example, has the best health indicators in the world. When you look at their Gross Domestic Product (GDP) versus their health indicators, Kerala ranks the highest. Their biggest strategy is that they allowed research in herbal and complementary medicine. 

I encourage honourable members to read about the state of Kerala and herbal medicine. You will pick the best story, which I would love to encourage through this Bill. If Uganda took this up, did enough research and made sure that all the herbalists are given opportunity to research, I think we would move a big step. If you compare what these people who pick our –(Member timed out.) 

5.19
MR ALEX BURUNDO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Herbal medicine is very important. Honourable members, you will notice that there are some young boys that always carry some roots locally known as mulondo. Men take it and it helps their manhood become strong in one way or the other. Where do we get it from? It is locally got. If we could try and improve on it, this medicine would be very important and we would also be able to export it.

On the other hand – this is a very serious matter and many of you are getting this - recently, there was a gentleman –(Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I request for clarification about mulondo as you have just said. It is true we are seeing many people carrying these roots, but I would like you to clarify as to whether you have tested it so that we can get feedback about what we normally hear. (Laughter) Could you please enlighten us on the use of mulondo?

MR BURUNDO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You will all attest and accept that if these young men –(Interruption)

MR MASIKA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Burundo is talking about is very true, according to research carried out by the Chinese. I was in China for almost 20 years and I know that we have been robbed of our precious medicines. China is known all over the world for producing herbal medicine. I happened to see mulondo being taken to China and a small piece costs $300. It is taken for that purpose which hon. Burundo has been talking about. (Laughter)

To add to that information, we, Africans, have a lot of herbal medicines which other countries have been taking away and they go and grow them on thousands of acres. I know quite a number of herbal medicines from Africa which are grown in China on thousands of acres. For us in Africa, our grandparents never wrote these things down; they would just pass the message on to their grandsons whom they liked. Also, when they went to pick these medicinal herbs, many times they would go at night while hiding and they would grind them on stones to disguise where the herbs came from. However, our counterparts teach their children and they know about decantation and the amount to take. They have harvested billions of dollars from Africans because we have not organised ourselves. Otherwise, Africa is the continent which produces everything. Thank you very much.

MR BURUNDO: Thank you, hon. Masika, for giving me that information. Hon. Namayanja, I have to assure you that if mulondo was not being bought, these boys would not be selling it. When you go around, you will find many of them carrying mulondo and that means there is market for it. Even Members of Parliament could be getting this thing from here. (Laughter)

As I conclude, hon. Masika recently had a very serious problem with diabetes, and you know there is no medicine for diabetes. Hon. Masika was very sick and after the hospital medicine was not helping us, we contacted one herbalist from Busoga –(Interjection)- No, I cannot, unless you contact me privately. We got this medicine and gave it to hon. Masika. Hon Masika has come back to life now. He is a living example of the value of herbal medicine. 

Therefore, I support this Bill 100 per cent, apart from those fraudsters who take people into the shrines saying that they are going to give them medicine and at the end of the day, they rape women and do all sorts of bad things.

5.26
MS ROSE MUTONYI (Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a living testimony of the value of herbal medicine; therefore, I support this Bill so that maybe it will help us in future to do what the Chinese are doing. I delivered my firstborn and my breasts got swollen. When they took me to the hospital, they gave me some medicine to swallow but after a week, there was no improvement. 

I could not even touch the breasts and press out the milk because they were very hard and painful. I had a cousin who unfortunately died without telling us what he used. He brought for me a herb which he had pounded with bamboo. He put it on the teats and told my mother to blow the pipe. As soon as she blew through that pipe, the milk started jetting out and by the end of the day, the breasts were getting better.

Secondly, the good medicine for ringworms is not what we get from the hospitals. In the hospitals, you are advised to take 30 tablets and also apply an ointment. However, for the local medicine, it is a matter of smearing it on the ringworm and the thing disappears. I have to support this Bill so that we make it official instead –(Member timed out.)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information which I would like to give is that right from the start of this debate, there are Members who have proved to be consultants and hon. Mutonyi is also emerging as one of them. Hon. Florence Namayanja seems to be having a rich experience as well. Therefore, the information that I would like to give is that I looked at hon. Florence Namayanja and she seemed to have very critical information because when hon. Mutonyi was submitting, she was giving good gestures here. (Laughter)

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, on the medicine for the breasts, I am also a living testimony. When you are breastfeeding, sometimes the milk gets clogged in the breasts. In fact, we should have a session to tell the breastfeeding mothers about this. Sometimes, we take tablets that are not helpful. I also testify about the herbal medicine which is just put on the breasts and the breasts unblock and the milk comes out. It saves mothers a lot of pain. Therefore, I also support the Bill because it is going to help us a lot to regulate even those people who are –(Member timed out.)

5.31
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Much as I support the motion, I think the Bill focuses on those that operate outside the publicly funded healthcare system. The Bill has not been exhaustive because there should be two categories of medicine. There are those who heal by applying spiritual powers and those who use botanically based herbal remedies. The Bill should come out clearly on those who they are going to regulate because they should regulate both. The spiritual powers could be negative or positive. You have heard lots of airtime –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, is what you are discussing part of this Bill?

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, let me concentrate. I was categorically focusing on those who use botanically based herbal remedies to heal - traditional healers. When this Bill was introduced, the national council –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the hands that prepared this Bill. 

Local medicines have gone a long way in solving challenges that sometimes our doctors have failed to handle with medicines that we know. I will give the example of snakebites. There is a specific snake – I think it is a cobra – which once it bites you and you go to hospital, be sure that you will go to meet the Creator. However, once somebody applies this local medicine on you, you are certain to live. What needs to take place is a lot of research and development so that we pull it from that level of being very local to the level of display in a proper pharmacy and then we shall see change.

I have seen in many places pregnant women getting certain herbs and putting them in water and you wonder why when they are going to bathe, they have some leaves in the water. I think these herbs have some kind of element that helps them deliver safely. Therefore, we still need a lot of research so that we develop that medicine so that someone just swallows it instead of bathing with it.

Madam Speaker, there is medicine for treatment of measles among children. When I was growing up, I saw many people struggling and measles was killing many children. However, using these traditional medicines, most people came out of these challenges. Therefore, we need to do more research. The problem we have is that those who innovated and –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, we are talking about a very important subject. First, the Bill is about regulation but the minister, in her justification of the Bill, talks about prohibition. I think that is simply because they have not done enough to understand herbal medicine.

China was supporting a company here called Prometra and they used to invest over $20 million annually in supporting research in herbal medicine. As a result, they were actually taking almost all our species from Uganda to China. The development of herbal medicine in China is largely a success because of Uganda. Members need to understand that China used to work with Buganda Traditional Healers Association, who specifically deal in herbal medicine, and also put a lot of money in research in Uganda. 

What do we need to do as we talk about herbal medicine? First, we need to support research, so that we do not just limit those people who are administering herbal medicine without any scientific information. They even advertise more than the Ministry of Health. On TV and radio, you see that they do a lot more advertisement than the Ministry of Health; that means they understand their trade. 

What this Bill needs to bring out is the limitation of the exportation of some of these species, because they pass through Entebbe Airport. We get peanuts and they get a lot of money. They even use these herbal medicines to make many other products like perfumes -(Member timed out.)

5.37
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report. Medicine is life. Whenever we deal with medicine – whether herbal or traditional – we need to be very careful. My colleagues were giving examples of how herbal medicines saved them and how they benefitted. On the same note, we have lost very many lives because of poor administration of these herbal medicines.

Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson. In the report, he talked about traditional medicine, herbal medicine, alternative medicine and local medicine. I would like to ask for definitions and clarifications. What is the difference and how do we define those different terms used?

Finally, this Bill is very important; let the administration of herbal or local medicine be done within the medical profession. We have some people who are not professional at all and they give any type of herbal medicine to anybody and we end up losing lives. The Bill is therefore very important. Let these herbal medicines be regulated so that we help people. It is true that there are local medicines that are very useful and when given to an individual, you can see a change. However, it should be done –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR ANDREW KALUYA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Madam Speaker, I would also like to support the motion by saying that we need to streamline how we will manage these herbal medicines. It is very clear that many of our people in the villages have difficulty in accessing medical facilities like clinics, hospitals or health centres. Their first line of treatment is always herbal medicine. This has created a lot of confidence in the communities. 

People who cannot afford quick transport to medical facilities believe that herbal medicines are the best solution for them. What we need to do is help them in terms of research and maybe building their confidence by affirming that what they are doing is okay. Without a proper law, these people will always look at what they are doing as something illegal.

Madam Speaker, I believe that what we need to do is to push Government to inject a lot of money into this department for research and empowering people who know how to administer herbal medicines. Doctors who went to Makerere University do not know how to mix herbs. If we are going to integrate herbal medicine into health centres, what we need to do is to empower those people who know how to use the herbal medicines to administer it. In fact, people believe that it is the first medicine for healing; when you use herbal medicine –(Member timed out.)

5.41
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I wish to join colleagues to thank the minister and the committee for the wide research they made.

Madam Speaker, for quite some time in this country, genuine traditional herbalists have been misunderstood as sorcerers and witchdoctors as they carried out their activities. This has led us to a misguided path in recognising the effectiveness of traditional herbal medicines. Now that the World Health Organisation (WHO) is giving a nod to this type of medicine, as my colleague has said, what is left for us is to review our allocation of resources to research.

Madam Speaker, although some herbs may be poisonous, many of them could be effective. We, therefore, need to carry out research to ensure that we do not endanger the lives of our population by taking medicines that would be dangerous to their lives.

Madam Speaker, about ten years ago, we heard that in Yaoundé, Cameron, some tests were made on a herb by scientists to see how effectively it would treat HIV/AIDS. It was found to be effective, although used on a monkey –(Member timed out.)

5.43	
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too support the motion. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to add to what my colleague has said, that some genuine herbalists have been misunderstood because of some who masquerade within the traditional medicine practice. My mind is still at variance because of the experience I went through. 

Some time back in 1987, I joined one of the liberation struggles as a young child, the Kinyamusitu movement. When I joined, we visited a witchdoctor and we were supposed to get medicines to give us strength not to fear anything –(Interjections)- I am sharing an experience. However, when the witchdoctor was administering his authority, herbs dropped from the top of the house to the ground and they were real herbs in the form of leaves. We were told to eat some of them and tie some on our hands - (Interruption)

MR MULINDWA ISAAC: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague is talking about witchdoctors and yet the report we are debating is about traditional and complementary medicines. Is the honourable member in order to talk about witchdoctors at this moment? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I did not hear; but concentrate on the Bill.

MR MBAJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You cannot talk about herbal medicines without mentioning herbs. I am giving you my experience where I saw herbs dropping, real herbs. This was an experience. This is why I say that I am at odds. How do you differentiate between herbs which have come from the wrong side and the ordinary herbs? It is a variance; that is why I said my mind is at variance.

Secondly, some of us come from areas surrounded by parks and forests where we get these herbs. However, these places have been declared national parks and some are forests but they have been gazetted. Therefore, it is not easy for some herbalists to access some of these herbs. It is, therefore, important that we provide in the law an opportunity for herbalists to easily access this medicine.

Thirdly, many of the practitioners did not get a chance to go to school and they are too old to go to school in order to access this training. I would like to therefore suggest that it is important that we strength the transitional provision to provide for them to continue practicing herbal medicine even without the necessary proposed training. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.47
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This morning, I came from Soroti. I have an aging mother-in-law in my house who for some time has been using products from moringa. There is a lady who makes moringa capsules, leaves, powder and some is eaten in the food, among others. When my mother-in-law takes this product, she feels healthy. So, this morning as I was coming, I passed by to pick some supplies, which I will send to my mother-in-law. 

That notwithstanding, I know that God created medicines. When the world was created, plants were supposed to be our food and medicine. Indeed, the western medicines that we swallow come from plants. However, even as we do this, like many colleagues have said, the spiritual people use these same plants but they add other powers. 

I would like to be comforted, especially when you talk about traditional medicines. How I wish we could call them natural medicines. When you call them “traditional” then you are attracting those other practices including witchcraft. Can we differentiate, so that we know it is about natural herbs, trees and what God created that we would like to extract good products from?

Madam Speaker, when I look at the groups that were consulted, they include a team of witchdoctors from Uganda ne Dagala Lyayo. That is a group that has a mix of witchdoctors and traditional practitioners. You will deny it here but they are witchdoctors. How sure are we that we are separating these and making sure that we are talking about research and then putting the others aside?

Madam Speaker, we do not want Ugandans to be lured into something that is not approved and that will endanger them both physically and spiritually. I thank you.

5.50
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA	(JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in welcoming this Bill and more particularly, the aspect of protection of medicines. Some of the concerns being raised of companies coming here from China to take our herbs or drugs, if you want to call them so, concerns the aspect of protection. Therefore, part of the focus should be on facilitating owners of this knowledge to have these indigenous medicines patented, especially at international level. Eventually, if discoveries are made here and treatment is realised, we would be able to protect our traditional healers. 

If we do not do this, we run a very big risk of being exploited. As of now, the Chinese will come here, take the herbs and make drugs, go to international pharmaceutical companies or the World Intellectual Property Organisation and patent the drugs whose origin is here. Therefore, this Bill should find means of protecting indigenous medicine for purposes of protecting our people. Thank you.

5.52
MS BAKIREKE BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To underplay the importance of herbal medicine in the treatment of ailments is to assume that before the coming of the colonisers, we were not able to treat ourselves, which is wrong. Some countries have gone ahead even to prescribe the doses of local herbs; for example, in India, there is a certain type of cherry and the Indians know that six of these cherries are equivalent to an aspirin. 

Madam Speaker, what we are talking about as herbal medicine here is part of international medical trade. In some countries, it is a branch of medicine that is even taught in law school. What we need is to professionally supervise herbalists. There is a young man I am looking after and he is suffering from sickle-cell disease. He was receiving medicine from Mulago Hospital until one time we were told about a herbalist in Masaka. The boy went to Pakwach College with a jerrican of that medicine and for some time now, he has not been down with any problem.

What we need is to professionally supervise our herbalists because these medicines are simple; they have few side effects and are inexpensive. They are also more available to our people than the conventional medicines. What we should do is highly regulate the advertisement- (Member timed out.)

5.54
MR JONHSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you. I would like to support the motion. 

In paragraph 5.4, they talked about collaboration and that is where our emphasis should be. As we speak now, we do not only have herbal medicines but they have gone ahead to come up with soft drinks and energy drinks in all supermarkets. However, those drinks do not indicate duration and even expiry period. Since many of our people are weak these days, they are buying these drinks, which are so many in our supermarkets. 

This Bill should therefore cover the drinks that are produced by herbalists. That is my area of interest. Otherwise, the Bill is good and it should be supported.

5.55
MR EMMANUEL KALULE SSENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion and I have three issues to raise. First of all, there are very effective herbal medicines. I would like to request the Government to set up a centre where all the herbalists could report and start carrying out research on these drugs, so that they improve and patent them and they can be distributed through the medical profession.

I know of a man who has a very effective drug for cough. He was asking me where he could take his drug so that it is patented. I did not know where he should go. He is still in the village and he keeps pestering me on where he should go. Therefore, why don’t we set up a centre where these people can report their medicines or carry out research on the medicines –(Interruption)

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: The information I would like to give you is that the centre you are talking about is clearly established in Wandegeya. It is called the National Chemotherapeutics Research Laboratory. It was put in place before Independence, in 1957, and money is being appropriated to it by Parliament. 

MR KALULE SSENGO: Thank you for that information. In fact, I was moving to that. I was going to ask a number of questions. This is where we have Dr Nambatya. However, very many of our people are not aware of this centre. Why don’t we make it public? Why don’t we inform them so that they take their drugs there?

Secondly, let this centre be expanded to handle all the drugs in the country. I know a man in Kireka called Mandevu who is able to treat some cancers but he does not know where to report his trade.

Thirdly, many of these herbalists are old people. They are soon going to die and when they do, they will go with their knowledge. How do we capture their knowledge before they die? How do we make use of their medicines?  I would suggest, -(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the minister for this Bill. 

For centuries, Africans were surviving on herbal medicines. Unfortunately, as time went on, there was some confusion that came in. Even in this particular Bill, the terms “traditional medicines” and “herbal medicines” have been used interchangeably and yet they do not mean the same thing. Traditional medicine is based on traditional or cultural beliefs which have no empirical basis while herbal medicines are based on the use of herbs and their scientific results can be proven. We need to have a clear distinction between the two in this Bill.

The use of the term “traditional medicine” has been abused by witchcraft practitioners including those who sacrifice kids. We need to promote the regulation of herbal medicine practitioners so that there is some control. This will help us know who does what and the processes through which medicine can be verified for effective use in order to avoid any harm to our people. Otherwise, there are a lot of herbs here, which are very useful –(Member timed out.)

6.00
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Research shows that nearly a quarter of all the modern medicines are delivered from the natural products, the indigenous medicines that we use today. Therefore, this shows that the indigenous medicine is a resource for primary health care, innovation and discovery.

World Health Organisation statistics show that a number of patients use complementary medicines especially those with multiple ailments; we are told that 41 per cent in Spain, 70 per cent in Canada, 82 per cent in Australia use indigenous medicine.

Therefore, as a country especially from the rural setting we realise that these medicines are also used a lot. I therefore, agree with the committee recommendations that we should regulate the usage of the indigenous and complementary medicines.

We should first of all invest in research. This research will help us boost and have the right quantities because our worry is how you would tell that that is the right quantity used of a given plant, say for a child under five years, or for an adult of 30 years.

Therefore, when we invest in research we shall even discover more and come up with may be even those that are unknown and we shall boost the medical schools. However, it will also help to form a council because there is a proposal of a council. This council will help us to regulate the advertising claims.

Some of these people who advertise are unscrupulous; they will mix anything. Someone can even mix ash. But if we had a council to control this, it will help to control –(Member timed out.)

6.02
MR JOSEPH KASOZI (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo,): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice in support of the committee report and thank the minister and the Government for this timely Bill. 

It is quite evident that those countries that have invested in this kind of indigenous and complementary medicine have really saved much especially on their health budget. You save money instead of importing western medicine when there is complementary medicine around and is encouraged, money is saved and the health budget - the Ministry of Health is helped. Therefore, I would like to thank the minister.

Madam speaker, if we pass this Bill into law, we shall have unlocked the potential of complementary and indigenous medicine which potential is already here. The potential is there, people have been in this industry, unsupported and people have been testifying here of how various ailments have been cured. Therefore, if we pass this Bill, it will be a green light to unlocking this potential.

My major concern is one; we have seen these herbalists whom we are praising struggling on their own. You know processing -(Member times out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute. That is an important point.

MR JOSEPH KASOZI: You know struggling to process their medicine on their own and yet we passed- Government created an innovation fund which we appropriated some money into. I just wish the minister could come up and interact with the Minister for Science and Technology so that these herbalists can also access that fund to help them process their medicine instead of struggling on their own.

6.05
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker, the committee and the honourable minister for the Bill and the report respectively. Uganda has been well endowed with natural forests and shrubs most of which are medicinal plants. A lot has been said here, but as we know, there are so many concoctions; ways of administering these drugs when they are produced, ways of producing them and quantities are not specified.

Therefore, as my colleagues have said, we need to invest primarily in research so that people can have the confidence that the medicine they are taking is safe. Also to have statistics and record cases of people who have taken herbal medicines and have cured. Also if we invest in research, then we will know what do you take, at what stage do you graduate to the other medicine so that everything is clear to give confidence to the patients.

Madam speaker, these people have their association or if they do not have, for them to organise into an association so that when the medicine is produced; for example in a factory, then they can get shares. They can buy shares and benefit from this medicine because –(Member timed out.)

6.07
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report and also the minister for bringing this Bill. Herbal medicine is very important. Many of our people have been surviving from it; am sure most of us have tasted herbal medicine in one way or another.

It is true it is useful but there are things which we need to make clear so that we do not take wrong medicine or bad herbs. One is a method of preparation; some of them just use any kind of water to prepare especially if they are not boiled, you are likely to get worms from it.

Also, what kind of dose is required? There is a medicine for gonorrhoea and it is very effective but if you take overdose, you die. Therefore, it is very necessary to know the type of dose to be taken. Our herbalists must be open. If they are preparing say, aloe-Vera, it will help Malaria, or ABCD. 

However, there are some herbalists whose one medicine cures everything. At times you wonder whether they are telling the truth. They may not and even some move from Buganda here to Koboko and establish themselves. Some just use local leaves like pigeon pee leaves, cassava leaves and pretend that it is real medicine and because you feel psychology –(Member timed out.)

6.09
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also support the Bill except that I would like to amend the title and call it, “Development and Regulation of Indigenous Medicine”.

Unless we are here pretending; I am sure all of us here have at one time or another taken this traditional medicine. God does not make a mistake. Tropical diseases are treated with medicine from the tropics. 

I know of somebody who travelled with malaria to Malaysia and he nearly died. They put him in an isolated room and they were not giving him any medicines until they sent for Artemether, which is also grown here. They sent for it and the man was cured but otherwise he had taken a tropical disease where it could not be treated.

Madam Speaker, we have invested a lot of money in oil exploration. I see development of this medicine as oil. If we invested in it, it would save us a lot of foreign exchange, which we spend in importing what we call Western Medicine. Even the so called Western Medicine is made from herbs, food stuff and other things, which we can conveniently find here. 

In support what hon. Nambooze said, I also have a nephew who has sickle cells but he is taking traditional medicine and he is doing so well. He does not have to go for blood transfusion nor admissions –(Member timed out)

6.11
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee and the ministry for at last coming up with this. It is quite timely.

I am a believer in the efficacy of traditional or herbal medicine although I also have a problem with the title. I do not know why the committee decides to amend it into “Traditional Medicine”. I thought that if they left it as the “Indigenous Medicine” it would make cover and make a distinction between the other evil part, which is a fear of many.

The Bill is going to help us in the research, standardisation and the regulation of herbal medicines. Like my other colleague had said, traditional herbs are in our forests, which we are depleting. I would like to suggest that we take seriously the restoration of our natural forests so that we can have a source for this herbal medicine for large scale production as we go in for it.

About herbal medicine vis-à-vis witchdoctors and witchcraft there are some churches, which are preaching against herbal medicine and for the correct reason; because of the mix. God gave us herbs for eating and treatment. When you go and pick a herb to treat yourself, it is very safe. It is only when the witchdoctor pours in some other things and enchants those others onto it that it becomes evil. 

I think this Bill is going to go a long way in sensitising our people that herbal –(Member timed out)

6.13
MR JOAKINO ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the minister for this Bill.

I highly support the Bill because as members have said, many years ago we relied on this herbal medicine. Even to date, many rural areas rely on herbal medicine. In my area, we have some herbalists who, as a colleague pointed out, use leaves when you are beaten by a snake or stung by a scorpion. Once the leaves are rubbed on that part where a snake has beaten you, the pain goes and you feel better as fast as possible. It is true that our herbal medicine is of great importance.

Madam Speaker, I have no problem calling this medicine herbal or traditional. When you look at the various conferences, for example, we have the 6th International Conference on Medicine Practices, it is herbal and medicine practices. This will be in Dubai between 14 – 15th.

We also have the 5th International Global Summit on herbal and traditional medicine, which will be in Auckland in New Zealand between 24 – 25 October 2019. There is still value that it is traditional medicine.

It is important that we also begin participating in some of these conferences so that we see – (Member timed out)

6.15
MR IBANDA RWEMULIKYA (NRM, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, honourable minister and the committee for the Bill.

I would like to also add my voice by supporting the Bill but I have few issues. First, there was the issue of the education courses. Some of our herbalists are not educated and I do not know how you are going to categorise those who are educated and those who are not. If they are going to do courses, what are those who are not educated going to do? I think there should be formal and non-formal courses so that the other one who did not go to school can also still do the work.

I would also think that it is all about streamlining now. All of us support but we have been getting people who have not been acting in the right way. Let us invest in research and streamline so that people who are doing this kind of practice are well known and they should not take it as something illegal.

Lastly, on the issue of advertisement, these are everywhere; radios, televisions and phones. I do not know how you are going to enforce these people not to advertise. I do not know what you have in the Bill that will do that work because these people do their advertisement and it is hard for you to stop them.

However, those who have done it a wrong way, we have lost people. You find that they dupe people that they should not go to hospitals. By the time someone – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 27 members have contributed and I have not heard anyone speak against this Bill. I think everybody is in agreement. Are you against the Bill? Okay, the final ones.

6.18
MR FREDRICK ANGORA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I would like to add to what has been said by our colleagues is that there is a company in Tanzania that is making herbal medicine called “Ngetwa”. They do Ngetwa I, II and it is highly marketed and the demand is so high. 

At one point in time, I also happened to have bought this Ngetwa. It is something like sand or something mixed up. My only challenge is that as these medicines get promoted, the problem is the prescription in terms of quantity; how many spoons do you take for this to assure yourself of healing?

The challenge that we have is that people want to take these medicines in bigger quantities and that is when they feel they get assurance heal faster. I would like to add my voice to research such that we can help many of our herbalists to ensure proper use and absorption of these medicines by also supporting them on their patent rights. Very soon we will be having people coming to steal this good knowledge of some of our people and render them jobless when their ideas have been taken and they will be used again – (Interruption)

MR MUSOKE: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to give is that since we have “Skilling Uganda”, why can’t we incorporate this in that programme?

MR ANGURA: Thank you. Finally, recently we passed a loan for innovation but we seem to be looking at it only in relation to electronic and other aspects. It is high time the Ministry of Health moved very fast to liaise with the Minister of Science and Technology – (Member timed out)

6.20
MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Bill is a welcome and a good beginning to regulating this industry. I will confess that these days I am taking a lot of Prunus Africana and everybody is reading about Prunas African in as far as preventing prostate cancer.

I also once survived dying of malaria after taking alovera tablets made by a Ugandan. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the Bill. Honourable minister, what we must do is to empower this council to be able to regulate and even issue certificates, certify the medicines that are already on the market.

We must empower it to give a stamp like the one of Uganda National Bureau of Standards to certify the medicine. We are taking so many things without standardizing and by the time we remember to go to the hospital, we are almost dying.

Therefore, there is a danger of relying on traditional medicine or indigenous medicine and yet we do not know what we are taking in prescription. Therefore, we must empower them to make sure that they standardize and issue certificates for practitioners.

There are also universities and tertiary institutions that have taken up tropical medicine and alternative medicines. We must find a way to collaborate between the schools and this council and have something to do with incubating these cottage industries for commercial production. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to disagree with the recommendation of the committee that the title of the Bill be changed from “Indigenous and Complementary Medicine” to “Traditional Medicine”. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want us to sit here and legalize of those traditional practices which are so ungodly and dangerous to human life. For example, there are some of these traditional medicine men and women whose treatment is so harmful to people that when they are consulted, they give love portions to be administered to husbands - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, the honourable Member of Parliament has said that she is very opposed to the word “tradition” because it is ungodly. Is she in order to call the word tradition ungodly?

THE SPEAKER: Can you explain what you meant by ungodly.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think it is very important to be attentive, I said traditional practices which are ungodly.  I was still going to explain some of these ungodly traditional practices which used to exist in our communities. For example, I come from Lango; they used to strip women naked. 

Is that the tradition that we want to promote? We are now talking about medicine where they give love portion to the women to go and kill their husbands. This is not right, Madam Speaker. That is why I am saying that we stick to the title of the Bill that talk about indigenous and complementary medicine so that we do not open the wounds for those traditional practices, which are not good for our people.

Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR DURU: Thank you. The information I would like to give is that I have gone to this hospital several times. Where need be, a doctor requires you to strip naked, now what is wrong with our traditional medicine if it requires being naked? (Laughter)You have gone there for treatment, if it requires you to be naked, you need to be naked. Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the honourable member is serious with what he is saying. We have known that in this country, some of those practices, which entail striping a client naked normally, affect women. They are rapped, girls are mutilated and where unspeakable things are done to people. Is the honourable member in order –(Interjection)– Of course, a medical doctor cannot perform surgery on you when you are dressed. At least that part of the body that is supposed to be operated on has to be naked. It depends on the kind of surgery. 

However, you cannot expose this to traditional practices. That is going to cause abuse of people’s rights. Is the honourable members in order to blanket what we know as risky and cause this Parliament to okay it in a way of endangering the lives of the people of Uganda especially women?

THE SPEAKER: No. I do not think he had listened to what hon. Alum was saying. He did not listen.

6.27
MR DEOGATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to thank the committee more especially the minister for enabling this Bill to come to this House. We have been waiting for it since 2012 but finally it has come.

Madam Speaker, traditional medicine is here to stay. It has been here for a long time, it has been administered on human beings and animals in general and it has proved to work.

Madam Speaker, I carried out research on traditional medicine when I was at the university in 1992 in central Uganda. My results are very clear; they are on the shelves of Makerere University Library. Literature is available not only in Uganda but in China, India, Japan supporting the use of traditional medicine.

Madam Speaker, what we need to do is to regulate the sector. Harmonize things like dosage, how do you administer things and standardizing things that are being produced.

In sectors where trade is being carried out, there are so many people who are - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, colleague for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you is that the issue is the mode of administering. When you go to the western medicine, the doctor can do surgery on a patient, are you suggesting that even in traditional herbal medicine, if that person has been authenticated by the ministry can use his herbal medicine and do surgery on his patients?

MR KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, that one is okay. It is done everywhere. It can be done. What we need to do is to empower our natural chemotherapy research laboratory by giving it more funds to carry out research on this traditional medicine. Results have proved that medicine can work. Standards have improved since 1992. When you look at what is available now, you see a very big change. Therefore, I support this Bill 100 per cent and I thank you so much for enabling it to come to Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the word “traditional”, I understand it is guideline of WHO- that is what they use. It is also wider because it involves the bonesetters and traditional birth attendants and that it wider than herbal because herbal is just about the herbs.

In addition, to state that on page 24 of the report, there is a recommendation there to support continuous growth and development of traditional medicine and then observation on page 23 to promote continuous training, skilling in traditional medicine and for regulation. Therefore, I want to put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, this work is for the Government.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INDIGENOUS AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINE BILL, 2015

6.30
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

6.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Michael Bukenya): Clause 2 reads, “Objects of the Act.” Consequently: 

    (i)  Replace the word, “indigenous” with “traditional” wherever it appears in the Bill. 
	The justification is to conform to the Ministry of Health Framework on Traditional and Complementary Medicine and WHO guidelines on traditional medicine.

    (ii) In paragraph (c), insert the word “scope” between “acceptable” and “standard”
	The justification is to provide for regulation of the scope of a practitioner of either traditional or complementary medicine. Scope sets limits of what a practitioner is allowed to do based on competence. 

    (iii) In paragraph (e), delete the phrase “such as indigenous knowledge in health among its members.” 
	The justification is to remove ambiguity in the sentence. 

    (iv) Replace paragraph (i) with the following: 
“
    (i) To promote collaboration and integration of traditional and complementary medicine with conventional medicine.” 
The justification is to provide for integration of indigenous and complementary method in the health care system of Uganda, as is alluded to in the various health policies. 

    (v) Insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (i) to provide as follows: 

“(j) 	To provide for the regulation of herbal medicine and herbal practise.”

The justification is that herbal medicine is a common practise in Uganda and yet it is unregulated, it is vital that a specific mention of it is made in the law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

DR BUKENYA: Clause 5 reads, “Composition of the Council.” Replace the entire clause with the following: 
“
    (1) The council shall consist of the following members: 
    (a) Two representatives of the traditional medicine practitioners association, one of whom shall be a herbalist. 
    (b) Two representatives of the complementary medicine practitioners association. 
    (c) A representative from National Drug Authority. 
    (d) The Commissioner for Health Services (Clinical Services) in the ministry or his or her nominee.
    (e) The Director of Research at the natural Chemotherapeutical Research Institute or his or her nominee.
    (2) The registrar appointed under section 16 of the Act shall be an ex-officio member and the secretary to the council. 
    (3) The minister shall appoint one of the members of the council to be chairperson of the council. 
    (4) The members referred to in subsection (1) (a) and (b) shall be appointed by the minister.” 

The justification is that a smaller council is more effective in delivery of services and it will reduce on the expenditure associated with having a large council. 

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES)(Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to that proposal. We are okay with that. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The issue of gender sensitivity here is not brought on board, especially on the traditional – not the technical people. I would like to propose that one of the members or at least a third of the members should be women because women are usually marginalised. If they are on the council, they can report.  

I would also like to propose that we get someone from police to be part of the council.

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, I see under the composition of the council in (f) it is an anthropologist or sociologist and we are talking about continuing with a deep research in this area. I think it would be important, not only to have an anthropologist or sociologist, but we also need an ethnobotanist because these are the people who are studying the herbs. Therefore, it is very important that they are included there and I know a number of them in these universities. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing a retention of 5 (c)? 

MR ANGURA: Yes, we need anthropologists, sociologists and also ethnobotanist because those are the people doing research in herbs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have alerted you many times that when we intend to amend the Bill, we give notice; we circulate it. Therefore, there should not be any amendments on the Floor. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, before the minister takes the Floor, I wonder what the real required qualifications are for the members that are going to be on this board. When you talk about the members of the traditional medicine practitioners association, I do not know their academic credentials at this stage. We are talking about qualifications because they are going to work with professors and serious researchers. In my view, we would actually delete that one –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want to delete? 

MR ABALA: My proposal is to delete the “traditional medicine practitioners association” because we are talking about qualifications. We are saying that someone must be at the level of a doctor and now we are talking about people who do not have any academic qualifications. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Abala, the other day when we went for the NRM celebration - there was a story in The Daily Monitor about a woman who is 108 years and has been a traditional birth attendant but she is not educated - 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, let me give information. It is not true that because it is a traditional association, therefore, the people are not educated. For instance, the Buganda traditional healers association has the following members: Prof. Kanyerezi who runs Kampala Hospital and Mr Galiwango who was Director of education in KCCA and other botanists involved. Therefore, let us not be confused by the word “traditional” because there are professionals actually. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, if that one is well defined and the people who are there have the ability to handle the council matters, I do not have a problem. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, let us accept the amendment on the issue of one-third just for emphasis in the law, although that is the practice. Let us accommodate it so that a third of the members of the council shall be women.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means we are introducing clause 5(f).

MS OPENDI: Yes. The council shall consist of the following- and immediately after that “…one-third of the members shall be women.” In addition, Madam Chairperson, I wish to inform Members that those who are proposing botanist, anthropologists, etc., should note that the National Chemotherapeutic Research Laboratory is the technical body that recruits these people. Therefore, they are already there in the intuition working and the director of National Chemotherapeutic Research is a member of the council and I think that covers the botanists and others.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to go back to that composition. In the broad sense of traditional healers, there are spiritualists. Therefore, if they give you a spiritualist, would you allow them to be on this council?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that a new sub clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a new clause immediately after clause 5 to provide for associations of traditional and complementary medicine practitioners. The numbering is in error but it should be titled “Associations of traditional and complementary medicine practitioners. 

    (1) The minister shall ensure that the associations of traditional and complementary medicine practitioners are formed. 
    (2) Subject to subsection (1), where the council is formed before the associations, the minister shall appoint interim representatives for traditional and complementary medicine practitioners until such a time when the associations are formed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put a question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed to.

Clause 6

DR BUKENYA: Clause 6 is on the object and functions of the council
    (i) In sub clause (2), insert in new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (c) as follows:
“(d) To set standards and quality control measures and assurances for traditional and complementary medicines and practitioners.
(e) 	To promote continuous training and skilling in traditional and complementary medicine.
"(f) 	To approve, in consultation with the education and research institutions, the curricula for training in traditional and complementary medicine in the institutions.”

Justification: The insertion of the new paragraphs is to:

    1. empower the council to set standards and quality control measures in order to ensure a clean practice and eliminate quack practitioners;
    2. encourage continuous training of the practitioners in order to keep them in check via new knowledge and procedures; and
    3. update them with new skills and avail special curriculum or training in the practice.

    (ii) Replace paragraph (f) with the following: “(f) To support the continuous growth and development of traditional and complementary medicine sector.” This is for grammatical correction.
    (iii) Replace paragraph (h) with the following: "(h) To receive complaints, investigate and discipline errant traditional and complementary medicine practitioners.” This is to empower the council to discipline errant practitioners found in breach of professional ethics.
    (iv) Insert a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (i) as follows: “To ensure the establishment of conservation areas and banks for medicinal plants.” This is to ensure preservation and continuity of medicinal plants.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 6 be mended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

DR BUKENYA: Clause 7 is on tenure of office of members. Replace the entire clause with the following:

“7. A member of the council other than a member appointed by virtue of his or her office shall hold office for three years and shall be eligible for re-appointment for only one more term.” This is for clarity purposes as to who tenure of office applies and for how long it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR BUKENYA: Ethics and intellectual property rights committee.

(i) 	Delete the words: “ethics and” appearing in the headnote. The justification is that the disciplinary committee created under clause 11 shall also work as the ethics committee.

(ii) 	Delete the word “also” appearing on the first line. The justification is that this will ensure clear legislative drafting language.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

New clause

DR BUKENYA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 13 to provide for collaboration with other agencies and institutions as follows:

“Collaboration with other agencies

In carrying out its functions, the council shall collaborate with the relevant agencies and institutions such the National Drug Authority, Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, Uganda National Research Organisation and Uganda Communications Commission, among others.”

This is to provide an avenue for collaboration between the council and other agencies doing similar or related work to avoid duplication of roles as well as interference in each other's functions.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, if I am not mistaken, about a year ago this country officially banned what we call “reflexology”. I do not know if the ban was lifted but I have seen it in the Bill. How do we intend to incorporate it?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, to inform hon. Osegge, yes, it is true that there was a ban. However, those who were practicing this went to court and we lost the case.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not want Members to worry. Actually, what she said is not there in the Bill. I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

DR BUKENYA: Clause 15 is on management of traditional and complementary medicine at the local government level
(i)	Replace the entire clause with the following: 

“Regional and district offices of the council

(1) 	The board may establish regional and district offices of the council in each region and district as determined by the council.

(2)	The regional or district office of the council shall perform the functions of the council in the region or district as the council may direct.

(3) 	The regional or district office of the council shall collaborate with the district health office of the district.” 

This is to facilitate the regulations and integration of traditional and complementary medicine practice at the district and regional levels.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, let me seek clarification from the committee chairperson. When you say “the board may”, what does it mean? If we are going to operationalise the Act and we are saying the “board may”, if I do not establish, how does it operate in those districts where the board has not been established?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, looking at what the committee chairperson has read, he is talking of management at district level. Would it be bad if we talked about national and later local level – you are now jumping and people are getting jammed up. We should define national level clearly and we come to the local level.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to find out this from the committee chairperson. In the old Bill, it was very specific because it said “the council shall be represented in the district local government health management structure”. However, in the new amendment he is talking about regional offices. Don’t you think it is better to be within the district than regional level?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think the wording of the committee is appropriate because the council is guided by the finances they have. The Bill is giving them alternatives – you may establish a regional office and if funds allow, you may go to the districts. Let us give them that flexibility just in case they do not have the finances to spread everywhere.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Chairperson, let us not leave everything at the centre. For example, we have traditional herbalists and healers and they have their associations and their leaders at the districts and their heads are also members of the council. Therefore, can I propose that at regional level the council can operate? However, why can’t they be a contact office in the district? These people have their leaders in each and every district.

Otherwise, if we say “may”, this thing will only be operated in Kampala and there will be no leadership down there. Madam Chairperson, these people at the district will not want salaries. They are not like the council but they will help to streamline to see who is who.

DR BUKENYA: First, I would like to make a correction that “board” should be substituted with “council”. It should read that, “The council may establish regional and district offices of the council in each of the regions.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will they decide that here we shall put a region?

DR BUKENYA: When you go into the detail, we talked about linkage with the district health office but we envisioned that we may have financial challenges at the beginning and start at the region and subsequently as the field grows, we will go to the districts. That is our ultimate target.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other question is, which are the regions? The ones which are at the gate there are 18 and those are the regions of Uganda.

MR MWIRU: Secondly and most importantly, when we talk about the commencement of this law, the minister may appoint different times for commencement but what is going to happen to that particular area where the council does not exist yet one of the functions of the council are incidental to the operation of these activities? How are we going to deal with that situation?

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition, does your certificate of financial implication have a regional and district offices?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the certificate covered the districts and as we speak now the traditional medicine is already officially recognised under the public private partnership for health in the Ministry of Health, and we already have desks at the district level. The certificate covered the districts but maybe for the regional offices since he said “may” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: First, what are the regions and what will be the rationale for creating the regions?

MS OPENDI: I think let us delete that for now. If there is need to amend in future we can always come back.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR ANGURA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 16 I have a concern on the drafting. Instead of what is written there, why don’t we say “There shall be a registrar of the council appointed by the minister in accordance with the advice of the council given in consultation with the Minister responsible for Public Service”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yeah, the words are very many. You are really talking about registrar of the council appointed by the minister. We will correct the language but the minister is appointing upon the advice of the council. Can the draft people correct that?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, for how long is the registrar going to hold office? Otherwise, it appears that he or she will hold office until his or her death. Of late, I have seen people given five years but this particular registrar seems to be holding office for permanent. May I request the chairperson and minister to make me understand this, so that we are on the same page?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what is the tenure of the registrar?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, the registrar shall hold office on such terms and conditions as shall be prescribed on the letter of appointment. We hope to come up with a regulation and this regulation will govern the appointment of the registrar.

Madam Chairperson, there is retirement – we have a Registrars for Uganda Medical and Dental Practitioners Council, the Nurses Council and Allied Health Professional Council. These people are just like civil servants and at the age of 60, they retire.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 17(5) says the registrar may delegate any of his or her function to an officer of the council although he or she shall not be relieved from ultimate responsibility for the discharge of any delegated function.

Madam Chairperson, I think the words that come after the word “council” may not be necessary. When you delegate, you clearly indicate to the person you have delegated what to do. In my view, these other additional words may not be necessary since the person has been delegated. Therefore, I propose that clause 17(5) reads, “The registrar may delegate any of his functions to an officer of the council”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that the sentence ends at the word “council”. Honourable minister, what do you say about this?

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to that proposal. We can take it and stop at the word “council”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17, be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 19 is about registration of practitioners. The committee proposes to replace clause 19 (1) with the following:
“
    (1) A person shall not operate, own or use premises as a practitioner, producer, manufacturer, supplier or seller of traditional, herbal or complementary medicine unless that person is registered as traditional or complementary medicine practitioner in accordance with this Act.”

The justification is to ensure registration of the various categories of persons or individuals that deal in traditional herbal and complementary medicines at the different levels.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem. I thought we would have a transition provision. Whereas, we want to regulate, there are a number of things which the Act requires the ministry to put in place. If we stop the practitioners from operating at the commencement of this Act with immediate effect, I think it will disrupt this sector and yet it has been filling the gap where the minister –

Therefore, I would like to propose a transition period by creating another clause – I am imaging but once this Act comes into force, the effect of this clause is that no one will be allowed to deal in herbal medicine unless he or she has been registered. 

Madam Chairperson, the ministry actually has no capacity to register all people practicing herbal medicine in the country and yet this provision will be prohibiting anyone from dealing in herbal medicine. Therefore, I would like to propose that it reads, “A person shall not operate, own premises as a practitioner or produce herbal medicine for sale unless….” We should create some time frame. Can the minister tell us the time they will take to operationalise the commencement of this Act?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you look at clause 1, it says the minister has powers to effect the Act at different times; it is there. I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 20 is about qualification for registration. The committee proposes to rephrase the entire clause with the following:

    (1) A person is not qualified to practice as a traditional or complementary medicine practitioner unless-

    a) in the case of traditional medicine -
    (i) the person has the relevant training, knowledge and skill recognised by the council in the practice of traditional medicine; and
    (ii) the application has been endorsed by the following;
    (a) the district health office;
    (b) the district office of the council; and
    (c) a person authorised by the village local council of the community. 
b)   	In case of the complementary medicine practice -
    (i) the person holds a valid qualification in the field of specialisation of complementary medicine from a recognised institution by the council to which the application relates;
    (ii) the person has undergone an internship for a period determined by the council;
    (iii) the application is endorsed by-
    (a) the district health office;
    (b) the district office of the council;
    (c) a person authorised by the village local council of the community; and
    (d) an association of complementary medicine practitioners.

(2) 	Upon satisfaction by the council that an applicant has fulfilled all these conditions for registration under this Act and has paid the prescribed fee, the council shall direct the registrar to enter the applicant’s name in the register of practitioners and issue the applicant with a certificate of registration.
(3) 	A person issued with a certificate under subsection (2) shall be known as a practitioner for the purposes of this Act.
(4) 	Registration under this Act shall be in addition to registration required under any other law for the time being in force in respect of the practice. 
(5) 	The council shall on an annual basis publish a list of all registered practitioners.”

The justification is to clarify the requirements and procedure for registration.

MS ALUM: I wanted some clarification because in the upper clause, we had dropped the “office of the district council”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we abandoned the amendment and retained the old text. 

MS ALUM: Okay. 

MS BWEKWASO: Thank you. The clarification I seek is on the clause on traditional medicine as it differs from complementary medicine where they are saying someone should not be registered unless he has proof that he has been trained. However, we know that this is knowledge that has been passed on to most of the tradition healers. They have been told how to serve traditional medicines. They have been doing this for generations without a formal training.

The clarification I seek is on how the council will have the capacity to know that a traditional healer has been trained. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. On this note, if we are restricting that all traditional healers should have certificates, we should note that we have only one body that is allowed to accredit certificates and that is the National Council for Higher Education. Also, we should note that some of the traditional healers have not attended even primary one level of education but they have the knowledge. They know which particular drug to apply to cure someone and yet we are here limiting their natural gift. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wanted to propose a small amendment that can cure that by saying “unless the person has relevant training, knowledge or skills”. They can come in through skills or training. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chair, I agree with you. Secondly, I have a clarification. Like we dropped the region, clause 20 (c) talks of a person authorised by the “village local council of the community”. Now, I do not know whether the certificate of financial implication even incorporates and indicates that the village local council is to be part and parcel of the registration. I would like the minister to clarify that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think I have understood what your issue is.

MR ABALA: I was saying clause 20 (c) talks of a person authorised by the village local council of the community. It means when you talk about registration, you must be cleared by the village local council. I am asking the minister whether this one is part and parcel of the certificate of financial implication.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This person is going to work in the community. So, he or she must be identified by the leaders. You cannot avoid the local council.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you. I think what the honourable member is talking about, in my view, is very perfect because this is a vetting process. People at the village can tell who is a genuine practitioner. So, this is part of the process of vetting and I believe it is very thorough. 

I just wanted us to balance the boat. We are assuming that all LC1s are in the village. However, we also have a clear terminology for the urban set up which I think we should provide for here and say “A person authorised by the cell/village council”. We do not need to say “of the community” because it is well explained in that context. 

Just have a person authorised by the cell/village council.

MR WALUSWAKA: Honourable minister, on the issue of qualifications, this is where I say we shall disagree with you. There are people in my village who have never gone to school and they have knowledge-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Waluswaka, we have already handled that. 

MR WALUSWAKA: Okay. Do not bring education into this thing.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, instead of “village local council”, we needed to substitute it with “village executive committee” because the village local council is everybody in the village. If I am going to be appointed by the village local council, that means they have to call a meeting of the whole village. However, if it is only through the executive committee of a village, that will be practical. 

MR ABALA: It is better to have the entire village local council because sometimes the few executives can be compromised by the herbalists. So, one way of addressing all that is for everybody in the village to know.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 20 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

DR BUKENYA: Temporary registration of non-citizens. Replace the entire clause with the following. 

    (i) Replace the headnote with the following: “Registration of non-citizens and foreign-trained practitioners.”
    (ii) Replace the entire clause with the following: 

“21. Registration of non-citizens and foreign trained practitioners. A person who is not a citizen of Uganda or a foreign-trained practitioner may be registered as a practitioner where that person -

    (a) is a holder of a work permit or is otherwise entitled to engage in gainful employment in Uganda;
    (b) has undergone internship training in an institution approved by the council for a period determined by the council;
    (c) has a good working knowledge of English or an indigenous language of Uganda;
    (d) has proof of qualification and registration to practice in his or her country of origin or where he or she was trained;
    (e) has paid the prescribed fee.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MR NZOGHU: You gave us guidance on who actually is qualified because you had to add there those who have the skills but not necessarily - there is this one which is still there, Madam Chairperson, that has satisfied the requirements of section 20 (1) and (2). I don’t know whether that one is not contradicting with the- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it?

MR NZOGHU: It is in the Bill, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have amended clause 20.

MR NZOGHU: Clause 21 (b) (1) and (2) of section 20.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have settled that.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 21 we had a proposal amending the whole clause which is listed. And 21 (b) does not say what you read. You are reading the Bill and we are reading the report. Therefore, can we agree on which one we should take? We are still debating the committee presentation which is different from what we captured in the Bill on that clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed?

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, thank you so much. (a) Is talking of the holder of a work permit. And of late, if I am not mistaken the Government is saying they are not going to register those betting companies. In this case, betting companies owned by foreigners, their license will not be renewed. 

We are also saying here kind of allowing a foreigner in the name of a herbalist to come in here and practice this traditional medicine and yet we are promoting what we called BUBU, (Buy Uganda Build Uganda). However, when I look at this, I do not know - I need to be helped by the chairman. Won’t that be something contradictory because we are looking at BUBU at the same time reducing the foreign influence on some of these things? Help me to understand.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the issue of betting is different. Suppose we have this herbalist who has an exceptional knowledge - those from China, India and Congo and you see him here is walking every day.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My proposal is to delete this particular provision. One, I don’t agree with all these qualification for temporary registration. Recently, when we benchmarked in Tanzania for the Human Sacrifice Bill, they do not have such a thing yet. When they outlawed the operations of some of these quack traditional medicine practitioners, many of them ran into Uganda. Therefore, putting such a provision is going to create an avenue for them to flood our country.

Madam Chairperson, to avoid influx of quacks in this country, we should not be tempted to put a provision that will legally make them to enter our country. How will you prove that this person is accepted or an expert of the traditional medicine in his or her country? Therefore, we have no mechanism to trace back. My proposal Madam Chairperson and chairman of the committee is to delete this provision from this Bill.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking is not different from what hon. Atiku has just said because when we talk of (d) as proof of qualification and registration in his or her country- there was a time that many of these people ran coming to Uganda here and when I look at the proposals in the Bill, we do not have any means where we are going to prove that these people are genuine or not.

Like for example, we have the national council which is an institution mandated to prove whether somebody is educated or not. However, in this case, I do not know which institution will help us to regulate and prove whether these people are qualified from their country to come and practice.

Madam Chairperson, this is very serious and we should not open doors for traditional witch doctors from other countries to come and practice when they were chased from their countries. I thank you.

DR BUKENYA: Complementary medicine is being regulated together with traditional medicine of this Bill; and for complementary medicine there is training while we have not yet got training - you were talking about the reflexology and other people who are trained in those fields.

They are trained in universities and they get degree; recognised international university and not traditional but complementary. Therefore, these are the ones that are captured as foreign trained practitioners who come with degree certificates from those universities and not the traditional healers. The title is “Registration of Foreign Trained Practitioners of Complementary Medicine”. This is where it applies. 

MR OYET: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee. In the report 21 (c), they have recommended that as for one to qualify that must have a good working knowledge of English or an indigenous Ugandan language.

I feel a little uncomfortable given the fact that we have two official languages in this country; that is English and Swahili. Why don’t you be specific by saying that has a good working knowledge of official language or an indigenous Ugandan language to capture both Swahili and English? Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, if I may, it is quite unclear when we talk about accommodating foreign practitioners. We are trying to think that what is acceptable traditionally in South Africa can be acceptable here in Uganda.

In South Africa, witches are a called Sangomas, in West Africa they are called Baba, and some of them go to the school of Satan and they get certificates. –(Interjection)- Yes, there is a school of Satan in the US, there is a school of Gudu and they get these certificates saying they have qualified to ABC. Some of these are the things we are stipulating here. I do not know how we are going to regulate that because there they have the qualification, the certificate and you have allowed them to come in; how are you going to stop it?

Yet according to our values here, principles and ethics, we do not allow that. We are actually opening our space for institutionalised witchcraft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I don’t know why you are going into witchcraft. We had good testimony here from hon. Namayanja about how she got treated with an herb. Hon. Mutonyi was here. You know – let us deal with the medicines.

MS OSEGGE: I personally said that I picked Moringa for my aging mother-in-law but when you open and talk about this clause saying traditional practitioners who are foreigners – I am giving an example; a Sangoma (Traditional healer of South Africa) will come here; they have their qualifications and they are accepted in their country. How are you going to regulate that in this country?

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, what my colleague is explaining is quite right but we should note that whether we need it or not, there are those people; whether we have this law or not, they are there. 

It is prudent to have something that will control them. If you do not have any law to regulate them, automatically they will come and do anything in this country. I feel it is important to be regulated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether you have seen the Maasai walking deep into the village with their sukas (Bedsheets).

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we should also correct the impression being created by our colleagues. I have seen a tendency to say that whatever is African is satanic. That is also not correct. What we are trying to deal with is herbal medicine –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Chairperson, I believe in what God created and I said in my first submission that God created plants for food and medicine. That is why I acknowledge that I picked Moringa capsules and leaves and powder for my mother-in-law but we cannot deny that there are some practices that can infiltrate this system. That is our worry. 

We are asking ourselves how we are going to insulate ourselves. Nobody has said anything traditional is wicked. We must be cautious –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MS OSEGGE: Is the honourable member in order to misunderstand my proposal and yet I would like to make the best law for all Ugandans including the born again?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwiru, substantiate.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have seen the tendency. There is even a debate when we come to spirituality. There is the African and Western spirituality. The Ministry of Education and Sports has licensed universities in Uganda, which teach about African spirituality. That is why I was saying that we need to guard ourselves against perceiving herbal medicine to connote satanic practices. Whenever you talk about traditional medicine I see members moving into a corner. It is that we needed to help. Thank you.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, there are two things we are trying to regulate: Traditional Medicine and Complementary Medicine. With the latter people go and get certificates in acupuncture, massage and reflexology, which universities we do not have here. When they come to practice, we have to see their qualifications – the universities are certified internationally. This is not witchcraft.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we shall ask the chairperson to define “Traditional Medicine” in the Interpretation Act so that we are all here.

MR KARUBANGA:  Madam Chairperson, this is the issue I raised. Some time ago, I used to interface with a Non–Governmental Organisation (NGO), which was situated on Mawanda Road. 

There was that group of traditional healers but there was the other bit of the spiritualists who were members of that association. This is basically what I raised here. What hon. Osegge is bringing out is the issue of the spiritualists. The way the Bill is, it does not cater for them. It is talking about what can be touched and packaged. 

When you check on the requirements by National Drug Authority (NDA) you will see that the spiritualists are not catered for. I think that we should not dwell so much on them. My worry is that they may go to court because they are part of the traditional healers. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have we excluded them?

MS NAGGAYI: I would like to get some clarification. Is the council going to specifically ask members for their spiritual inclination? If we dwell there, that means that every practitioner will be tasked and there will be preferred spiritual ideology. Will it be spiritually inclined to some and opposed to some? Is this Bill going to address anything spiritual?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what are you proposing?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I see no problem because if you read the Bible, Jesus turned water into wine at the wedding of Cana. Secondly, when Jesus was on the boat with his disciples there was a lot of storm and wind and He calmed it. Therefore, I see that what we are trying to cure here is what hon. Mwiru was saying that the attitude people have about spirituality in the African context vis-à-vis the western one. Therefore, let us move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

Duration and renewal of certificate of registration

    i) Replace sub-clause (2) as follows: “For avoidance of doubt the certificate shall be renewed annually.” 

The justification is that the annual renewal of the practicing certificate is to put in place checks and balances for unethical practitioners and yet gives them the ability to operate for three years without disturbance.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

Cancellation of registration 

Insert a new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2) as follows:

“The council shall within two weeks after cancellation of the certificate of a practitioner notify the general public of the cancellation and the reasons.” 

The justification is to protect the unsuspecting public from practitioners whose certificates are cancelled but may continue to operate due to ignorance of the public.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

DR BUKENYA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 26 to read;

“Restoration of name on register. 

(1)	A practitioner whose registration is suspended may re-apply to the Council for restoration of his or her name on the register where the period of suspension has elapsed and the reasons for the suspension have been rectified.

(2) 	Subject to sub-section (1), the Council may direct the Registrar to restore the name of the practitioner on the register.”

The justification is to offer an opportunity to the practitioner who was suspended but has put right his practice to be restored on the register.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 26

DR BUKENYA: Representation on the Council. Replace clause 26 with the following: 

“26.Right of a practitioner to be heard by the Council. 

A registration shall not be cancelled or suspended unless the Council has given the practitioner at least 14 days' notice of its intention to suspend or cancel his or her registration and has given the practitioner an opportunity to appear and be heard or to be represented, to the Council.”

The justification is for clarity purposes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27 agreed to.

Clause 28

DR BUKENYA: Application and Conditions
(i)in sub-clause (2)(a), add the words “where applicable” after the word “practice.”

The justification is to provide for situations where the practitioner does not own the building.

(ii)In sub-clause (2)(b) substitute for the phrase, “District Planning Authority” with the phrase “Physical Planning Office” and insert the words “where applicable” after the word “use”.

The justification is to provide for a situation where the practitioner does not own the land.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended -

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wanted the committee chairman to clarify on (g) where they are talking about the prescribed licensing fee. I do not subscribe to the wording and I wish to propose “the prescribed license fee” instead of “licensing fee”.

My other amendment is on (h), “… any other additional information which the Council may require”. I thought this is drafted casually because any requirement that the Council has to adopt should be determined through a process. Therefore, I wish to propose that it be drafted as, “… any other additional information, which the Council may determine” instead of “which may require”.

Finally, I am not comfortable with 4(b); evidence of financial viability for the ownership and operation of the practice. I know that this may disadvantage practitioners who have the skills but may not necessarily have the financial muscle as is being proposed here. I wish to propose that (b) be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: 28(b)? Why would you apply for a licence when you have no capacity?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, the licence may be minimal but what is stated here is the financial ability for the ownership and operation of the practice. I see that this one has an interpretation, which is beyond the licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a qualification here, which says that the Council may request where they find it necessary.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, can you give us a clear interpretation of this because I am at a crossroads?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, we can put the words “where necessary, request from the applicant” (a), (b) – We could move the words into the sentence so that it is only when it is necessary.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 29

DR BUKENYA: Issue and renewal of licence. 
In sub-section (2), substitute the phrase, “and may be renewed subject to the provisions of the Act” with “shall be renewed annually.”

The justification is to specify the period within which to renew the licence.

MR NZOGHU: I have an issue, which I think the chairman should explain fairly well. The practice has been that most licences are issued premised on the financial year. I would like the chairman to justify why they prefer the calendar year instead of the financial year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the financial year starts in June.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, when it comes to professional organisations and practices, usually it is the calendar year. Even the Advocates Act says so. I am sure it is the same with the Medical and Dental Practitioners’ Act. Therefore, this proposal is in tandem with professional practices.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

DR BUKENYA: Notice of revocation, suspension or refusal to license. 

Arrange the clause into sub-clauses and insert a new sub-clause (2) as follows:
“(2) Subject to sub-section (1)(a), the notice shall be given at least 14 days before the intended action is done.” 

The justification is to give the practitioner an opportunity to rectify his or her challenges before action is taken. 

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, my worry is about the period that the law intends to provide in case of revocation of licence - the 14 days. Suppose a company is found to be involved in criminal activities, 14 days might give them room and provision to commit more crimes. How do you intend to clear that situation? Can we come out with a provision that will give an instant revocation in case of gross abuse of the licence? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you revoke without giving notice?  

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, I understand that. We have situations where a company may be involved in gross human rights abuse. We should put a provision where the minister may use his or her position to instantly revoke the licence. I feel that we should put that provision. 

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, what hon. Oyet is raising is very important. Cancelling or revoking a licence may require an individual to provide evidence and a lot of information. Therefore, the timing of 14 days is quite short. Let them be given ample time to put their evidence in place and defend themselves. If we can push it to at least one month, that would be fair.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I think the worry of my colleagues is well catered for. Along the way, this Bill makes provision for offences. If a practitioner is engaged in criminal acts, it does not, in any way, stop police or any other authority from moving very fast to address the criminality. Therefore, I think 14 days is not, in any way, a bar to any officer or office to address the criminality, any abuse or breach of the licence issued by the council. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, in this very clause there is an aspect of one being given an opportunity to be heard. Of course, when we put that and leave it open, this may be subject to abuse. What hon. Olanya is proposing is to close those gaps so that someone knows that there is an opportunity to be heard within a certain period of time and possibly, a decision can be taken by the Council. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: 14 days for cancellation of registration - You cannot now change that for the licence; you can take one month and for the other one, 14 days.

MR BASALIRWA: I think the concern here should be for purposes of clarity. Where does the notice go? Is it the Gazette or the newspapers? For purposes of this aspect, I think we need to be clear. 

DR BUKENYA: I think the intended notice was going to the practitioner; the owner of the licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For purposes of informing the public, hon. Basalirwa is asking, where do we display the revocation or the intention to revoke so that people do not continue coming? 

DR BUKENYA: The Council would announce it in the papers or in the media. Probably, that is what is not settled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We should probably add, “… where the licence is revoked, the Council shall notify the general public through the newspapers.” How many people read the Gazette? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we are insisting on the Gazette because they may pick any newspaper. We could probably specify and say, “in the local dailies.”  

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, in my view, we could actually notify the affected persons through a local daily in that specific area. Otherwise, if you are going to talk about Red Pepper, Onion or the Independent, somebody might not understand. It requires a language that people understand at the local level. We are saying that we are going to have it from the village to a district and that is why this should be handled at that level. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, local newspapers such as Entatsi, Etop and Rupiny are not official newspapers; we have to put something official. What can be of prudence here is to go ahead and prescribe that, “The Council shall ensure that the practitioner is alerted.” That is what is key. 

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, earlier on, we had said that somebody should know English and a local dialect. That means we have to insist - For example, in Busoga, they should use the local language; either a radio or newspaper of Busoga so that somebody understands. The most important thing is to notify the public about it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: In clause 33, we managed to create a smaller sub-section dealing with refusal to issue a licence because here, the headnote reads, “Notice of revocation, suspension or refusal to license. Therefore, revocation and suspension deal with an existing licence but refusal to issue means – The rejection of the licence should come under another headnote by itself. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the observation is very legitimate because these aspects are completely different. You are talking about revoking and suspending what has already been issued. It is very clear. In refusal, you are talking about an application being made, submitted to Council and then, for one reason or the other, Council declines to issue the licence. 

Therefore, it is very important, in this clause, to distinguish those aspects of revocation, suspension and refusal. When you look at the sub-clauses here, in distinguishing them, it will be very clear to state the aspects of refusal, revocation and suspension.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Consequently, “refusal” should move away from both sentences and go separate.

MR ABALA: They should be independent.

MR ATIKU: Madam Chairperson, when I came in, the line minister was present but now, we are continuing to process this Bill in her absence. I do not know whether we are proceeding rightly. (Interjections)- This is the minister for animals not human beings. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: The minister for animals was left in charge. I think the minister’s technical team is still here.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the provisions of clause 32, it actually caters for only revocation and suspension but not refusal. Therefore, your licence can be revoked if you are not complying with the Act, if your continued practice is a risk to public health, if your services have deteriorated and if your qualified practitioners have not been employed. That makes it more necessary to separate the two because these sub-clauses only apply to “revocation” and “suspension” but do not, in any way, cater for refusal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That means we shall have to recommit clause 32 -

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Basalirwa but I think we also need to provide for new applicants.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Aren’t they here?

MR NZOGHU: I do not know the spirit in which the committee talked of “refusal”. If we have notice of revocation, suspension or refusal to license, refusal to license can also apply to a new applicant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you looked at clause 28(3) of the Bill? It reads, “A licence shall not be issued to an applicant unless the Council is satisfied that the applicant –

    a) Is registered as a practitioner under this Act;
    b) Has experience.”

MR NZOGHU: I have read it but I am just asking for your guidance on how we are going to treat a new applicant because refusal to renew or refusal to have a licence can also apply to a new applicant. That is what I am seeking your indulgence on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 28 is all about a new applicant. We shall have to make those breakdowns and recommit. Okay, the Clerk is requested to separate the redundant words from the headnote. 

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, when they are including that sub-clause, we should also take care of a situation where the Council, deliberately or for one reason or another, refuses to licence a practitioner. It has happened in this country where some members of a Council for reasons known to a few members of the council, may refuse to license –

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR OYET: Under that refusal, which is to be a separate sub-clause, it should also take care of – I am trying to paraphrase. “In an event where the Council refuses to license a practitioner, there should be a body where appeals can be made.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there provision for appeal?

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, clause 27 is clear that the practice shall be issued under the National Drug Policy and Authority Act, Cap 26. What would be the grounds if it were not for non-compliance with that Act?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what the honourable member is asking is, after the Council, where do I go if I am still dissatisfied? Do I have any other place that I can go to?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I think the general observation with this Bill is that it has no clear appeal process. Unlike other legislations that we have made here, if, for example, somebody is dissatisfied with the decision of the Council, do they go to the Chief Magistrate or the High Court? Where do they go? I think this is lacking throughout. When you read through the Bill, they talk about an appeal process from a disciplinary committee but it is not specific as to where somebody who is dissatisfied can go. 

I think that needs to be captured in the Bill because there are many processes here, which will easily create discontentment. For practical purposes – I am speaking as a legal practitioner – it would be important to specifically mention where a dissatisfied person will go; either to the Chief Magistrate or the High Court. In practice, you will go to a Chief Magistrate who will decline jurisdiction and send you to the High Court. Therefore, the law must be very specific for purposes of addressing that issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us stand over it and come back to it later when we are focused. However, I think there is need for a structure. 

Clause 34
DR BUKENYA: Clause 34; Effect of suspension or revocation of licence. 
At the end of the clause, we propose to add the phrase, “… and such practitioner shall be barred from carrying out a related practice from any other place or location.” 

The justification is to protect the unsuspecting general public from such a practitioner who may choose to relocate to another place.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

DR BUKENYA: In clause 35, we propose to:
    (i) Substitute the headnote with the following: “35. Right to be heard”. 
    (ii) Replace sub-section (1) with the following: 

“(1) An applicant or licensee who receives a notice under section 33 may appear in person or by representation before the Council within 14 days from the date of receipt of the notice.”

The justification is for clarity.

(iii) Delete sub-section (3) and substitute for 27(2) the section of 35(2). 

This is for proper numbering.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The numbering will be done by the draftsperson. I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

DR BUKENYA: Clause 36; Power of entry and inspection. Clause 36 is amended as follows:

(i)	In sub-clause (1), substitute the word “officer” with the word “inspector”.
(ii)	In sub-clause (2), substitute for the word “police officer” the word “inspector”.

The justification is to give the mandate of inspection to a qualified staff of the Council who has knowledge of what to look out for in an inspection and to avoid abuse of power by errant police officers.

    (iii) Delete sub-clause (5).

The justification is that the police is empowered to enter any place under the Police Act where there is suspicion of crime being committed.

    (iv) In sub-clause (7), insert the phrase, “except where such a patient has given written authorisation to the Council to inspect the medical record.”

The justification is to allow the Council to get evidence in case it is required from the patient’s medical records and to ensure that the practitioners keep medical records of their patients.

MR NZOGHU: I have an issue with sub-clause (3) where “the inspector shall, at the request of the person in charge of the practice, produce his or her authorisation.” I think it would be unfair to tag it to that. The inspector should mandatorily produce his or her authorisation even without the request of the person in charge.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what it should be. “The inspector shall produce his or her authorisation…” Remove the other words because the other one is saying, the person in charge will request, can you show me…? He should come and say, “I am so and so and this is my card.” Therefore, delete those words.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

DR BUKENYA: Clause 38; Notification of Local Government Councillor. Substitute for the words, “local Government councillor” the words “the chairperson of the local council in that area”. 

The justification is that this will widen the scope of those to be informed in order to avoid high expenses of looking for local government councillors who may be hard to find, especially in the rural setting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

DR BUKENYA: Funds of the Council

(i)Insert new paragraphs immediately after paragraph (c) to provide as follows:
“(d) Fees from registration and licensing services offered by the Council.
“(e) Fees derived from fines and penalties instituted by the Council.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you keep sub-clause (d) there? I thought it is now a custom that we do not allow donations. For the last several years, we have said it should be appropriated. As such, we should delete clause 39(d).

I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

DR BUKENYA: Clause 40; Power to open and operate bank accounts. We propose to substitute sub-clause (1) with the following:

“(1)The Council may, with the authority of the Accountant-General, open and maintain such accounts as are necessary for the performance of the functions of the Council.” 

The justification is to conform to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, this clause says, “The Council may, with the approval of the minister and minister responsible for finance …” I see that we must put Parliament because what is there does not rhyme with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and it is fair that Parliament appropriates the finances. Otherwise, the ministers will connive with them and defraud the country. (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, I ask the committee chairperson to concede that it is Parliament, which should appropriate.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, this is a Bill sponsored by the minister but as a committee, we have no issue with that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have already provided for funding through clause 39. Money should come through Parliament. Let us delete clause 41. Members, I put the question that clause 41 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41 deleted.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

DR BUKENYA: In clause 46, Compliance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003, we propose to substitute for the words “Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003” the words "Public Finance Management Act, 2015”. 
The justification is that this is the correct title of the relevant law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, the question is that clause 46 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

New clause

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 49 to provide for the procedure of advertisement of a practice as follows:

“(50) Procedure for advertisement of a practice

(1) 	A person or a practitioner shall not advertise traditional, herbal or complementary medicine or his or her practice without authorisation of the content of the advertisement by the Council.
(2) 	The Council reserves the right to refuse, discontinue or revoke an advertisement if, in the opinion of the Council, the advertisement misleads the general public and is likely to cause harm to the public.
(3) 	A person who commits an offence under this section is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding one thousand currency points.”

The justification is to empower the Council to have checks and balances in regard to the nature of adverts that practitioners make as a means of protecting the public from false adverts and to guide Uganda Communications Commission as to which adverts have been authorised.

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, we need to be clear on what kind of adverts we are talking about because there are very many ways of advertising a product. I request that the committee be specific on the kind of advert they are talking about. Are you talking about adverts in the newspapers or on the local radio stations? Giving one’s product to another is also a form of advertisement. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR OLANYA: I propose that we should add the words “advertisement in the media or newspapers”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about radios?

MR OLANYA: We can specify radio, newspapers and other social media. 

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Olanya for raising that concern but mine is different.
Right now, we are seeing a lot of adverts being run by many media houses, especially in newspapers and yet, some of them are not accurate. 

I, therefore, think that we should put a provision that much as we are going to allow adverts by traditional practitioners, there must be some kind of regulation in terms of the ethical. I believe you have seen many adverts, especially around Makindye, that talk about certain products that they have. They even display pictures, which at times are very disturbing. I do not know how we can take care of that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over the new clause? Is there anyone working on this proposal? I think let us leave it for the committee to work on. For now, let us go to clause 50. 

Clause 50
MR BUKENYA: Clause 50 is about non-concurrent practice of both. Madam Chairperson, we propose to replace the entire provision with; 
“(50) Dual practice.”
‘(1)A person who desires to carry on dual practice is authorised to do so upon fulfilment of the requirements stipulated in this Act.”
 
The justification is to allow for concurrent practice of both conventional and non-conventional medical practices by an individual qualified in both and to allow individuals exercise their freedom to professionalism.

‘(2) A conventional medical practitioner who wishes to practice traditional or complementary medicine shall obtain a certificate of registration for the practice and a license in accordance with this Act.”
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 50 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

New Clause

MR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 51 to provide for herbal research.

Clause 52: Herbal medicine and research
“(1) It is prohibited for a person -
(a) to refer to oneself as a herbal researcher without approval from the Council;
(b) who knowingly or unknowingly sells supplies or administers adulterated medicine as herbal medicine.
(2) A person who commits an offence under this section is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points.”

The justification is that it is pertinent that regulation on herbal research is specifically provided for since it is common in Uganda for one to refer to himself as a herbal researcher without the requisite qualifications.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, this is a way of trying to curtail other people. I may have the skills and you are telling me that I cannot declare myself as a herbal researcher and that if I practise without permission, I will be charged 100 currency points.

My view is that this should not apply. Madam Chairperson, research is a modern terminology but in the context of our tradition, how would you call someone who is interested in finding out which herbs treat certain diseases? How would you term that and why should you restrict that person?

Madam Chairperson, I feel that this new clause that the committee is introducing is very restrictive, discriminatory and selective and it should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the headnote is on herbal medicine and research but the provision is dealing with the offences. It is not dealing with the headnote. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I gave information during the debate that there are already established researchers like Prometra and the Buganda Traditional Association who have linked up with other scientists globally. In fact, they are earning a lot of money from this. Now, instead of investing in the research, it is like you want to criminalise their activities.  Madam Chairperson, we object to that proposal. Can we hear from the minister who is holding the portfolio?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the old clause 52 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

Clause 56, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59

MR BUKENYA:  Madam Chairperson, clause 59 is about offences. We propose to amend the clause with the following:

(i) In paragraph (m), substitute for the word “coroner” the words, “the local council authority in his or her area of practice.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is equivalent of a coroner in this country? What is the registration bureau? Is it the work of coroners in criminal law?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, coroners are appointed under the law to investigate causes of death. It is usually under inquests that you have coroners. Therefore, I think the proposal to do away with coroners, in one way or another, will make a lot of sense because at this point in time, you are assuming that there is an inquiry being made and a coroner has been appointed to investigate a death. 

Unless he is talking about withholding information from a coroner –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, that is what it is.

MR BASALIWA: If it is withholding information from a coroner who has been appointed under an inquest, this would make sense. However, if it is for purposes of general information, this may not make a lot of sense. It is like withholding information from police, in one way or the other.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we have an equivalent of a coroner in our system? To whom do we report deaths?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, under our law on inquests, there is a provision for a coroner somewhere but it is something rarely used in our criminal justice system.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I have concerns on sub-clause (j). Let us first conclude on coroner so that we go to the next issue.
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Earlier, we said that we needed a local council authority to be part of the decision. I think it is also important for them to inform that a death has occurred. He was substituting the “local council authority” for “coroner” because that is what we understand better. 

MR NZOGHU: Honourable chairman, I think your issue is now sorted. Can I now go to –

DR BUKENYA: The second one was to substitute the word, “forty eight” appearing on the second last line of the clause with the word “three hundred”. 

The justification is to provide a deterrent sentence in order to deter would-be offenders.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that –

MR NZOGHU: I have an issue to raise on sub-clauses (j) and (k). I would like clarification from the chairperson of the committee on where someone would be criminalised for use of a title for which he is not qualified. I know that there are two scenarios. For example, when I am addressing Dr Bukenya, I will say hon. Bukenya. However, hon. Bukenya cannot address himself as hon. Bukenya”. 

There are titles, which community members attribute to individuals and those individuals are not necessarily the ones generating them. How do we deal with such a scenario? People may address a traditional healer as doctor. How do you differentiate that the person is not giving himself the title but it is the people who are attributing the title to him?

THE CHAIRPERSON: If I put an advert on my building that I am Dr Kibuuka when I am not, then I will be committing an offence but if I casually say, Dr Kabatsi - 

MR NZOGHU: Secondly, under clause 59 that talks of a practitioner operating from a vehicle without a banner, what happens where a practitioner with a licence hires a vehicle? Do you criminalise him for not putting bold words on the vehicle he hired?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, this is a question of accountability. Otherwise, I can put a car anywhere and start operating on people. If you are practising and you have a licence –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, we have to be clear about what we are saying. Is he talking of a banner? This is too general. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know, the Bill is trying to – They must be able to find you; we must know your identity.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there isn’t a lot of awareness about this herbal medicine; herbal practitioners normally go to markets. Their patients know that every Thursday, there is a herbalist. To do it that way will close them out of business. Some of them actually practise from their homes; they spend most days in their homes looking for these herbs and operate on particular days.

Hon. Bukenya, the chairperson of the committee, could have been delivered by a traditional birth attendant. If we had put a restriction on that traditional birth attendant that she must have had an office, probably hon. Bukenya would have been a stillbirth.

MR NZOGHU: Therefore, I propose that we delete sub-clause (k).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do they want to put the licence on the car?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we are saying that once a herbalist displays his or her licence, he or she should operate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are trying to professionalise and organise these people so that they have some standards. 

MR MWIRU: Most medical doctors do not have clinics; they keep treating patients from other people’s clinics. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But they do not operate in their cars.

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, what if we treat this situation like the way we deal with CIDs? When they come to arrest someone, they do not put on uniforms. They only identify themselves and they are allowed to do their work. In most cases, they do not even use their official cars. They use private cars and yet, they are doing their work normally. Would it make a big difference if we treated this in a similar way, as long as they have licences?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, driving a vehicle is okay but when you go and make a hospital out of it,  we do not know who you are -

MR MWIRU: We are actually running away from the reality. These herbalists will always appear in particular markets with their licences. We have now put the requirement for a licence and so, the offence would be for them to operate without a licence. However, if we impose on them an extra cost - For instance, we have had professionals like Mr Nagenda who operates from his home but he writes good pieces and we always read them in the newspapers.

Similarly, if you are not good, you will be driven out of the market. That is why there are doctors who do not have clinics and only stick to one Government job. There are those who operate in that way. 

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether that provision is not redundant because given the provision of vending of drugs, which is provided for under the National Drug Authority Act, which was quoted, I do not think that working in a vehicle would be legal. This is because the Act provides for inspections, suitability of premises and all that. Therefore, it appears that this clause is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we delete sub-clause 1(k)? I put the question that sub-clause 1(k) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Sub-clause 1(k), deleted.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, earlier on, we passed some clauses that deal with ethical principles and code of conduct. Incidentally, I wanted to raise it earlier but we had moved on. I think I can raise it at this point in time.

The Bill makes provision for ethical principles and code of conduct but it does not provide sanctions for breach of those ethical principles. For example, one of them is “respect for the dead” and it is very broad. If I disrespect a dead person, what happens to me? It talks about exploitation of patients as an ethical principle. Of course, it does not define what exploitation is but more importantly, if a patient is exploited, what happens?

Therefore, if we want to give effect to these ethical principles and code of conduct, the best way would be to criminalise them and perhaps make a provision under offences that it is an offence to breach the ethical principles and code of conduct and then, provide a penalty. Otherwise, if we just leave them there, they will be redundant and without any sanctions -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing that breach of ethical principles and code of conduct becomes a crime punishable under the law and we make it part of the offences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: A person who breaches the ethical principles and code of conduct commits an offence and is liable to - Okay, what is the sanction? Oh, you have a uniform sanction?

DR BUKENYA: What hon. Basalirwa is proposing could be captured as 59(n) and we add an extra – The sanction would then be put in the last paragraph before you go to (50), which was (48) and the committee proposed that we change it to 300 currency points. That could be a better way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 59 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

New clause

DR BUKENYA: Insert a new clause immediately after clause 59 to provide for appealing a decision of the Council, which will read as follows; 

“Appealing the decision of the Council 
‘(60)A practitioner who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Council regarding registration, cancellation or suspension of a certificate or licence or closure of premises of practice may apply to the High Court to review the decision of the Council.”

The justification is to avail an avenue of seeking for justice from the High Court, which has unlimited jurisdiction to practitioners in case dissatisfied with the decision of the Council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to propose that we put in the area for the applicant who will be dissatisfied with the decision of the Council; who has been rejected. Let us create clause 60(a). This is a practitioner but we would like to deal with the applicant; “An applicant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Council regarding the issue of licence may apply to the High Court to review the decision of the Council.” 

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.


Clause 61, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

THE CLERK: The technical bench in the amendment as proposed by the chairperson on procedure of advertisement of practice. We were asked to draft and this is our draft.

Clause 50(1); “A person or a practitioner shall not advertise traditional, herbal or complementary medicine for his or her practice in the media; including print media, social media, radio or television, without authorisation of the content of the advertisement by the Council.” Therefore, we have added “the media” and we say, the media includes print media, social media, radio or television. 

MR TERRENCE ACHIA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On that point, there should be some clarity because when you say, for instance, the penalty or fine for that person who will be advertising will be 1000 currency points, which means about Shs 20 million.

If we have not categorised those persons, there can be some with capital of Shs 1 million or Shs 2 million. What will happen in the case of a fine of Shs 20 million without another option? The law will definitely not be easy to implement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want, in addition to the fine, another option?

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Exactly; there must be another option. I do not what to mention it.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Any proposals?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with prohibition of advertising. I do not know whether we are conscripting these herbalists to become pharmacists by enacting this law because if someone - We have learnt just today that there was a herb, which some honourable members used on their breasts and they were okay.

If that information did not come to the House, how would other Members get to know of those herbs? I would like to propose the deletion of that clause, which restricts advertising. Since we are going to provide for research, people should get information about the availability of this herbal medicine – (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the mischief we are trying to cure?

MR NZOGHU: Regarding modern medicine, whatever they have in their stock is already on the internet. For whatever drug you want, you just go to the internet. For us, we are telling our local herbalists that they should not advertise. What contradiction is that, hon. Bukenya? They should advertise.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are creating a new barrier by saying that I must come from Kitgum, apply to the Council and until they allow me, I cannot advertise.

DR BUKENYA: Madam Chairperson, the Council is represented at the district in the District Health Office. It is not barring but putting a stop in that the advertisements should be approved by the Council.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I have watched the Ministry of Health and some of these doctors; they do not do any advertisement. The herbalists do a lot of advertising and I think there may be conflict of interest from this perspective. Western trained doctors want to curtail advertising by the herbalists. It does not make a lot of sense for us to stop them. They have already applied for a licence and they have the necessary qualifications. Why should we stop people from knowing that there exists a herbalist called Mr Bukenya who has special medicine? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is restrictive and I think we should leave it. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, let me give information. Misleading advertisements are even prohibited by Uganda Communications Commission (UCC). Right now, when you place an advertisement on radio or television, which either connotes some degree of witchcraft or sorcery, they punish the radio station. They can even withdraw the licence; so, let us not go in that direction.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to provide information that we already have network marketing of herbal products like Forever Living and Tianshi products. They are so many and they have a wide network. As we are trying to empower ours, there are competitors that are already global on the market. We will be curtailing ours.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us allow our people to thrive; let us leave this.

Clause 33

THE CLERK: Madam Chairperson, clause 33 was dealing with notice of revocation, suspension or refusal to license. We were asked to desegregate or split clause 33 and have 33 that talks of notice of revocation and suspension and then, have a new 34 that deals with notice of refusal to license.

The technical bench came up with a new clause 34: “Where the Council intends to refuse to issue a licence of a practice, the registrar shall give the applicant:

(a) 	notice of intention to refuse to issue a licence;
(b) 	reasons for the intention to refuse; and
(c) 	an opportunity to be heard.
(2) (1) Subject to sub-section (1)(a), the notice shall be given at least 14 days before the intended action is done.
(2)	The Council shall notify the general public of the refusal to issue the licence through a newspaper with wide circulation or the Gazette.”

MR BASALIRWA: I have a challenge with the wording; “Notice of refusal.” If somebody has made an application and for one reason or the other, you are going to decline or you decline the application, ideally, you should not give a notice. You cannot say, I am giving a notice that I intend to refuse your application.”

I think the phrasing should be, “Refusal to issue a licence” as the heading. Those other details will come in. Once somebody has submitted an application, the Council may refuse to grant a licence, the reasons will be given and then a right of appeal. That should be the body and it would create legislative flow in one way or the other.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I agree. The notice to revoke means they want you to correct something. They would give you notice that they intend to suspend or revoke so that you can correct but “refusing” is refusing.

If I have refused your application, I do not need to give you notice that I am going to refuse because there is nothing that you are going to correct.

THE CLERK: Madam Chairperson, what we get is that there is no need for a notice on refusal and so there should be no notice of intention to refuse. As such, we shall give the reasons for refusal, give an opportunity to be heard and maybe in the opportunity to be heard, we may add the period within which opportunity to be heard shall be – 14 days? There should be a timeframe so that if the person does not come within that period, he is no longer interested in that licence.

There was the part of the notification. We are catering for the refusal to be put in a newspaper of wide circulation or the Gazette. Once an application has been refused, the person has been given a chance to be heard -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why should you gazette the refusal for an application? We gazette the revocation because people have been working with you, know you and might continue coming to you but a new one?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, we should borrow a leaf from the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001. They have very good provisions with regard to revocation, suspension and licence. If our legislative team can look critically, we will have a good law. With revocation and suspension, you are telling the public not to deal with so and so. It is as simple as that; you are putting the public on notice that these are no longer eligible to provide this service.

However, where there is a refusal - because in any case, the public does not know the applicant. Therefore, when it comes to decline or refusal to grant the licence, still it should be an administrative matter.

If anybody then practices without this, it is criminal and becomes another issue. Otherwise, you are going to unnecessarily impact on the resources of the Council because if you are talking about notice, either in the newspapers or the Gazette, it is very expensive and unnecessary.

THE CLERK: Madam Chairperson, the reason we put it is because in 33, where the Council intends to revoke, suspend or refuse to issue or renew a licence – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought we had separated them?

THE CLERK: Yes, we are going to separate them but in what has been passed, every year, you have to apply to renew. You guided the House earlier on when they were discussing, that revoke and suspend is on a running licence. Refusal to issue is on an application. You can still refuse to renew a licence. That means that this herbalist has been operating but because of certain reasons, the council is not renewing that licence. Shouldn’t that be gazetted because this will mean that the person has been operating-?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there should be no instance in which the Council can sit and say - We assume there must be supervision. If a practitioner is messing up, he ought to have been notified by Council of the inequities as he is practising. However, for Council to withhold a certificate and say, we have assessed and we shall not renew the licence - I think we should not have such. Even not renewing a license should be after a hearing. I should be notified that my licence will not be renewed because of a, b, c, d so that I have a right to - It cannot be that we have withheld the renewal of your license because of a, b, c. That means council will not be supervising.

MS ALUM: Madam Chairperson, the process was going on very well up to the point of suspending the licence or refusing to issue a licence. Putting it in the media with national circulation or the Gazette might not help. The local people must know that this person’s licence was cancelled. How are we going to do that? If we choose media of national circulation or the Gazette - The Gazette is not that much read by local people and yet, this person may be in the village locality.

I feel that this clause is still very necessary to make the patients know that the license of this person was suspended or completely cancelled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think she is right. We might add that, “… or in the case of a local authority, it shall be displayed at sub county headquarters” or something like that.

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to my colleague that the current practice with Uganda Law Council is, every year they publish a list of licensed advocates to the public. They do not go to the extent of saying, so and so was rejected. I think, administratively, we would be heaping a lot of costs on the Council if we went that way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will the clients know that you are not allowed to work?

MR OYET: Madam Chairperson, given the nature and how the Bill was processed, the LCI is the first point of contact for the registration. Therefore, they will be the ones to say that so and so has been de-registered.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make further amendments to hon. Basalirwa’s proposal where he proposed that the heading should be, “Refusal to issue a licence”.

I feel that issuing a licence is one of the prescribed activities within the processing of the application. I thought that we would be broader and say, “Refusal to grant a licence”. This is broader than saying, “Refusal to issue a license”, which is just one of the activities of processing a licence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be created.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you manage to define traditional – That was what was remaining.

DR BUKENYA: Clause 3; Interpretation. 

(1) Replace the definitions of the words “association” and “practitioner” with the following:

“’Association’ means an association or body of associations of traditional or complementary medicine practitioners recognised by the minister. 
 
‘Practitioner’ means a person registered and licensed under this Act to practice traditional or complementary medicine.” 

(2) Insert the following new definitions in the correct alphabetical order:

“’Adulteration’ refers to an accidental or purposeful addition of an impure substance to a product resulting in an alteration of the properties and composition of the product or substance thereby diminishing its quality.

‘Advertisement’ includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document or any announcement made orally or by means of producing or transmitting light or sound.

‘Complementary medicine’ refers to a set of healthcare practices that are usually not part of that country's own tradition or conventional medicine and can be used along or alone with conventional medicine such as aromatherapy, homeopathy, naturopathy, reflexology, Ayurveda, among others.

‘Complementary medicine practitioner’ means a person registered under this Act to practice complementary medicine. 

‘Conventional medicine’ means a system in which medical doctors and other healthcare professionals such as nurses, pharmacists and therapists treat symptoms and diseases using drugs, radiation or surgery.

‘Inspector’ means a person empowered under part v of this Act to enter any premises. 

‘Traditional medicine’ means the sum total of knowledge, skills and practises based on series and experiences indigenous to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used to maintain health as well as to prevent, diagnose, improve or treat physical or mental illness. 

‘Traditional medicine practitioner’ means a person who uses any aspect of traditional medicine for the prevention, promotion and maintenance of health diagnosis and treatment of diseases.” 

The justification is for clarity and to enhance understanding of the words used in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I just have something small; what is adulteration in relation to? Where in the Bill is it mentioned? I do not know where it falls. 

DR BUKENYA: In the report, on page 33 on Herbal Medicine and Research under sub-clause (b). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We do not need that one. We therefore delete it. I put the question on the balance –

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am seeing Dr Bukenya trying to personalise the association, tagging them to the minister. I thought it would be fair for standardisation and ethical principles –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are you reading from? 

MR NZOGHU: On the first definition of association, Madam Chairperson. I am not comfortable with him saying, “… recognised by the minister.” I would be much more comfortable with him saying, “… recognised by the ministry responsible for…” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Unless you go to the Companies’ Act – 

MR NZOGHU: Why is the minister here? 

MR BASALIRWA: Another fundamental issue is the definition of “association”. Here, there is an aspect of recognition by the minister but there is also the aspect of an association being duly registered under the laws of Uganda. It could be a company, an NGO, a CBO and the like. 

I would like to propose that perhaps we could add, “An association means an association or body of associations of indigenous and complementary traditional medicine practitioners registered under the laws of Uganda and recognised by the Council.” The Council is the regulator. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, thank you. With that amendment, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title 

DR BUKENYA: Replace the word, “indigenous” with “traditional.” 

The justification is to conform to the Ministry of Health Framework on Traditional and Complementary Medicine and WHO Guidelines on Traditional Medicine. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Title be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

9.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Traditional and Complementary Medicines Bill, 2019” and passed it with amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

9.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINES BILL, 2019

9.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabtsi): I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Traditional and Complementary Medicines Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Traditional and Complementary Medicines Bill, 2019 be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE TRADITIONAL AND COMPLEMENTARY MEDICINES ACT, 2019”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Title settled and Bill passed. Let me congratulate the Committee on Health for yet another Bill. I thank you for the work. I also congratulate the minister for finally getting the Bill out of the “cooking.” 

Honourable members, you may have noticed that in the last three weeks, our business has collapsed because ministers are not ready and they do not want to handle matters on the Order Paper. I would like to give Members a few days off so that you can go and sort out other things. Therefore, the House will resume on Tuesday the 12th February. This is because even if we come tomorrow, we are just going to – 

I would also like to thank the Sergeant-at-Arms, the Clerk and her team. We have kept you long but we thought we should finish this. Tomorrow, you will be free. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 12 February, 2019. 

(The House rose at 9.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 12 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 


