Wednesday, 13 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I just want to apologise for this morning. Last night after I went back to my office, I was advised that the presentations we wanted for this morning would not be ready, so we are going to arrange another date for our consultation. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO DURA CEMENT LTD

(Debate Continued) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we had done the greater part of the report but there were two areas I think the chair wanted to review. I invite him to inform us what he decided with his committee.

3.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, you will recall that yesterday after we had gone through the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee on the Dura compensation, there were two issues which we stood over and we were to go back to the drawing board as a committee. 

One was to acknowledge receipt and look at the contents of the letter which was written by the Chambers of the Solicitor-General and addressed to the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority. The letter was on the decision to consider when making sure that the two major items - general damages and special damages - were exempted from taxation.

This morning, members of the Public Accounts Committee sat and scrutinised this letter, which we had never gotten an opportunity to see earlier. The committee came up with the observation that the author of this letter simply narrated the process through which the compensation was negotiated. He never stated anything of a legal nature in a way of advice. Madam Speaker, at the end of my explanation and presentation of the amended recommendation, you will allow me to lay this letter on the Table so that it forms part of the records of this Parliament. 

Arising from that, therefore, we realised that the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority went ahead to exempt tax payment to the tune of Shs 3.2 billion without any legal basis. Therefore, the committee found out that the right person who should answer for this is the former Solicitor-General who is now Judge of the High Court, His Lordship Billy Kainamura. 

In this regard, the committee recommends the following: That the former acting Solicitor-General, now Justice Billy Kainamura, and Mr Elly Karuhanga of Kampala Associated Advocates be held liable for causing a loss of taxes amounting to Shs 3.2 billion as a result of disguising the compensation in the consent judgement as special damages in order to evade taxes.

The committee further reaffirms the decision that it took in making a recommendation against Mr Kajubi of Uganda Revenue Authority. So, the recommendation that we stood over, after due consideration by the committee this morning is still valid and we cannot drop it based on the strength of this letter, which letter did not touch it at all.

In considering this, the committee even went further to consider the second issue, which you asked after the Leader of the Opposition had sought for an addendum to our amendment. Consequently, we came up with the following on the grey areas on which the committee did not tighten the noose very well, and these are the recommendations:

One, hon. Col Fred Mwesigye be held liable for the extension of the initial four-year mine lease to 19 years without any development, which led to the loss of US$ 16.5 million. You can refer to the letter dated 9 August 2006, which refers to him.

Two, we also observed and recommended that Kampala Associated Advocates should be blacklisted from all Government contracts for defrauding the country under dubious dealings with the Attorney-General’s Office. 

Many of the associates of Kampala Associated Advocates are former employees of the Attorney-General’s Chambers. You will remember all those who were involved in all these negotiations were people who had handled this matter in the Chambers of the Attorney-General. They had just left the Attorney-General’s Chambers to go into private practice, so they went with all the knowledge that they had on this case. They just changed offices and used the same knowledge and inside information which they had when they were still employees of civil service in order to defraud this country.

We also recommend strongly that Kampala Associated Advocates should provide documentary evidence to Parliament on how the US$ 16.5 million was received and disbursed. This is a very contentious area and it is the heart and soul of this probe. When we asked the officials from Kampala Associated Advocates who appeared before us as to whether they actually professionally received this payment and channelled it to the clients, they declined to answer us. They said it was within their powers not to disclose this information to us. 

This was further augmented by information from his Excellency the President when we met on August 13 at State House. He did tell us that he is sure that this money has not left the boundaries of Uganda. He said the money must still be within the country. He said that the committee should interface with him again in January 2013 so that he will be able to tell us where this money is. So, we strongly believe this money did not even leave the accounts of Kampala Associated Advocates. That is the reason why we are making that recommendation.

Lastly, but not least, we further recommend that Government should impose limitations on former staff or employees in the Attorney-General’s Chambers from representing clients against Government in matters that are filed against the government when the staff were still in government employment. 

As said earlier on, these were people were privy to this information. They handled this file and they handled this matter when they were civil servants in the office of the Attorney-General. Immediately, they moved to Kampala Associated Advocates, and they moved with all the information and changed sides and started representing clients who had taken Government to court. We feel that a limitation, which is in line with civil service regulations, will be able to curtail further reoccurrence of such matters. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chair. Hon. Kakooza, you have three minutes and the Minister of Finance -

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, allow me lay on the Table the letter dated 18 March 2011 addressed to the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority. It is signed by Mr Oluka Henry for the Solicitor-General. It is regarding the compensation to Dura and the tax evasion. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members. As we continue investigating and getting information about this, I would like to now get clarification because we understand that according to the information that we have gathered, Dura had no managers and directors. So, can we know whether we have discovered whether it had managers? If there were no managers, then it means that this was just a fraudulent organisation to defraud the Government of Uganda of large sums of money which would have been used in health centres. Thank you.

2.55
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do agree with the observations of the committee concerning the taxes. However, when you read on page 22, there is an observation that there was a prior consent judgement and the committee is saying there are people who negotiated this consent judgement, but in the recommendations these people are not mentioned. I thought it should be wider and include even those people who negotiated this consent judgement where taxes were lost. Maybe that would help the person who is going to investigate this matter because it seems the Commissioner-General came in when there was a consent judgement. 

As you know, the termination and damages of cancellation of a company when there is a consent judgement, in the law of taxation when you are compensating me, there is no gain to that company. So, it would have been neater that even these people who negotiated be indicated in your recommendations. I do not know what your observation is as a chair.

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I have received the proposed amendments to the PAC recommendations from the Chair of PAC. 

One, I would like to submit that neither URA nor Moses Kajubi was called to the committee as the rule of natural justice would want. They were not called for this. Two, they did base their recommendation on the strength of the letter from the Solicitor-General. However, having said that, we will take it on when we are giving the Treasury Memorandum, to ensure that all other details that are not contained now will be given so that this matter is brought to its logical conclusion. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, just for the record; on recommendation No.4, I would have thought that when we finish with this report, we will have finished with this investigation but if you are requiring KAA to come and submit again to Parliament, I do not know. I do not know whether we shall still close the report but also hover.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, the committee actually at one time also took the line that you have just indicated. The problem we were faced with is the fact that once bitten, twice shy. We have just been bitten in yet another probe where we are told that what we are doing was sub judice. Also, we are not so sure whether the Police as the investigating arm will be of help to us to know whether this money was really disbursed to the clients. That is the biggest problem. 

Probably, if these people had cooperated with us and given us the information that, “Yes, we acted on behalf of our clients; we received this amount of money on our account and we remitted it to the client and the acknowledgement receipt is here; we also put forward to the client our legal fees and they have paid us”, then we would know they really carried out the work and the money is not with them and that they passed it on. That is the reason why we feel that Kampala Associated Advocates should just indicate to Parliament that actually they did their work professionally, they received the money on behalf of their clients and that the money was paid to the clients. We just want to satisfy ourselves in that regard, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, you would still want them-

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we still have a feeling that that would be the only way for us to prove that Kampala Associated Advocates acted on behalf of a legitimate client and that they were able to pass this money over. As of now, we have a lot of doubts whether this money left the accounts of Kampala Associated Advocates.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I hope we are not reopening the debate.

3.00
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to think that the fact that we shall have a Treasury Memorandum, this matter will still be in the ambit of the House. 

Still with your guidance, I thought that committees of Parliament should exhaust the power we have in doing their work. There is nothing that stops the committee from invoking the constitutional power we have to order for documents or to summon the arrest of anybody who has behaved in contempt if he refuses to bring documents to Parliament, so that we avoid a situation where we have reports here and then somebody says, “You know, I did not have time” and so forth.
 
Madam Speaker, I think you really need to issue a very strong guideline that the committees should exhaust the power we have. In this regard, even in this recommendation the Chairman should go ahead and issue summons to Kampala Associated Advocates to produce the documents. If they refuse, order for their arrest because we have that power.

With your permission, Madam Speaker, I need some more clarification. There is a letter on page 33 in the annexure. The chairman has recommended action against Col Fred Mwesigye for having extended the lease for 19 years. According to me, it is one Sibi Wandera who extended the lease and I wonder why this gentleman is not named. I have not seen a document where Col Fred Mwesigye extended the lease for 19 years. The person who extended the lease, according to the document, is Mr Wandera, the commissioner. 

Under the Mining Act, it is the people in the mining department who have the power to extend or terminate. National Enterprise Corporation was not holding this lease in perpetuity. That lease would be withdrawn at any time or would be extended. Before even National Enterprise Corporation extended, they needed consent from the mining authority under the Mining Act. Therefore, chairman, why have you left out Mr Wandera who extended according to the document and then you go to the MD of National Enterprise Corporation? I am not protecting hon. Fred Mwesigye but let us do the right thing.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable chair, yesterday the Leader of the Opposition was gunning for this man of the mines. This is the person he was looking for.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker and colleagues, I invite you to page 26 of the appendices. There is a letter written by the late Mayombo who was the Permanent Secretary of that ministry. It is based on the strength of this letter, which was copied to the Permanent Secretary and the Managing Director National Enterprise Corporation, among other people. 

You know that according to the Mining Act, the only person who is authorised to write a letter of extension is the commissioner. The commissioner, Mr Wandera in this particular case, acted on the strength of this letter that I have quoted which was written by the late Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Defence - (Interjections) - Yes, he was just a conduit, a pipe, executing directives from his Permanent Secretary.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable, really, to extend a development lease without inspecting the item you are extending! This is the responsibility of the registrar of the mines. They ought to have established whether the covenants had been complied with in the four years so that they could graduate to the 19 or 15 years. Whose responsibility was that? It is the fellow of the mines.

MR AKORA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, as the chairman has indicated, the letter the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence wrote is Appendix 10 on page 26 dated 9 of August 2006. This was the real offer. The late Brig. Mayombo was taking the Government offer to Mr Rawal.

If you read item 5 of this letter, it says; “In collaboration with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, your company will be granted a mining lease of all the limestone quarries, gypsum, volcanic ash, clay, iron ore quarries and other raw material sites in Dura for a period of 21 years, subject to extension.”

At this time, Dura Cement had made representations to Government in the negotiations. Mr Rawal had made representations during the negotiations they had with the President, that the remaining term of the original lease to Dura Cement would not enable them to make a viable investment. So they had requested for the extension and that extension had been more or less granted by this letter. 

This letter was copied to the PS of the Ministry of Energy and Mr Wandera had to follow suit because the lease was registered in the names of NEC for whom Brigadier Mayombo wrote this letter. That was the reason for that extension. So, the committee considered that we could not hold Mr Wandera responsible for extending the lease because he did not initiate it; he was instructed.

3.07
MS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That actually was my main point. Even in their report, on page 9 they say that on 2 February 2007, the commissioner informed DCL, not even NEC, that the mining licence formerly held by NEC, which was left with four years to expire, was extended in favour of DCL for an extra 15 years with effect from 7 March 2007. 

Hon. Ekanya has stated it properly; the only person who is responsible for extending leases in this sector is the commissioner. Even as they try to explain, nowhere is Fred Mwesigye mentioned. The late hon. Mayombo wrote and just gave a copy to hon. Fred Mwesigye. If you are saying people were being instructed, then hon. Fred Mwesigye was also being instructed. You look for the right person but if we put it like this in a recommendation as Parliament, I do not think that we will be doing the right thing, Madam Speaker.

MR AKORA: Honourable members, there are two issues here. The first one was to consider whether Mr Wandera should be held responsible, and that is what I was responding to. The second issue is whether Col Fred Mwesigye should be held responsible for the extension. I think that is the second matter that should be separately discussed. I was responding to the issue of Mr Wandera.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In management, there are responsibilities and roles, and in this situation our honourable members on that committee are clearly stating the person who granted the lease even after not seeing anything in place, and that was Mr Wandera. 

I wonder why they want to exonerate Mr Wandera because if it is a department, that is why we are holding accountants responsible for financial messes in ministries. This is because they are the ones who were signing cheques. In this circumstance, we seek clarification as to why Wandera should be exonerated especially when he committed himself and signed for a company which was not doing any work.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we only have less than 10 minutes. This item was allocated only 30 minutes and most of it was done yesterday.

3.10
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this very good report that they have presented. 

As Parliament, as we play our role of oversight, we need to be very careful; we need to be very clear and apply the principle of natural justice. I have read the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and I have read laws regarding public servants, those who are given the opportunity and the tasks of performing functions on behalf of the people of Uganda. Within our laws, we have also provided for sanctions on those officers who act on behalf of the people. I have also read laws regarding private businessmen. 

I am getting a bit confused and I want your guidance, Madam Speaker. When we now bring in private citizens, those who are doing business, what laws are we using to implicate a private lawyer, for example? As a lawyer, I want to be guided if it is done in Parliament or it is done in the courts of law.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, have you studied the report of the Auditor-General? Were they mentioned by the Auditor-General?

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I usually do not rise on matters of procedure in this House but when I look at the Front Bench on the Government side, we are discussing a very important subject and there are only two ministers of state seated before us. What is happening to Cabinet? What is happening to Government? Where is the Executive? To whom are we speaking? Should we proceed deliberating on this matter when the entire Executive is almost absent?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that the Minister of Finance is taking charge of Parliament today. He can confirm.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just wanted to get clarification from the committee on the recommendation about the Shs 3.2 billion. 

From my understanding and from reading the report, I think Shs 3.2 billion was just a fraction of the total tax assessed. So if we are to talk about the laws, it was Shs 10.7 billion. This Shs 3.2 billion was a requirement; when an objection is made to an assessment, you are required to only deposit 30 per cent. So it is this 30 per cent of the total Shs 10.7 billion which was deposited and it is what was refunded. So if we are to talk about the loss which was caused by the acting Solicitor-General, we should be talking of Shs 10.7 billion. So, I think we need to correct this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think we are leaving out the major person involved in this transaction. If you read the letter dated 9 August 2006 by the late Brigadier Mayombo, the first paragraph is very clear. It says, “This is in reference to your meeting with His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta, held on 5 August 2006 and the various meetings held with the ministers of defence, industry, energy and mineral development as well as officials from National Enterprises Corporation…” 

From that meeting, if you read paragraph 5, it looks like it is these meetings which directed that there should be a lease of 21 years. So, the person who directed the lease is the President. We cannot leave out the President.

Two, why Col Mwesigye cannot run away is because there is a letter – see page 24 - which Col Mwesigye wrote on 12 January 2005 inviting Rawal. In fact, he is the one who brought us problems together with the company where Rawal is called Motorsense Ltd not Dura. But of interest, on page 8, on the same day, 9 August 2006, it is Col Mwesigye who is cancelling the lease of Lafarge. So, he knows everything in this transaction. You cannot leave him out of this lease. He is the one who advised the President on the lease.

Having said that, the ministry in charge of minerals should have gone to inspect; for an extension to be done, there must be development. So, the Ministry of Energy is responsible. According to the letter from the late Brig. Mayombo, you cannot also leave out the ministers of defence, energy, industry and the one of investment. They came with a hammer and told this staff to go ahead and extend. Madam Speaker, this letter is very clear that there are more culprits we have left out.

We want to amend this proposal No.1 and insist that Col Mwesigye is liable. Two, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Industry, the Minister of Investment, and the Minister of Energy - that is hon. Migereko who is here - should also be held liable. The last one is that His Excellency the President of this country should be No.6. 

Members, if you tend to fear, we shall destroy this country. The President of the Republic of Uganda never sold his cows to get this money which is being spent; it is the taxpayers’ money. The pain we are going through is a lot. If you see the poverty which people are going through, it is terrible. Mothers are dying because they are giving birth and we come and give away Shs 50 billion to an individual who had done nothing. The President must be brought to book so that tomorrow he thinks before he takes action.

Madam Speaker, I want to propose that His Excellency the President of this country should also be held liable for the loss of this US$ 16.5 million. All these people were implementing his Excellency’s decision. There was a sequence of meetings. How do you change only after two months and cancel the lease? I want to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened to the report and I did not hear the Minister of Industry mentioned. I heard about the PS but I did not hear about the Minister. Do they mention the Minister of Industry and the Minister of Defence?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, the letter is here; it is very clear. It says, “9 August 2006. Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal, Director Dura Cement Ltd, P.O Box 35007 Kampala.” By the way, this is the box number of Kampala Associated Advocates, I think.

The letter says, “Establishment of a cement plant at Dura, Western Uganda. This is in reference to your meeting with His Excellency the President, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, held on 5 August 2006 and the various meetings held with the ministers of Defence, Industry, Investments, Energy and Mineral Development as well as with officials from the National Enterprises Corporation (NEC) in respect of the above subject.

Further reference is made to letter ref. GSM/186/456/01 dated 30 June 2006 of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development in respect of the above subject.

National Enterprises Corporation (NEC), a corporation under the Ministry of Defence is the registered proprietor of the land comprised in LRV 2504...” – (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I never wanted to interrupt the Leader of the Opposition but I know the committee has been doing this work. I recall that the committee was dealing with the report of the Auditor-General and they even formed an opinion on those people. I now wonder how procedurally we are bringing up these people he is mentioning. The committee would have mentioned them but they did not have it as an opinion formed by the Auditor-General.

Of course, there is a point in what the Leader of Opposition is saying, but we are acting on the informed opinion of the Auditor-General where the committee based their recommendation for investigation. I thought it is procedurally wrong to import in some people who were not mentioned by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I said that I listened to the report and I did not hear the committee report on the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Industry. I think they are not in the Auditor-General’s report. We have got to conclude this matter.

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. The Committee on Public Accounts did meet His Excellency the President and did put to him all questions that they wanted him to answer and he did answer them to their satisfaction. That is said and that is the position. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON COMPENSATION PAID FOR JINJA-BUGIRI ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and it was due for debate. Does anybody want to contribute?

3.25
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have the following observations in line with the Jinja-Bugiri Road: 

I want to thank the committee for the work done. Basil-Read Bouygues (BRB) was awarded a contract. However, if you look at the documents and what is here before us from the committee, it clearly shows, on page 4, that Basil-Read Bouygues was not meant to be awarded this contract. That is what is on record here. They did not have the capacity first of all to execute the contract, but also one supervisor within the EU was among those who sat with officials from the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) and awarded the contract to BRB.

Madam Speaker, on page 5, there are issues that are brought out, which I also want to raise to the committee. When we talk about failure by the technical officers within the Ministry of Works and in the Attorney-General’s Chambers, they are the ones who have caused Government to lose Shs 36.5 billion. My observation here is that the report does not give details but a general recommendation that the ministry takes responsibility. Who are the people, the members or the staff of RAFU? Could the committee tell us? 

If Ogwang was a member of staff and among those who were meant to implement the project or supervise it, if you look here in the observations on the main termination of the contract, it is stated that the technical people within the Road Agency Formation Unit are the ones who failed to provide the technical input to the contract.  So, I want to ask the committee why you did not help us and name those specific persons to be held responsible, instead of us putting a general observation that Ministry of Works be held responsible. Now, who in Ministry of Works? Really, are we not wasting time on some of these issues? Let us be specific regarding these people.

Another observation here is on the Attorney-General’s Chambers where Kampala Associated Advocates comes on board again. Madam Speaker, I think this is the right time to know who the people behind Kampala Associated Advocates are. These people were picked without PPDA procedure and it is on record here that the Solicitor-General went ahead to nominate Kampala Associated Advocates to represent this country on the arbitration case. 

I am given information that these people are part of the staff of the Attorney-General. If you talk about compensations in Uganda now, you cannot remove Kampala Associated Advocates. I am embarrassed by my good friend, hon. Elly Karuhanga. I have been giving him a lot of respect but he is an embarrassment to this nation. (Member timed out.)

3.27
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I use Bugiri-Jinja-Malaba Road and we are really concerned about compensations, which are made. On that road, between Mabira and Jinja, people die but others pick money for compensations. So we really support the recommendation that the people concerned should be brought to book. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.28
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This would take the total amount of compensations to different companies to over Shs 390.6 billion. This is a very big amount considering Uganda’s economic status. 

At one point, I was listening to the Minister of Works and he said that this company was forced onto Government by the development partners. Actually, he went further to state that it was incompetent but they had nothing to do because it was a grant. 

I looked at this like if you go to borrow a shirt because you have a function then the one from whom you are borrowing says, “No, I do not have a shirt but take this skirt after all it is also cloth” and you then take it because you have nothing to put on. I think it is high time we declined to take offers, which we think will create problems for this country. Otherwise, we are suffering because we think offers are offers yet actually these offers are creating more problems.

Madam Speaker, there is no free money. There is a general perception that actually there is some money, which is free. There is no free money from these development partners. When they give us money, they attach a condition that you must award this contract to this specific company. So, my humble request to Government is that we should stop taking such offers.

If you look at this document, they indicate that it is the same company, which is going to be compensated that terminated the contract. So, I am looking at a situation where the company terminating the contract is the same company being compensated and the grounds are stated as to why they terminated the contract. As Government, I think we also had grounds to sue this same company for terminating the contract but why is it that Government is only on the receiving end? 

I think we are paying a lot of money in compensations to different companies, which money would have steered this economy to another level. (Member timed out.)

3.31
MR KYEWALABYE WAIRA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at the report and the recommendations, like hon. Peter Ogwang has said, PAC should be serious because now the whole House is seated here but there is nothing we have to point at. The recommendations are just general; we need somebody to pin. In this case, I do not know what happens if a whole committee like PAC comes up with a big report like that and there is nothing substantive.
Kampala Associated Advocates is involved in every scandal. I want to move a motion that this KAA is blacklisted.

Lastly, when you look at Jinja-Bugiri Road, it has got a lot of heavy traffic, which makes the road wear out very quickly. There is an alternative route, which is the Musita-Namayingo Road. The government has promised to tarmac this road since 1996 but it is not yet tarmacked. Why can’t Government give this road priority so that Jinja-Bugiri is saved from the heavy traffic?

The Ministry of Works is supposed to give to this House an update on the status of tarmacking Musita-Namayingo Road. I have a document here, which I am jealously keeping to myself because of security reasons. This document has a group of roads, which have been priority for contract financing as Ministry of Works has been telling us, and Musita-Namayingo Road has been No. 3 in that group. As we talk now, in the list I have, which is more recent, Musita-Namayingo Road was removed from this priority group. Madam Speaker, I want the Minister of Works - (Interruption)

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that there was a grand plan between Kenya and Uganda to tarmac. The Kenyans have already played their part and they have tarmacked their road up to River Sio on the Kenyan side and it was commissioned by President Kibaki. As Uganda, we have failed to play our part to tarmac this road from Sio river down to Musita to ease traffic and also help our place to develop. Actually, Musita-Namayingo-Busia Road is long overdue. Thank you.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, hon. Okeyoh, for that information. Madam Speaker, I have information here with me, which is the latest. We have to save the Jinja-Bugiri trunk road from heavy traffic. So, the minister should come up and tell all Ugandans about the status of the tarmacking of the Musita-Namayingo Road. What you have been telling us about contract financing is contrary to what I have in a report here where it does not appear. It was not by mistake or a typing error; it was just edited out deliberately. I thank you.

3.35
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for the report. All the time when we come here to debate about conniving and stealing of Government and taxpayers’ money, I have been wondering and finding out why people normally connive to the extent that even though somebody has been pointed out, the matter goes to court. This is because in contracts that are being written, they leave a loophole so that that loophole favours the private person coming to work with Government. This is one area in which we as a country should be very careful about and we should open up our eyes. 

There is a saying in my language that the back hoof follows the front hoof. The things that take place at a national level trickle down to the local level. Just like last year, a company called Evarazo, working on a road of only 17 kilometres in my district, connived with some people, got all the money and then abandoned the work. They threatened the local government that if they terminate the contract, they would take them to court.

When you read the contract, you find that the people who write these contracts leave a loophole to the point that they get a way of conniving to get all their money. This is a common practice taking place in this country and it is so alarming. 

As Parliament, we should come out and confront the people who are being named; for example, on page 12 of this report they have named hon. Syda Bbumba and the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya. If people are being named and we are leaving them go like that, I think it is high time the Parliament thought of a solution. This is the only arm of the government that people trust. I would love it so much, like it was said in the previous debate, if we use the power as Parliament - (Member timed out.)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure. I had wanted the opportunity to raise this point when my honourable colleague was submitting information that he was giving to the House, where already listed roads have mysteriously been removed. I thought that this information would be for the benefit of Members. 

I am one of those who are waiting to see when the Gulu-Kitgum Road and Olwiyo will be worked on. I ask that the honourable colleague lays the document on the Table so that we also benefit from it and find out whether we are also not victims of that deletion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he said he was guarding it carefully. I think he was guarding the document jealously. Let us leave him for now.

3.40
REV. BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the Public Accounts Committee for this report. Like other members have said, I think this time round, the Public Accounts Committee was a bit lenient. Maybe they concentrated so much on the Dura Cement report and they just made blanket recommendations when it came to this one. 

One of the recommendations of the committee states thus: “Ministry of Works and Transport takes responsibility for failing to effectively supervise RAFU...” Whom are we pinning in this ministry? “The contracting authority, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, takes full responsibility.” Who are we pinning here? “Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs also needs...” Who exactly should we blame? 

Let me comment about the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. We have come to realise that maybe the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs lacks competent lawyers. This is because we have had a number of cases occurring in different areas where they have to give legal representation and we find that they have not done it. When you come here, you find that they have to do arbitration and they have to interpret laws but someone just handpicks anybody and then zeros down on Kampala Associated Advocates once again and you find that work done does not give you value for money. I think we need to do something here. 

I have a case in Mukono on Kyetume-Katosi Road where an American company was awarded a bid to work on that  road. After a short time, they cancelled it and it has now been re-advertised. I even raised it one time here, that as a matter of law what are we going to do in case those people go to court? This is the same scenario we are experiencing here. So, in this recommendation, we need to know who is totally responsible in the Ministry of Justice so that we do not face such bad action again which will cause our Government to lose a lot of money and be at a total loss. Thank you very much.
 
MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure in line with rule 162 (3) of our Rules of Procedure, which is to the effect that the Public Accounts Committee in handling its work is supposed to enable this Parliament meet its objectives and responsibilities under Article 163 (5) of the Constitution. 

Article 163(5) says, “Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report... debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.” My understanding is that in considering the report of the Auditor-General, PAC should be enabling this Parliament to consider the report and take appropriate action. Appropriate action is taken on the basis of the recommendations of PAC. 

Madam Speaker, I am looking at the recommendations of PAC, and allow me to draw the attention of members to pages 15 and 16 of the report. Permit me to point out some issues in terms of procedure. Their recommendation No.1 is that Government should ensure development partners’ assistance is in line with the objectives and priorities of Government. There is no action for us as Parliament. The second one is that development partners should respect national institutions and the regulatory framework. That is vague and general and there is no action. 

The third one is that Government should consider likely consequences on existing contracts. I do not see the action that these people are directing us as Parliament to take. The fourth one is that Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication takes responsibility. Again, here we cannot take action on the entire ministry. 

The fifth one is on Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, that they take responsibility. It is similar to No. 4 above. The sixth one is that Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs takes responsibility, etcetera. It is the same as 4 and 5 above. The very last one is that Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs ensures that Government negotiations be led by Attorney-General. This is the obvious. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to propose that in terms of procedure, we save on our time and we thank the committee for presenting the report and, Madam Speaker, you guide this House on how we can proceed with a report that has no basic recommendations that call Parliament to action. I need your guidance.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, this is not the first report of the Public Accounts Committee. The Public Accounts Committee has 30 members and we have put in our best- (Interjections) - I can assure you - (Interjections) - Allow me. Most of the recommendations which you see here are of a policy nature. It is because we could not succinctly find any information or document to pin an individual- (Interjections) -Yes! 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR WADRI: My colleagues, members of the committee are here. We do not just make a report because at the end of the day the committee must be able to stand and defend it. I do not want to make any recommendation where at the end of the day I am asked and I have nothing to prove. This is the reason why we only focussed on policy issues. Otherwise, it would have been to our interest as a committee that if we found anybody culpable, we should have mentioned him or her by name but we found ourselves in that situation. If there is any way that Parliament can help us, let them help us. If there is any way that you think you can help us in this regard with the evidence, we have availed the document, help us as a committee. There is nothing more useful I can add.

THE SPEAKER: Members, please. Let me hear from- 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. For the few minutes I have sat in this august House today, before the former seminarian and chairman of PAC stood up, I was wondering whether it was another chairperson who presided over the investigations. I actually thought that PAC had changed membership largely, beginning with the chairperson. However,  I got surprised when the former seminarian, who one time stood here and told us that people from particularly the region he comes from are well known for telling the truth and standing by the truth and nothing but the truth, - (Laughter)- is now telling us that these recommendations are only policy in nature. 

Madam Speaker, there are figures and monies pointed out as being lost. I would want to understand from the ex-seminarian, where monies have been pointed out as being lost, is that a policy matter? Two, issues of embezzlement, issues of conflict of interest or even of abuse of office have been cited in this report. I also have a copy of the Auditor—General’s report and I am sure the Auditor-General’s report, to some extent, went ahead and name called some parties. So, I am extremely surprised. 

I know that during the investigations, the chairperson and his committee were interacting with people. They have been investigating people who were actually part and parcel of this. Now, to come here and tell us that all these are policy matters, I think I want to buy the idea as proposed by hon. Magyezi that we only religiously thank this committee for doing us a lot of harm by not bringing out issues clearly and we send them back to go and refine the entire report. Otherwise, for us to sit here and pass resolutions which have no effect as they are, Madam Speaker, that will be doing us a great disservice. Let members of PAC today concede that maybe they were only using one eye and blocking the other and they did not see properly. We ask them to go back and do some moderate job.

3.51
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I am here as the Opposition Chief Whip, a very big woman- (Laughter) - very tall. I am up to move a motion that the report before Parliament be deferred for future addition of more information. I move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. It is seconded. Hon. Magyezi, amendment?

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to humbly request that you permit my amendment of the motion to the effect that the report be withdrawn and be referred back to the committee. I beg to move.

3.52
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to second the motion as amended by hon. Magyezi that the report be withdrawn. First of all, I want to thank PAC for the work they have been doing and I want to appreciate the effort that the committee has been putting in. 

At the same time, I want to acknowledge that the committee has been overwhelmingly finding itself in a position where during its investigations they deal with the same offices, same officers and same recommendations. You will hear the office of the former Attorney-General, the office of the former minister, the Solicitor-General. So you find a whole network that the committee now has found itself going in a circle that they have no further recommendations to this House, so they can only recommend by way of making general observations. 

Now, it is my prayer that this report is withdrawn and PAC goes back and investigates these offices for the period they have been making Government lose all this money especially in terms of compensation. Ever since the Ninth Parliament came in, we are dealing with compensations, loss of Government money, and the same offices and officers. Now that you appreciate they have done their work, now that they cannot recommend any further resignations, stepping aside and others, I humbly request that the report is withdrawn, they go back to the drawing board and re-investigate and come with a comprehensive report. (Applause) I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank the Public Accounts Committee. They have a lot of reports to handle but I think that we need to improve on the recommendations. So, please, fine tune them and come back. Thank you.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ON THE AFRICAN SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAMME

3.55
THE VICE-CHIARPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Robert Kafeero): Madam Speaker, honourable members, this is a report of the Committee on Science and Technology on the African Space Research Programme (ASRP).Rule 173(c) (d) and (e) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament mandate the Committee on Science and Technology to:

(i) 	continuously monitor, evaluate and assess activities in public institutions and any other bodies engaged in national science and technology development;
(ii)	examine and carry out research on the performance of the national science and technology sub-sector; and
(iii) 	examine, recommend and oversee adequate national budgetary provisions for development of science and technology.

In view of the above mentioned mandate, and in consideration that His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda pledged to give Shs 142 million to ASRP, the committee set out to assess the activities of ASRP, carry out research on its progress and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament for consideration and adoption. 

Findings of the Committee
The African Space Research Programme was founded by Mr Christopher Nsamba, who is with us in the gallery today. Through you, I request that he stands up for recognition. That is the man.

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome.

MR KAFEERO: He is doing a great job of manufacturing a plane - (Interjections) - Didn’t you see him?

THE SPEAKER: Please stand up again. 

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, that is Mr Christopher Nsamba. It was launched in 2000. It is located on Stretcher Road, Ntinda, near Kampala.

Mr Nsamba’s interest in planes started while he was in Primary 4 at Shimoni Primary School. At that time, he built a glider plane which crashed. This introduced him to plane crashes. After Primary Seven, he travelled to the US for higher education after which he trained in military marine as a reservist with over six military honours. 

While in the military, he served as a fighter pilot. During this time, he learnt about building aircrafts. He was able to successfully build a civilian aircraft which was licensed by the Federal Aviation Authority and this plane is flying up to today.

The membership and objectives of the ASRP are contained on page 5 and through you, Madam Speaker, I invite Members to read them on their own.

Among the achievements, the committee was informed that ASRP’s major focus was on astrophysics. That is physics relating to study of outer space-stars, galaxies and planets. The programme has undertaken three major projects so far. One of them is the African Sky Hawk. This is a medium-sized plane, and it is shown in Annex C of that report. The other project is an ultra-light project. This is a one-seater plane which is also shown in Annex B. You can refer to it as the Skyler plane. The third project is the space rocket or thruster project.

The Africa Sky Hawk Project
(i) 	The project has been underway since 2010 and is now in advanced stages of construction. There are a few avionics and details remaining to enable it to be launched. Save for the lack of funds to purchase the required avionics, it should have been launched in January, 2012. 

(ii) 	The plane has been locally built by a locally-trained crew which has been trained on the job. The crew has been trained in avionics, advanced astronomy - that is, how to undertake calculations -and identification of space objects and also how to conduct ground astronomy research. This includes when and how to identify stars and planets in the sky.

(iii) 	The plane is a double occupancy plane, built with a wing span of up to 35 feet. It has the potential to fly between 45,000 to 55,000 feet above sea level. 

I invite Members to read through number 4 and 5. However, for emphasis, number 6 categorically states that:

(vi) 	The mode of financing the construction of the plane to date has been self-financing, with several people donating to the project.

(vii)	The African Sky hawk plane will be ready for launch within two months of procuring the required parts, including the engine.

The second project, the Ultra-light Project, as I mentioned is a smaller plane. You can call it a Skyler plane. I invite Members to read through on their own.

Their third achievement is the Space Rocket or Thruster Project. 

i)	The ASRP successfully launched a prototype thruster into outer space in November, 2011. The thruster is a small propulsive device often attached to space crafts to control their altitude and translational motion. 

ii) 	The space rocket prototype was launched privately at the ASRP base in Ntinda. 

iii) 	The prototype thruster’s movement was tracked by a Global Positioning System(GPS)tracker attached to it. The thruster launch speed was 2748km per hour and is now orbiting the earth at a speed of 11.5km per second. It is now estimated to be at a location of 92.3 billion miles from the earth’s surface in an area with microgravity. 

iv) 	The ASRP hopes to launch a 500kg space ship later in the year using the results of the prototype that was launched earlier on. 

ASRP Challenges

i) 	Inadequate funds

The African Space Research Programme lacks funding for machinery to ensure that discoveries are undertaken according to plan. Currently, there are no funds to permit launching of the African Sky hawk and Skyler planes. The African Sky hawk plane could not be completed and launched on time because of lack of funds to secure the engine and other required parts. Likewise, the Skyler cannot be launched due to lack of approximately US$1260 required to procure the required parts.

ii) 	The Presidential pledge

The President of the Republic of Uganda pledged Shs 142 million for the project which is yet to be received. It is expected that with this funding, all the requisite avionics would be procured and the plane would be launched. When contacted, the State House Comptroller, Ms Nakyobe, acknowledged that the presidential pledge had been made but informed the ASRP developers that the issue was not urgent and could not be funded yet. The project is considered non-urgent and would be funded when the funds became available. 

iii) 	Taxes

Taxes on imported parts and avionics are high and prohibitive. The importation policy on aircraft only recognises airlines as importers of aircraft engines. Individual importers and manufacturers are therefore not provided for in the law. 

iv) 	New technology

Design-based research is a fairly new phenomenon. Likewise, aircraft manufacturing is a new and unfamiliar technology that is not well appreciated and is difficult to start up. There is lack of a critical mass of researchers in specialised areas such as space and aircraft manufacture. Consequently, ASRP has no local companies to refer to or share knowledge, experience and expertise with. 

v) 	Land for expansion

The ASRP also needs land for expansion. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is also important to note that the committee was informed that modification of the Skyler jet, which uses either aircraft fuel or petrol, was 75 percent complete. The jet was actually tested at Kimaka in Jinja during the early months of 2012. Members are invited to read through the committee findings as presented on page 10. 

Point No.5 on page 10 talks about the findings of the committee of Civil Aviation Authority vis-à-vis ASRP’s project:

1. 	It should be remembered that the CAA is mandated by the CAA Act to:

    i) Promote safe, regular, secure and efficient use and development of civil aviation inside and outside Uganda;
ii)	Advise Government on matters concerning civil aviation generally; and

iii)	Advise on matters regarding international conventions relating to civil aviation and adoption of measures necessary to give effect to the standards and recommended practices under those conventions.

2. 	Meanwhile, the Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago Convention) requires a contracting state to establish a civil aviation system that is commensurate with the scope of its aviation industry. 

3. 	The Committee also learnt that the components that make up the aviation system are aircraft design industry; aircraft manufacturing industry; and aircraft operations industry. 


Aircraft Design Industry

This is a highly specialized aeronautical engineering industry that develops and issues aircraft design blueprints, load distribution paths, stress analysis, specific construction material requirements, aircraft testing, performance and safety factors; operations, capabilities and limitation; design structure and component life limitations as well as aircraft continued worthiness support requirements. The authority of the State of Design carries out critical technical analysis and safety standards established by the International Civil Aviation Organisation. The State of Design also issues a Type Certificate, by which the designed aircraft should be manufactured.  

Aircraft Manufacturing Industry 

After issuance of a Type Certificate, - this is a very crucial document - the newly designed aircraft may be manufactured by any state, provided the State of Design has granted authorisation and has agreed on the safety oversight of the construction process. The manufacturing industry converts the aircraft design specifications into an aircraft. The specific safety requirements of the manufacturing industry include personnel, facilities and equipment.

Aircraft Operations Industry

This is the industry where the manufactured aircraft is put to service within the operational performance limitations it was designed for. It should be kept airworthy by the established continuing airworthiness activities as required and issued by the manufacturing industry. The operation of an aircraft requires the operator to develop and document acceptable operation procedures, demonstrating compliance with the design requirements, safe operation and continued airworthiness maintenance. It is a requirement that the operator has trained and qualified operational and technical staff. 

General Observations

1. 	There is lack of coordination of efforts to enable this country Uganda to incubate and enhance scientific ideas and discoveries.

2. 	There is also lack of appropriate enabling laws to boost such scientific research. Space exploration and aircraft manufacture, which are new research areas, are thus left without a directly responsible regulating government department.  

3. 	The Authority of the State of Design carries out critical technical analysis and safety standards established by ICAO. The State of Design also issues a Type Certificate, by which the designed aircraft should be manufactured. The committee observed that Uganda is not a State of Design and can therefore not issue a Type Certificate to ASRP to enable it design its aircraft accordingly. 

I invite members to read through the other observations as contained in the report. They continue on pages 14 and 15. On page 15, the committee recommends that:

1. 	The presidential pledge of Shs 142 million should be expedited in order to fast track the ASRP research.

2. 	An enabling law should be enacted by Government to boost development in that direction.

3. 	Efforts should be made by Government, through Uganda National Council for Science and Technology in conjunction with relevant stakeholders, to identify and support individuals or groups involved in scientific discoveries and innovations.

4. 	Much as Uganda is not a State of Design, Government should interest itself in the works of ASRP to ensure that its work is in conformity with the established international Conventions.

5. 	Government should ensure that all international civil aviation conventions are domesticated. 

6. 	In the absence of a regulatory body in this sector, CAA should work closely with individuals to ensure that all test flights and any launch is carried out with maximum safety to other space users.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members: 

1. 	Based on the fact that Uganda is not a State of Design and the fact that no evidence of authorisation and no documented record of specification was presented to the Committee, the specifications and therefore design of ASRP’s aircraft remain unknown.

2. 	Uganda does not hold design and production or manufacture capability but nevertheless, Regulation 5 of the Civil Aviation (Airworthiness) Regulations of 2012 provide for the possibility of constructing an aircraft in Uganda provided that:-

i) 	The work to be undertaken conforms to specified designs as approved by the State of Design;
ii) 	There is a suitable arrangement in place with the holder of the Type Certificate, which ensures satisfactory co-ordination between design and production; and
iii) 	There is an acceptable arrangement for oversight by the State of Design.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be adopted by this august House.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, honourable chair. We congratulate the Committee on Science and Technology. I think this is your first report and thank you very much. I believe the chair wanted to correct something and then we can comment for 10 minutes. Hon. Obua.

4.19
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Hamson Obua): I thank you. Madam Speaker, I think for record purposes, this is our third business as a committee in this Parliament. The first was the motion congratulating Makerere upon the Kiira Car. The second one was the motion that was seeking leave to introduce a Private Members Bill and this is the third. I think that we are moving in the right direction.

I would like to provide the latest information in as far as this project is concerned. When you look at the picture appearing in today’s New Vision, His Excellency the Vice-President on Monday launched the first Ugandan space observer by the same group. This space observer, according to Mr Nsamba and group, can be used to see any place in the world. You can see the level of innovation that Uganda is moving towards. So, it is the picture that appears on the front page of the New Vision and I think that as a Parliament, we need to support this initiative and innovation by these young Ugandans spearheaded by a former US Pilot, Capt. Nsamba. We should ensure that his group is supported and we move forward into issues of advancing science, technology and innovation. 

We are moving in that direction and the group is even moving so well because when you look at today’s paper, they are appearing there with their first space observer officially launched by His Excellency the Vice-President. I thank you. 

4.22
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I thank you so much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I do appreciate that as Uganda, we are moving in the right direction.

My first comment is from page 6 where it says the plane has been built by local people and they are locally trained. I really would like to commend the team and urge Government on, since we could have some people to be trained. We should appreciate that in Uganda we do not have any aeronautic or aerospace training institute. The only thing we have is Soroti Flying School which trains pilots, and in any case I understand that it is in a dilapidated state. So, let us try to motivate the group. Let us train them. Since we do not have a school or institute here, let us take them for aeronautic and aerospace training so that they can come back and do some good work. 

What I am reading from the report is that what they are doing cannot be internationally recognised because we are not a State of Design. So as Government, we should encourage these people by training them so that they can get to international standards. 

The second issue is about funding. Honestly, if we can fund the banana project, why can’t we fund this project? Why can’t we fund these people? I believe that an aerospace or aeronautic project would give better recognition to the country than the banana project which is a nonstarter. So, I suggest that we encourage Government to take on funding of this project. I thank you.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (INDUSTRY) (Dr James Mutende): I thank you, Madam Speaker I want to register my thanks to the Committee on Science and Technology for a very wonderful report. 

I think we all appreciate from this that the Government is moving in the right direction. I want all of us to appreciate the fact that this is part of the vision that His Excellency the President has been teaching every day, that we should give support to science and innovations in this country. In fact, until recently and even up to now, he still says that we should boost the salaries of scientists as a way of encouraging them to continue working and taking on such initiatives. This includes even the science teachers but also medical personnel and researchers in the science area. 

Secondly, as it has been mentioned by the previous colleague who was on the Floor, we need to support the innovations taken on and those eventually adopted by State House. This is one of the pledges the President has made. So, whenever we come here requesting for more support directly to State House, these are some of the pledges that have to be met. So, we should look at some of these demands in a proper light, that this is going to support many of the innovations that come up. The President, by virtue of his office, moves around in very many parts of this country and comes across many of these innovations and he is naturally touched to the point of supporting them and makes a pledge. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MRS AOL: Madam Speaker, I just wanted clarification. 

THE SPEAKER: But he has left the Floor.

4.26
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee and the people behind the African Space Research Programme for the effort so far undertaken. We have heard of an effort by Makerere in making a motor vehicle, the Kiira EV vehicle, amongst others. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want some clarification on the issue of space research and manufacturing this. Maybe it is because of the way that I perceive space research but Members could help me out; is this assembling or manufacturing? Space research is a bit more detailed and complex than what you can have in a certain yard in Ntinda. We need to come to grips with this. If we have people with brains to undertake this, can we have fully-fledged Government support?  

I read here that even the Shs 142 million pledge by the President is yet to be realised. You talk of Shs 142 million; that is nothing, let us be honest. We are not even talking about a billion shillings or even several hundred million dollars. Unless we are satisfying ourselves with an assembly, can the chairperson inform us what kind of research we are talking about? What aerospace research is being undertaken in Ntinda? 

I have seen the President launch the Kiira EV vehicle but isn’t it high time we became serious as a country. How do you start to launch the Cadimella space observatory? A space observatory must have the ground where that information is transmitted, and it cannot be a katogo or something like that. Unless we are satisfying our ego as a country but in as far as I understand, I need clarification from the chairman. 

Was the committee of Parliament taken around and was it satisfied about the kind of venture – the space observation, the building of planes? If we have even failed to build a bicycle or manufacture a safety pin - if we do not have the rudimentary technology needed for the manufacture of a safety pin - how are we as a country be made to believe that really –(Member timed out)

4.29
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. After two very depressing reports on corruption, which have managed to redefine the word “compensation”, this report by the Committee on Science and Technology gives us a fresh breath. I want to appreciate the committee for taking this initiative of investigating this particular project. 

As Africans, we need to rise, especially as we go into the second phase of our independence, the second century of our independence. We need to be seen to be taking certain initiatives. The efforts of Nsamba should be applauded. We need to support him in every way possible. I can see that they are asking for little money, US$1,260 and Shs142 million. If Basajjabalaba can just take away Shs 160 billion plus, if so many people can be given billions free of charge, surely, this group which is doing something which can lift the name of Uganda globally can be supported.

I, therefore, would like to support the committee, especially on page 15, recommendation No.7.1, which says that these people should be given the money which was pledged by Museveni, the President of Uganda. Let them do their work. Let us support them. There are so many young people of Nsamba’s nature that we need to start looking at with keen interest so that we also develop our young people who have shown that they have some talent. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.32
MR MOHAMED KAWUMA (DP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for presenting this report. 

Secondly, I also want to commend the efforts of Mr Nsamba and his team for this innovation. Well, we are not yet satisfied in calling it an invention. The history of aircraft manufacture by the Wright Brothers had similar commitments. When these two brothers attempted to make an aircraft, we did not imagine that one time it would be flying and with the current design it has. Actually, in their first attempt over a mountain, they crash landed. Innovations were then made, up to where we are today. 

Europeans and the western world have come to design a system where we are consumers of technology and not anywhere can we attempt to manufacture. We are made to believe – actually they have cartels – that you have to suit this system before you are Okayed to operate. I want to appreciate the observation of the committee where it said or recommended that we have to domesticate the international agreements so that we at least attempt to operate these systems here. 

Madam Speaker, I want to draw the attention of members to page 8, bullet 3, where it is said that the prototype, thruster’s, movement was tracked by a Global Positioning System. It goes on to say that it is now orbiting the earth at a certain speed. My understanding of this is that this device is somewhere in space. So, I do not know whether the committee established that this device is operational somewhere or has been assembled. I am saying this because recently, the failing of the Boeing 878 was due to a malfunction with its batteries and those aircrafts have so far been recalled. So, if this device is somewhere, then these are the guys we need to promote amidst the hiccups.  

I do not know, but I think we are frustrating innovations. If we are failing to fulfil a Presidential pledge of Shs 142 million – We have been examining the Dura report and the one in respect of Bugiri Road and billions of shillings and millions of dollars were put to waste. 

Madam Speaker, I want to end by strongly recommending to this Government to support such innovations. When you go to Soroti Flying School, you realise it is in a devastating state. We also do not have a single passenger aircraft. (Member timed out)

4.36
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for doing a good job. When you look at page 14, paragraph 6.8, while we would support, and I support, the financial and other contributions, you realise that there is a clear legal limitation that we must address. I expected the committee to have lifted a recommendation from this paragraph. I am saying this because that paragraph talks of the lack of a safety oversight system as per ICAO. At the moment, Uganda has only been licensed to operate the aircraft industry. 

So, I would like to advise that the committee, at an appropriate time, accepts an amendment to the recommendations to the effect that we must ensure all international civil aviation conventions are domesticated to address all these issues. Also, I think that the most urgent issue would be to address all the legal concerns raised, which have been said to be lacking in Uganda.

The second issue is that we must congratulate this gentleman for that initiative and especially because he used his own money, maybe with some donations, to get to those heights. You will realise that the world is now controlled by technology. If you want to move into the status of either a second or first world country, you cannot do that without enhancing your capability and capacity technologically. Therefore, it is inevitable that we congratulate him. 

We must support and explore parliamentary support interventions through budgetary allocations. We should not only be talking about the Shs 142 million. That is very little money, Madam Speaker. Some members here can spend that money in only one month. This is technology that we need to develop.
In the circumstances, I would like to suggest that this committee should write a proposal on how, through budget allocation using the line ministry, we can support this initiative. We have the Public/Private Partnership Policy in this country; we must ensure that policy also embraces technology. 

I also would like to suggest that the committee sits and considers this because they have now left us without a conclusion on whether or not the technology is safe. You recall that the report says that its safety is still unknown. That leaves us in a dilemma. I think you should have gone further to examine its safety by using experts from civil aviation in order to get a conclusion on whether investing in it would make the industry safer. In other words, what recommendation would you have made if its safety remains unknown? What analysis should we do to establish the safety aspect of this aircraft?

 Madam Speaker, I think while we congratulate – (Interruptions)

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am the minister in charge of civil aviation and the registration of all aircrafts in Uganda but this is the first time I am hearing about this spacecraft. So, there is no way we can license it when they are still talking about putting a rat on that spacecraft and see whether it will come back alive. We cannot license it because the spacecraft is supposed to carry human beings. Anyway, I would like to encourage the people engaged in this project to visit the ministry charged with the safety of aircrafts, the Ministry of Works and Transport.

Secondly, since I now have this opportunity, let me talk about the issue of Soroti Flying School. That school is not in a dilapidated state. I was at Soroti Flying School about three months ago and I have been there twice – (Interjections) – just a moment. What has happened is that the East African Community has written to minister and Government saying that the ownership - (Dr Epetait rose_) – Let me finish – (Interruptions)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I rarely rise on a point of order, but this time I have been compelled to do so. The minister has just stated that he was at the Soroti Flying School three months ago and that it is not in a dilapidated state. I would like to say that contrary to the minister’s assertions, Soroti Flying School is in a sorry state, in terms of both the buildings and the runways including the aircrafts. Just about a week ago, one of these aircrafts crashed in Gweri Sub County and nearly killed people. So, is the honourable minister in order to come to the Floor and start to make misleading statements about the state of Soroti Flying School, which is in such a sorry state, for which he ought to apologise? Is he in order?

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, it is so painful for a minister of Government who is paid by taxpayers money to monitor and supervise the activities of the ministry he takes charge of – Here, it is on record that the Ministry of Works and Transport is even in conflict with Civil Aviation Authority about the ownership of Soroti Flying School. The main reason Soroti Flying School is in the state it is in today is because of that conflict. So, is the honourable minister in order to come here and besiege, mislead and confuse this august House in line with what he is talking about? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on the Hansard of this House, there are reports of committees relating to the very sorry state of Soroti Flying School. So, I do not expect you to gloss over it or pretend that Soroti Flying School is okay. It is not. 

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I did not say that Soroti Flying School is in excellent condition. What I said is that it is not in a deplorable condition as the Members said. Secondly, the issue of ownership of the school – (interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable minister in order to insist on a matter that is obvious to many members that come from the East? He is talking of three months; I was at Soroti Flying School one and half months ago. The roofs of the hangers are leaking. The hangers’ doors no longer roll. The personnel there had not been paid for several months. The school no longer teaches. The students were long told to go back home, that they will be called. 

The hostels in which these students are supposed to sleep have no running water, they have no power and the beds are in a deplorable state. They have no doors that lock and the lockers have no doors. Madam Speaker, I can stand here from morning up to evening and list down the issues that cause Members from the East to say that Soroti Flying School is actually in a very bad state. Is the honourable minister in order, therefore, despite your ruling and the silence that some of us had chosen to keep, to insist on that matter that is fairly obvious and mislead the State on such an important issue?

For him to stand up and say it is not bad, despite the accident that my colleague has just raised and a report on that matter has said that those planes were not serviced and several planes that are on the floor have not had the grade 2 service, what they call the C2 service; Madam Speaker, is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I really appeal to you not to pursue that line anymore. Soroti Flying School is dead.

4.47
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, District Woman Representative, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I thank you for giving me the opportunity. I applaud this team, especially the Committee on Science and Technology, for the report that they have presented to us. 

I think this being a new committee of this House, it is very imperative that we do not just pick here and there. The other time we were launching the Kiira vehicle. Today, of course, we congratulate Mr Nsamba, the young man, for this initiative. That is being creative and unique, but I think as an institution, as a country, we need to have a harmonised institutional arrangement, which can go deeper into researching and ensuring what we can do in regard to promoting science and technology in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I am a graduate of Makerere University. While I was on the environment side, I had colleagues who were graduating from the chemistry side but up to today, we still import toothpicks. Can you imagine toothpicks? So, this is something that we need to take further. Further research must be done in trying to make sure that as a country, we know where our comparative advantage is in terms of technology. 

I would like to give an example. Eighty per cent of our economy is dependent on agriculture and agriculture and technology go hand in hand. I think we should be interested in exploring technology in regard to even agriculture where we have a comparative advantage, where we supply other countries – 

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Member for giving way. I just want to give information to the Member that the particular items you are talking about called toothpicks are actually being made at our Uganda Industrial Research Institute, and the raw material comes from Kisoro, the bamboo. We are still running more trials on the equipment, but just to assure you, we are in the process of going commercial with the production of this. I would encourage our Members to visit the Industrial Research Institute, which is within Kampala, to see for yourselves that the production of these products is underway and we are soon going commercial. Thank you very much.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for that information. However, as far as I am concerned, I could count and count different issues, different areas, including the sanitary towels that we use as women. That is an area of technology that we could explore as a country. 

Madam Speaker, I want to applaud the President of the Republic of Uganda for having made a commitment of Shs 142 million but I think that is peanuts. As a country, we cannot continue running on a pledge on such an important topic or matter. It is very true that the Parliament of Uganda should consider this seriously, do further research and we come up with a harmonised budget and those other pledges can come as a by-the-way. If, for example, the President does not honour the pledge of Shs 142 million, what happens? I am looking at going to space and I see Shs 142 million as something simple, something very little. 

Madam Speaker, this country has very many talented young people. The challenge the country has is identification of these young people, most of whom are very incapacitated. I am even wondering how Mr Nsamba came to the limelight or the students of Makerere who produced the Kiira vehicle. But how many are those? Just go to Katwe here. Also, when we launch some of these projects, where do they end? I imagine from the time we launched the Kiira vehicle, we should be taking a different step now in trying to promote science and technology. Lastly, Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we said we would only handle this item for 30 minutes and we have gone beyond that. I put the question that this House do adopt the report.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I have a pledge from Government to ensure that the Shs 142 million, which the President pledged, is paid?  

4.53
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I thank the committee for this paper. I would like to remind the august House that the communication that we enjoy now, the telephone, was initiated by Bell but it started from his bedroom. So, if we have such innovations, I would appeal to honourable members that we support them because there is always a beginning.  The UDC, the unit we have, is supposed to support such capital intensive innovation. So, we could support it and UDC as well could support it. I congratulate the young man, Nsamba. 

About the pledge of Shs 142 million, as the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, I will follow it up with the Executive and ensure that they get it. Toothpicks and pads are already in production and are on the market. Thank you.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the Bill was read, the debate ensued and now we are going to committee stage.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

Clause 1

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, permit me to make a preamble to what I am going to take you through. First of all, on behalf of the Committee on Natural Resources, I would like to thank you, Madam Chairperson, your deputy and all the Members for having passed the upstream Bill. As we proceed to consider the clauses under the midstream Bill, it is important to bear in mind that this Bill is closely related to the upstream Bill that was recently passed by this august House. The past and adopted provisions in the upstream Bill have a direct bearing on the provisions in the midstream Bill. 

It is also important to recognise the efforts of various stakeholders who contributed to the process of harmonisation. We have had several meetings and the last one which was organised by the Parliamentary Forum on Oil and Gas was held in Entebbe, which over 200 honourable colleagues attended, including the technical staff from the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the consultants. So, we arrived at a harmonised position on many clauses. 

Of course, when we came back, the ministry also had to look at them and what I am going to present is the harmonised position between the committee and the ministry, taking into account the views and proposals of other stakeholders who participated in the harmonisation process. So, I thought I should make this preamble, Madam Chair.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek some clarification from the committee chairperson as to whether after the upstream Bill had been passed, you sat and harmonised those provisions that had a direct impact on the midstream Bill in the report.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, that is precisely what I have just said. We actually extracted; I even have a matrix of all the clauses we passed in the upstream Bill, which have a direct bearing on the midstream Bill and that has culminated into what I am going to present.

We proposed to amend clause 1 as follows: “Commencement shall be on publication in the Gazette.” Justification: To be consistent with what was passed under the upstream Bill.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, on the question of amendment on clause 1, I propose that we substitute what is in the Bill - “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument and different dates may be appointed for commencement of these different provisions” - with “This Act shall come into force in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Constitution”. 

This is in order to conform with Article 91(8) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 118, 119, 120, 122, 123, 125, 126, 127 and 132 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Now, for you to allow a date appointed through a gazette yet you know that this is a Bill with a requisite financial implication certificate once it is enacted; let us go with the procedures as laid down by the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are those? Please, mention them. Can you speak to them? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, once the Bill is passed and it is assented to by the President, it should commence its operations forthwith. Indeed, if I can be allowed to look at my rules, they provide for how a Bill becomes a law. That should be the procedure, rather than allowing the minister the powers to sit back and then appoint on a gazetted date. It would not apply that way because it would leave it to the minister’s discretion. I think we should be agreeable on this with the chairperson. Moreover, that must have been captured in the Upstream Bill, if you may look at it.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not agree with the submission of hon. Ssekikubo because the provisions of our interpretation law are quite adequate on this matter. In fact, if you want an Act to come into force on the date of its publication, you do not even need to put it in the law because once it is not there, the Interpretation Act applies automatically – on the date of its publication in the Gazette, it becomes law. 

Now, when a Bill we pass here is assented to by the President, it becomes an Act of Parliament. Its commencement is also provided for in the interpretation law as the date of its publication in the Gazette or where otherwise stated in the law, like the provision of a statutory instrument by the relevant minister or other body. So, we should not actually confuse many things on this matter. It would be the first time I hear that you say commencement is in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question-

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have the Constitution and we have the Rules of Procedure. Part XVII of our Rules of Procedure provide for the progress of Bills. If you look specifically at rule 118, it is about when a Bill is referred to a committee and what is done in a committee. Now, we are on rule 119, which provides for the Second Reading of the Bill. Rule 120 provides for Bills in committee and rule 122 for the Committee of the Whole House.

Madam Chairperson, the point I am belabouring here is that we should not create room for uncertainty. Once this Bill has been assented to, it should be allowed to operate instead of waiting. It can happen that a Bill is passed and kept in abeyance until –

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable member, what signifies that a Bill has been assented to other than the Gazette?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, there is talk of the date appointed by the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But the amendment being moved is that as soon as it is gazetted, it becomes law. That is what the Chairperson is moving. You get notice of the assent in the Gazette.

MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, as a matter of fact, what has happened is that Clause 1 was deleted, meaning that the commencement will be on publication in the Gazette. That is exactly what you are saying and that is what the Attorney- General said. So, I do not understand what hon. Ssekikubo is saying. That is how it was treated in the Bill; the clause is deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows: 

1. 	Substitute paragraph (a) with the following: “(a) enabling the development of petroleum refining, gas conversion, transmission pipelines, transit pipelines and midstream storage facilities.” The justification is: to remove activities, which belong to the upstream petroleum value chain, and to include more activities that are part of the midstream operations.

2. 	In paragraph (b), substitute the words, “petroleum processing, transportation and storage facilities” with the words “midstream operations”. The justification is: to separate the upstream and midstream segments of the petroleum industry. The consequence of such a change is that throughout the Bill, most references to “petroleum activities” or “activities” should be substituted with “midstream operations”.

3. 	Substitute paragraph (c) with the following: “Regulating the planning, preparation, licensing, installation and maintenance of facilities for midstream operations.” The justification is: a consequential amendment to separate the segments of the petroleum industry.

4. 	Substitute paragraph (d) with the following: “(d) providing for the security of midstream facilities.” The justification is: the security envisaged in this clause is in regard to midstream facilities.

5. 	Substitute paragraph (e) with the following: “(e) promoting equitable access to facilities for midstream operations.” The justification is: to bring out equitable access to facilities in the midstream petroleum value chain.

6. 	In paragraph (f), insert the words “relation to” immediately after the word “in” and delete the word “petroleum” appearing immediately after the word “midstream”. The justification is that the provision applies to public safety and health and the environment in midstream operations.

7. 	Substitute paragraph (g) with the following: “(g) promoting State participation and national content in midstream operations.” The justification is: to promote State participation and national content in the midstream petroleum value chain.

I beg to submit.

MR NIWAGABA: I have a further amendment on that clause, Madam Chairperson. I propose an amendment on clause 2 to widen the purpose of the Act by adding after the words “policy of Uganda” the words, “and to regulate the refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage of Uganda’s oil and gas resources and to establish an effective legal and governance regime to ensure that the midstream oil and gas operations are conducted in a sustainable manner”.

The justification is that the legislative mandate of Parliament goes beyond the limits of the National Oil and Gas Policy and as such, it would be important that we widen the purpose of this particular Act.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I beg the indulgence of my colleagues. We really had time; together with even hon. Niwagaba, hon. Ssekikubo, hon. Katuntu we really spent hours and hours in Entebbe to harmonise most of these provisions. I really get surprised that we get here and renegade on the harmonisation processes that we worked on. However, that does not stop any Member from moving an amendment. I am only saying that it was in that spirit that we came up with these proposals. Even what hon. Niwagaba is saying was debated and we agreed that this should be upheld.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, I want to make it clear that that was part of the matter that was agreed upon. The only unfortunate thing is that after the Entebbe meeting, apparently, the chairman met with the minister alone and we were not consulted again to see how we can harmonise this. Since we have not harmonised since then, and we did not get the tabulated version you have talked about, we may have to consider clause by clause.

MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, I am in full support of the chairperson’s proposals and indeed, the committee went to great lengths to harmonise with the various stakeholders. I am in full support of what the committee proposed in its entirety, which the chairperson has just read. I do not support the other amendments that the hon. Niwagaba is bringing on board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Niwagaba, wouldn’t that proposal fit better in the Memorandum to the Bill?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the proposal would be better here because you can see that when you look at the purpose of the Act, it is very restrictive as if Parliament is only legislating within the confines of the Oil and Gas Policy, which should not be the case. The mandate of Parliament is wider than the policy that comes strictly from the Executive. This causes no harm. 

This is also part of the amendment that was captured in the upstream Bill, to widen the purpose of the upstream Bill because it too had restricted the legislative mandate of Parliament to the National Oil and Gas Policy. It would actually help to harmonise the wordings in the two Bills, which are similar for all intents and purposes. I would suggest, Madam Chairperson, if we are to move in tandem, we should be having copies of the version that was passed and assented to especially by the Chair, so that we are guided very well in order not to bring contradictions in the two laws. 

MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, if you look at part 2(c) regulating the development, installation, operation and maintenance of suitable refining, gas processing, transportation and storage facilities, hon. Niwagaba’s concerns are well catered for there. What hon. Niwagaba is talking about, the National Oil and Gas Policy of Uganda, was actually passed by Parliament and it is from that that this Bill was derived. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to find out from the minister and the chairperson of the committee what injury that amendment proposed by hon. Niwagaba brings to the Bill. After all, you have already agreed that part of what he is talking about is taken care of in (c), so he is merely enriching it. What do you fear? What negative effect does it have on the Bill?

Secondly, I would like to caution that we should avoid the scenario that happened in the other Bill of the exploration of petroleum. I remember at a certain stage, there was an agreement here that further consultations be made and then a meeting was held, which was attended by the minister and other Members of Parliament, but on coming back to the Floor you disowned the consensus that had been generated. I want us to avoid that scenario when dealing with this Bill because I am already seeing it happen.
 
MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, while consultations are essential for us to gain consensus and harmony, it is not in order that the honourable member can bring out a matter where effort was made to have a common understanding and allude that this is the way issues are going to be handled while moving forward. Consultations are necessary for better understanding and building consensus and that is exactly what has been done. When you bring out a matter that was dealt with in the upstream Bill, when you go to discuss to have a better understanding, it does not necessarily mean that that is the final agreed upon position.
 
MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I hope I have caught your eye; I am seated behind you. 

I think the question asked by the hon. Dr Epetait is very simple. There is an amendment that has been moved on the Floor and the question being asked is: what harm does it do? The minister is deliberately avoiding the question. Instead, she is referring to something which is offensive to some of us, and she has repeatedly said “better understanding.” I take exception to that kind of attitude.
 
We have moved an amendment, we have cited the authority of Parliament and you can convince us whether our amendment is misconceived and we debate it. It is as easy as that. Do not come here with a rigid position.  We are not going to be fed. We want you to bring up the amendment and we also bring up another and convince each other.  

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chairperson, in the upstream Bill, some of us sat here for long hours with the chairperson. The chairperson told me that while considering this Bill, and he repeated this, “we are looking at how we had moved amendments.” However, the problem I have now is that I cannot follow well because I do not have the text the chairman is reading from. 
 
Is it possible, Madam Chairperson, to be availed with the documents so that we are able to follow his amendments, which I think are in good faith? If we are to make any further improvements, we can do that; since that time, there are people who have become wiser and it is possible that certain things can be improved upon. Without having the text the chairperson is reading from, I am at a loss and yet I want to follow this matter closely.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, what I am reading from is the report of the committee to the House - (Interjections) - yes, taking into account the amendments that were proposed. Basically, this is the report of the committee that was presented and adopted by the House.
 
MR KATUNTU: The amendments came after the report.
 
MR WERIKHE: Basically, the report of the House is the one with amendments.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving way. I thought you had earlier informed the House that following the Entebbe meeting and the proposed amendments, you harmonised with the minister and that you had tabulation. What the Members want, because we want to move very fast and smoothly, is that you give us copies of what you subsequently harmonised with the minister following the Entebbe meeting. If possible, a few of us, including you and the minister, will meet and flush out the matters and within 30 to 40 minutes, we can pass the Bill. Short of that, if you do not give us the copies then most of us are not following and we shall be forced to bring amendments on the Floor.
 
MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, before I comment on the issue of responses that the chairperson is making, I made it clear when I stood here before that what hon. Niwagaba was raising is actually covered under clause 2 (c). So, it is not that I did not say anything or I was dodging the question.

Now, regarding what we are following here, the Committee on Natural Resources made a report and presented it to Parliament here. It is that report that we are following. The amendments that were made through the process of harmonisation with the various stakeholders that the committee held are the ones that we are now responding to. However, the original basis was the report of the Committee on Natural Resources, which was presented to this House.
 
DR KASIRIVU: Madam Chairperson, the committee made reports both for the upstream and midstream Bills but if I can now recall, on the upstream Bill we made substantial amendments, which departed from the amendments that had been proposed by the committee. I was ready to move amendments on clause 3, clause 4 etcetera but the chairman told me that the amendments I moved were going to be carried forward into the midstream Bill. So, I came with nothing here. 

I have been following what the chairman has been saying but I am saying, can we have what we presented then so that we can move very well? When the minister says we are moving by the report, the report fell by the wayside in terms of amendments.   

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Chairperson, thank you very much. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. It is true that what the chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources is presenting now is a harmonised position, which has been looked at by the committee. The problem I am seeing now is that Members do not have at hand what the chairperson is now raising. Their request is that if they can be provided with what the chairman has, which I confirm is a matter which has been looked at by the Committee on Natural Resources, they are willing to follow the debate. Now, that is where there is a problem. I think it does not do any harm if the Clerk made copies, availed them to the Members, then they follow the debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think it is necessary for Members to have the text of what the chairman is presenting so that they are able to follow and contribute intelligently. So, I think I might reluctantly defer this matter to tomorrow. It is interfering with my programme but I think we cannot proceed unless Members have copies. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I oblige. I think that is a good proposal. We can make copies available to honourable members and then we proceed together. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.24
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

5.26
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012” and passed clause 1 with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.27
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopts the report of the Committee of the Whole House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stood on the Floor of Parliament and I sought guidance from you in respect of questions for oral answer because our rules show that they are supposed to be coming up on Thursday. We raised some but up to now, on Thursday we keep on missing them out and some of the issues we raised are overtaken by events. 

I think it also affects some of us; if we cannot get a chance to contribute in Parliament on a daily basis, at least when we raise these questions for oral answer I think this is an opportunity. If they are accorded space, maybe we would keep disposing of them and even reduce the time when we come on the Floor of Parliament to keep on raising these issues. I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you were not listening when I communicated last week. I directed that the Minister of Health and the Minister of Defence come to answer questions from three Members. It is on the Hansard. I said they would be on the Order Paper tomorrow. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.29 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 14 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
