
Thursday, 14 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR    
                                                                       
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I just want to remind the three committees of finance, budget and national economy that they are expected to go to the National Planning Authority to consult over Vision 2040 tomorrow at 9 O’clock. I hope they will be able to do that.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 40/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE

2.50
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu East Constituency, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I do not see the honourable minister, unless the only minister who is here is going to stand in for the others. As for the question, it is very clear and I expect the answers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week I gave notice to the Minister of Health and the Minister of Defence that they are going to answer questions today. So, I want an explanation as to where they are.

2.51
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members. I received information from the Minister of Defence that he is on his way for official duty in Addis Ababa and then the Minister of State is not fine; he is indisposed. So, that is why they are not here. But the rest of the ministers are fully aware and they are expected to be here to answer questions.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we go further, I regret to announce the death of Mrs Angella Nalumoso, mother of hon. Namugwanya Bugembe of Mubende. She died and there will be a funeral service tomorrow in Butorogo, Mubende, at 11.00 a.m. and burial will take place at 2.00 p.m. May the Almighty God sustain the bereaved and rest the deceased in eternal peace. We stand for a moment of silence for Namugwanya’s mother.

(Members rose and observed a moment of Silence)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we proceed with questions, I will give an opportunity to other Members to raise matters of national importance because the first one hour belongs to the backbenchers for today.

2.53
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you so much, Rt. Hon. Speaker and honourable members, I salute all of you. 

I rise on a matter of national importance under rule 45(2) of the Rules of Procedure of our Parliament. The issue concerns the welfare and conditions of work of the recently deployed Uganda Police Force to Somalia under AMISOM. However, this matter may also give us an opportunity to examine the welfare problems of the Uganda Police Force as a whole.

Observations
Honourable members, you are aware of the fact that as of July last year, we have Police officers and men deployed in Mogadishu. Although the members of the force have been praised for the considerable work they have done since their deployment, members have complaints about the following:

1. 	Practical welfare management problems in the current mission in Somalia including the following:

a) 	Officers complain about their terms and conditions of work, which were not made clear to them.

b) 	The memorandum of understanding signed between the Government of Uganda and the AU under AMISOM for the deployment of the Police to Somalia is kept a secret document. It is kept by the Police officers in Kampala. So, those who are deployed in Somalia do not have a complete understanding of the terms of services.

2. 	There are delays in payment of salary and allowances for the Police. For six months now, there has never been any salary paid to members of the Police who are in Somalia.

3. 	It is further reported that out of their monthly salary, totalling to US$ 1028, US$ 200 is deducted without any explanation. 

	In addition to that, an amount of US$ 30 which was meant to be an allowance for laundry and another US$ 100 as subsistence allowance for every month is withheld from every Police officer. This gives a total of US$ 330 multiplied by six months for 140 Police officers, giving a total of US$ 277,200 withheld without any explanation to the Police officers who are entitled to this.

4.  	The officers are complaining about their families left home here without support from the Government on issues of welfare including food, school fees, health, to mention but a few.

5. 	There are questions about the health and life insurance for the Police officers injured or killed during deployment in the dangerous environment of Somalia. How are the injured treated and rehabilitated? How are the dead compensated?

There are also gaps in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Articles 211 and 212, regarding the Police especially about the deployment of the Police outside Uganda. The Constitution is silent about the deployment of the Uganda Police Force abroad. There are gaps also in the policy and legal framework for the operation and management of the Police. The Police Act, Cap 301, does not talk about the deployment of policemen outside the boundaries of Uganda.

My prayers, therefore, are as follows:

1. 	That Parliament of Uganda should urge the Minister of Internal Affairs and the top management of the Uganda Police Force to ensure that payment of all the accumulated salaries and allowances of the Uganda Police Force contingent deployed are made urgently and without any further delay.  

	This is very important, Madam Speaker. Every person here knows that children are going to school and they deserve to be given school fees. Police officers, their families and children are suffering not only in Kampala but all over Uganda where those people originate.

2. 	That the memorandum of understanding between Uganda and the AU for the deployment of the Uganda Police personnel to Somalia should be brought to the Parliament for scrutiny.

3. 	That Cabinet should bring to Parliament a policy proposal to address the gaps in the Constitution and the Police Act regarding the deployment of the Uganda Police for duties outside the boundaries of Uganda. 

4. 	Parliament should urge the Government to guarantee the welfare of the families of the Police officers deployed abroad.

5. 	Parliament, the Minister of Internal Affairs and the top management of the Uganda Police, especially the IGP, should explain why salaries and allowances are deducted or withheld from the personnel in Somalia as follows:

i) 	The US$ 200 deducted from the monthly basic pay of US$ 1028.
ii) 	The US$ 30 dollars meant for laundry.
iii) 	The US$ 100 for subsistence.

	It has come to my notice as Shadow Minister for Security that some police officers in Mogadishu now find life very difficult; they have to ask their families back in the villages to sell goats, chicken and potatoes to send money to Somalia to help them survive. Why deduct this money? We need an explanation?

6. 	The Parliament of Uganda should urge the Minister of Internal Affairs and the top management of Uganda Police to bring to Parliament a comprehensive report about the deployment, duties and welfare of the Uganda Police deployed in Somalia. This should include issues of recruitment, the selection process, the pre-deployment training and preparation and cases of injuries, death and desertion, if any. This is very important because there are also complaints from people in Uganda about the selection and deployment of people abroad. There are situations of bribery, corruption, nepotism and tribalism. So, we need a clear report about this.

Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. Honourable members, I beg you to support the Police because you know they are not like other civil servants who can complain openly; they are supposed to keep quite but they are dying silently. You are there only hope for rescue. Please, help the Uganda Police to improve their welfare both in Uganda and abroad. I thank you very much.

3.00
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank my colleague for raising this matter. This is a serious matter which I would call modern-day slavery. These police officers who have been deployed to Somalia have not got a penny of their allowances for six months but even when they get it, officially there are deductions that are being made which are being kept secret. We want to know whether such deductions are official. 

Besides the illegal deductions, the police officers who are in Somalia find themselves in a funny predicament, very funny unfair treatment; if they are to get back to Uganda, they pay for their own transport via Nairobi as opposed to their counterparts in the UPDF who are given transport direct from Mogadishu to Entebbe. These police officers, besides not getting any pay, have to fund their own transport. 

As if that is not enough, in this memorandum of understanding which has been kept secret, I hear there is compensation in case of death; police officers are entitled to US$ 50,000. Surely, keeping information secret in Kampala without the members who are in the field getting to know what their benefits are is what I term modern-day slavery.

What are the terms and conditions of their duties while in Mogadishu? We want to know when they go for night patrols. This is what is happening; they do everything together with UPDF but when it comes to remuneration and allowances, they are treated differently. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should expeditiously furnish this House with information, otherwise it becomes highly questionable and we shall hold Government accountable. The Police are in dire need; they should be helped out of this situation. Thank you.

3.03
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Representative for PWDs, Central): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, I strongly support this motion and I beg my colleagues to support this motion as well.

It is right for this Parliament to praise our Police force. Today is the right time for us to thank you so much, our gallant police officers, for the job well done to maintain law and order in Uganda and now also in Somalia. Thank you, the leadership of the Police force. I thank hon. Fungaroo for moving this very important motion which expresses your commitment to support our Police force.  

In principle, I support the motion but I request the Attorney-General to clarify one important constitutional issue raised by the mover of the motion. Going by the mover’s presentation, our deployment of UPF is unconstitutional. This is what the mover of the motion is trying to say. Sometime back, we as Parliament authorised the deployment of UPDF in Somalia but never at any one time authorised the deployment of Uganda Police Force. 

I would like to ask the Attorney-General, under what law was Uganda Police Force deployed in Somalia? Is the deployment illegal or unconstitutional? If it is unconstitutional, what is the cure? 

My understanding is that all us are here in Parliament to make sure that we guarantee the protection and safeguarding of the Constitution, and to make sure that whatever is done is done in the spirit of the Constitution. So, we would like to know whether our brothers and sisters in Somalia are actually constitutionally deployed in that Country. Thank you so much. I support the motion.

3.06
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman representative, Koboko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Fungaroo for bringing this important issue regarding our Police in Somalia. Going to Somalia is the biggest risk one can take. You cannot be sure whether you will come back alive, and those who have volunteered to go there are really sacrificing to be there. I am extremely surprised that they are not even paid. That is exploitation of the highest class. 

What about the families of these policemen; where are they? What are they feeding on? How can you be abroad and you do not get paid and you have no way to support your family? The children are going to school as mentioned but how are they going to school? Who is managing them? Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to explain the conditions of the families of those policemen. Thank you very much.

3.07
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. We thank hon. Fungaroo for bringing out the plight of the Police to the House. We support your view. 

Much as we are talking about the Police in Somalia, and we appreciate the work they are doing, we also question the way they are selected to go there. We do not know whether they are given terms and conditions. We would like the minister to explain that. 

In a comparative manner, we would also like to know how people join the Police. I have attended two selections and people from other regions again go to a certain region to be selected. So, we ask the minister to explain what the right procedure of recruitment, deployment and selection to go to Somalia is. Also, on this side, do the Police in Uganda even have health insurance? When they fall sick, where do they go and is it conducive? 

The other thing is about accommodation in the Police. I happen to move to Iganga through many areas where there are barracks but up to now, I will mention Jinja barracks, which still has asbestos on the roof and yet asbestos causes cancer. So, we do not know whether in this current budget you will consider the Police. Apart from asbestos, the Police structures like those in Nsambya and the toilet systems are in a sorry state. So, we seek that as we deliberate about the Police in Somalia, the Police within should also be considered. 

Lastly, there is the issue of their salaries and uniforms. We see that the police are smart but they might be washing at night. We would like to know whether they are given two pairs of uniforms and two pairs of shoes so that at least they keep to international standards. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.10
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating hon. Fungaroo for having raised this issue of the Police. 

I sit, watch, observe and really see that the Police are in a sorry state in terms of salary. I was just calculating and after the deductions, this policeman in Somalia is getting about Shs 1.7 million. When he is out of the country, he has a family to cater for and himself in the foreign country. Sincerely, this is not a salary but just peanuts. Therefore, I would really want to call upon my colleagues that as we consider this coming financial year’s budget, let us seriously think about increasing salary for the Police force. 

Secondly, there are deductions like the US$ 200 deducted from the monthly salary; what is it meant for? Can the honourable minister clarify on this? Is it pay as you earn? I was trying to calculate pay as you earn, which is a standard 30 per cent, it does not add up to that. What is the US$ 200 for? Why is it deducted? The laundry is US$ 30; does this mean they have a laundry facility there where they have got to clean or wash the police uniforms or they do it themselves? I also want to know that.

There is this deduction of the US$ 100 subsistence in the field. Does this mean that the policeman has got to pay for his stay in the field or the Police Force has got to pay for his stay in the field? I just want to be educated on that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Fungaroo and also to emphasise the issue of Police deployment in Somalia. What is the criteria? How do you get deployed to Somalia? There have been a lot of stories about excessive bribery for people to get deployed in Somalia. I think it would help this House if we asked the Minister of Internal Affairs to come to this House and present to us a list, by district, of who is deployed in Somalia currently in the Police force. 

The business of stealing from serving officers is not only limited to the Police. In the UPDF, currently in the country there is a monthly deduction of Shs 50,000 from their salaries for everybody above the rank of a captain and Shs 25,000 for anybody below the rank of a captain. This money is withdrawn by the authorities and these people are not being told where the money goes. For the last two years, they have been stealing from these officers, men, rank and file just like that and nobody explains anything. Would Government do us a good job to also come and explain to us the issues of this money that is stolen from the UPDF who are within the country?

There are categories of human beings out in Somalia unaccounted for. When Government presented the motion to deploy in Somalia, we pegged a lot of things. That was maybe five or so years back. We said Government should be coming here to report every six months on who has died in Somalia, who is in Somalia and what they are doing? There are people like those veterans who have been taken; they cannot be accounted for but they are in Somalia. We get reports of over 10 months of no salary and when they die, even getting back their bodies is a nightmare. 

I would like to ask that Government comes not only to report on the Police in Somalia but everybody deployed out of this country in  Somalia, DRC, Central African Republic - veterans, Police, UPDF and anybody. I think Government should account for them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation from Rukungiri Municipality. We have the Mayor and the division mayors, the councillors and heads of departments. I believe they are up here. Please stand up. You are welcome. They are represented by hon. Mugume and hon. Sezi Mbaguta. (Applause)

3.16
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to also thank hon. Fungaroo for raising this very pertinent issue about the Police and our officers who ordinarily have no voice but have to sneak their issues through colleagues as they meet us on the way. 

The welfare generally of officers is appalling. We know that housing has been a major issue for the Police. Day in, day out we have debated, we have allocated funds but I do not know why this status quo remains.  We know very well that when you go to Kajjansi there is now makeshift land that has been allocated and any officer, who has an opportunity to be allocated maybe five metres, gets mud and wattle and those who have buveras will put on top, and that is their house. It is on the highway to Entebbe. That is the housing for those who do not want to share maybe. We want to know, is this official? What is the status of housing of our police officers? 

Even when we look at Parliament, we know we have police officers at Parliament but behind the scenes, where do these officers stay? Some even have been asking that Parliament should cater for them. They have been turned out of their houses or barracks and been told, “Now you are in Parliament, let Parliament sort you out”. I want to know, through you, Madam Speaker, does Parliament have accommodation for our police officers? Was that communicated? As we are talking about their welfare, even our own here have issues, and that is something I think, as we are considering everything, we should look at. 

I know very well that Somalia is something like a Mecca for our officers. It is an opportunity, a cry that maybe they can make it when they go to Somalia. Even our veterans were told, when they asked for pension, that, “Those of you who want pension, go to Somalia, work for two years, maybe you will get Shs 48 million and that will be your pension”.  So, for people who have been told that there is an opportunity for them, an old man or a veteran, to go and sacrifice in dangerous waters, even they do not get their money. We want the Minister of Internal Affairs and Defence too to come out clearly to-(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that as much as we are really sympathising with our officers, probably one mistake which we should also look at is that as much as the Army is represented in this House, the Police are waiting. When will they be given that opportunity to have their direct representative in Parliament to voice their concerns?

Secondly, even those who go to Somalia actually have to part with a minimum of Shs 3 million to be put on the list to qualify to go there. It has now become business to sacrifice our own abroad. Thank you.

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would just want to appeal to our ministers to come out and give this issue prominence and not give surface information about it. It is very painful for the families of these officers and the officers also are in pain. That is why you see suicides. Some of these issues you read in the papers - “Police officer shoots this one after coming from Somalia” - are because they are so frustrated. So, we would want the minister to really come out and do justice to this issue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the observations and recommendations that have been made by my colleague. It is really important for this country to understand from the authorities that be where exactly they derive the authority to deploy the Police outside this country. Certainly, it is not from Article 212; I do not think so. I think this really caters for police work within the boundaries of Uganda. 

The Police, to my understanding, is more of a civilian force trained to engage the civilians caught against the law. To send them to Somalia where actually we know that what is there is death, carnage of our people, maiming and so forth, and to send them to go and engage the battle hardened extremists of Somalia, I think is most unfortunate. We need to understand where the authority was derived from. If we do not, then very soon we may have this Constitution as a mere heap of papers. We heard recently that the Army can actually overthrow the civilian Government. Now we are saying that the Police is being deployed to go and engage those battle hardened killers of Somalia. Surely, we must understand where the power comes from. 

It is not only the forces that are going to Somalia. There are many civilians that are leaving this country and are being trafficked to Somalia. I want to understand from the Minister of  Foreign Affairs, or the Minister of Internal Affairs for that matter, whether they are aware that very many Ugandans are being ferried to Somalia and how safe these people are in Somalia. How are they surviving in an environment of warfare in Somalia? I think the Government has to come up and explain to us the situation of not only the Police but even the civilians that are leaving this country being taken to Somalia by companies that at the end of the day end up exploiting them and treating them as slaves in a foreign country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.24
MS ATIM JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in thanking hon. Fungaroo for his concern which he has brought to this House. We know that it is the Police that provide law and order. I assume that some of them are picked under order and sometimes they are not consulted, though others are saying that they sell some of their animals to pay bribes to go to Somalia.

Under the Employment Act, there are terms and conditions of service which somebody being employed or somebody going for some service has got to be given. It surprises me why their monies are deducted and they have not been alerted about the reasons as to why their monies are being deducted. Here, they are telling us that US$30 is being picked for laundry. Can I hear from the Minister of Defence whether our serving policemen and policewomen there do not wash for themselves but their clothes are being handled officially? Can we be made to know that?

Not only that, we know for sure the conditions under which these people serve when they are outside the country. The conditions are too tough. It is very difficult. This is the reason as to why some army officer shot some women in a house in Ntinda; they work, they labour and the conditions are too tough and then somebody wants to take the monies that they get just by force. 

I want to assure them to let what belongs to our Police be for them. You do not have to deduct it and you do not even declare to them. Parliament does not know and Ministry of Finance does not know where you are putting this money. We are saying that next time they are taking the forces outside Uganda, can the Minister of Defence alert Members of Parliament of the numbers that have been deployed outside, their condition, their welfare and their duration of service outside the country. I think this will be fair to Uganda. Thank you.

3.26
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am lucky that I happened to teach in a military institution, Makindye, for 10 years. I know how hot a uniport gets during the day and how cold it is during the night. When you have that kind of experience, you can know how policemen suffer. 

I know how security officials suffer to buy uniforms for their children. Recently, there was a situation in Luzira where a UPDF officer who returned from Somalia found that his wife had turned adulterous - she had almost become a prostitute - and because of the anger, he shot a number of people. However, the locals never wanted this man to be imprisoned because they knew what the wife was doing while he was away. 

I would like to thank the minister because what he has done is good. Sometime back, I addressed the press and told them my next step would be to go and help the Police to fight for their salaries. When you increase teachers’ salaries, it should be automatic that the Police, UPDF and Prisons officers should get their increments since they lie in the same bracket. The only difference is that in the Army and the Police, an officer who attains a higher rank has more chances of getting an increment and of course, the way ranks are attained is different.

When we had the Military Police, when UPDF went for ECOMOG, the late Gen. Kazini – may his soul rest in peace - used to meet wives of the deployed officers. We, the teachers, used to meet these parents and there were laws governing us in those schools. When these people were on Government missions outside the country, their children were not supposed to be sent out of school. Ask the Minister of Internal Affairs whether he has ever met these families or interacted with the people they left behind ever since these policemen went out.
  
The matter before us shows that we have failed to prioritise. When you drive along Entebbe Road, there are more than 15 pickups with policemen. What are they guarding along the road? That would have been an expense put into building houses for policemen.
  
As Parliament, we need a periodic report of what is happening to these people. One time, I asked Gen. Katumba Wamala, within Parliament, whether it was true that UPDF soldiers’ US$ 200 was being taken away from them. He said it was not true but up to now, evidence has never been produced. Let me tell you about new districts in Uganda where we have got DPCs. Members with new districts can bear me witness- (Member timed out.) 

3.30
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Fungaroo for coming up with this issue of national importance. 

It is common to appreciate people’s roles in words, but sometimes we also need to appreciate people through action. What our police officers are doing in Somalia is worth appreciation through action because they are sacrificing their lives, and this money we are talking about is not worth their lives. So, that money should not be taken away from them. I believe those police officers have families and to deny them that salary will compel most of those families to break up; by the time they return from Somalia, they will find their spouses gone. That is something we would not wish to happen - (interjections) – yes, they will have gone elsewhere to get money.
 
We also have the problem of street children that has not been solved yet. Now we are not paying these officers of ours their salary but there is a likelihood that when their spouses fail to get money for the children, these children may easily get on the streets, which we would not want them to. We want to solve the problem and remove street children and not add more. Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Defence to handle this issue and ensure that our police personnel get their salaries because it is not a favour but their right. I thank you.
 
3.32
MS SARAH KAYAGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very sad that the police officers in our country are living in terrible conditions. Their houses are pathetic and their salaries are very bad. However, even those who have been deployed out of the country, whom we would think that we would look after so well so that they portray the image of our country positively, are also suffering. I really do not know for how long this country is going to continue portraying the image of our workers in such a manner.
 
Secondly, it is clearly stated in this last page that the Constitution does not mandate us to deploy our police officers outside this country. Even the Police policy and framework does not give us powers to deploy these police officers outside Uganda. My question, therefore, goes to the Attorney-General; if someone came up with a case and sued the country or the Government of Uganda for deploying these people outside the country unconstitutionally, would you win or you would lose? 

I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still do not see the Minister of Health or the ministers of state for health. They were scheduled to answer the other question. In view of that, I invite hon. Wamai, who had another matter to raise, because we still have 25 minutes to finish our hour for the backbenchers. It is disappointing that the ministers are here for their business but are not here for the Members’ business.

3.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. I was recently in Canada on a private visit and I had an opportunity to visit our mission in Ottawa. The state of our mission is shocking. The building had a very big crack on the floor, running from one end to another, and all the walls had cracks. What is worse is that the Canadian Government, actually the Police, had visited the mission and had condemned the structure through a report that was made asking the officials to immediately vacate the building. What is shocking is that Ugandans are still occupying that building.
 
I watched Hillary Clinton, the Secretary of State, before she resigned. She appeared before the Foreign Affairs Committee and she was taken to task to explain how the Ambassador of America and the officers were killed in Benghazi because there was no sufficient security for their people. But look at these Ugandans serving abroad in terrible conditions. That building is due to collapse anytime, and this is not only in Canada but it is almost everywhere. 

I have had a chance to visit all these missions since I left the foreign service.  I was in Brussels but the situation is very bad. I was recently in South Africa and I visited the High Commissioner’s residence; the building was sinking. In Nairobi, we do not even have security for our officers and yet we know that Uganda is one of those countries on the list wanted by Al Qaeda and Al Shabaab but our officers are not protected. The building in Nairobi is in a trading centre. I was in Nairobi recently, Mr Minister. You, as the Minister of Works, would condemn that building if you saw it. This is everywhere. 

Look at the officers serving in those missions. I have always raised this issue on the Floor of Parliament, that the people who have been picked and who are serving in the missions, right from the lowest ranks, third secretaries, second secretaries  right up to the ambassador are politically appointed and they cannot perform at all. Uganda, which used to be respected everywhere in the world, today our missions have been run down. The officers cannot perform. I can be supported by colleagues on the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Public Accounts Committee who have visited missions. We have let down this country. We have run down our systems. 

There is even the issue now being raised of police officers serving in different countries. They served in Darfur, Bosnia, Liberia, Somalia and everywhere but the ministers do not come and brief us on the foreign policy of Uganda. Now there is a war going on in Mali, Syria, everywhere but there is nobody who comes to this Floor to brief the Members of Parliament about the foreign policy of Uganda or even the stand of Uganda on those pertinent issues. There is nothing. Even when Uganda is being condemned in international fora and international meetings about the issue of human rights, Government does not come to explain anything to the people of Uganda. 

I keep wondering; the ministry has got three ministers but when colleagues and Members of Parliament raise issues, you do not know what the foreign policy of Uganda is. This is a big shame. Last time, there was a scandal in London concerning officers serving in missions selling duty free items. We were embarrassed in London, but nobody came to make a statement on this Floor. (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. These are some of the issues. Before our people go out for deployment, it is pertinent that they come and explain to this House so that the Members of Parliament know whatever has taken place. 

I want to tell you that when the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence, appeared before us, what was shocking was the revelation that the US$ 200 that is deducted is used to service equipment. Can you imagine! This money is deducted from the people who have given their lives. This is blood money. This money is deducted to service the equipment, the guns and the military hardware - (Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. According to the MoU we have seen, the MoU to do with deployment of the UPDF, it talks about payment of every equipment of the Republic of Uganda; in short, hiring the guns, the uniforms, the bullets, the belts and everything. So, the deduction of the US$ 200 cannot be stated for servicing equipment which has been already hired and paid for. 

We also need to ask where the money accumulated from the hiring of this equipment is because we bought this equipment with budget money. So, this is the information I am giving you. 

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. 

THE SPEAKER: Point of order to whom? 

MR CHEMASWET: Him. (Laughter) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought hon. Wamanga had risen on a different matter of national importance but he has not restricted himself to one item, which was the issue of Canada. We have again drawn ourselves back to the question of hon. Fungaroo. Is he in order to raise many matters of national importance?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the first one hour on Thursday is dedicated to back benchers’ business. So, he can raise anything. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much for the right ruling, Madam Speaker. This is foreign policy and we want some of our colleagues, before they settle down in the House, to know some of these issues which concern the whole country.

What is also shocking is that some of this money, which is deducted from our people serving abroad, is also for training here before they go. Can you imagine? This money is deducted from officers going to serve abroad, carrying Uganda’s flag, and it is also used for training here before they leave. This is indeed very unfortunate. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would request that the government side comes here now and then to brief this House on the foreign policy of this country. Government should come out to brief us on our officers serving abroad and the state of our missions; otherwise, we are getting embarrassed now and then. I thank you, Madam Speaker.   

3.42
MR MPONGO ASUPASA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to substantiate the point hon. Wamanga has raised. 

Last year, we had a chance to visit very many missions in Europe, most of them in very appalling conditions.  All of them cry about not being supervised. It is as if they have been thrown outside Uganda and detached from Uganda completely. We were in Belgium and the situation is very bad. The villa where the ambassador is staying cannot be called a villa. It only remains so in name. We are also about to lose the land in Belgium. We have simply failed to fence off some bit of land. What is most interesting is that this land was bought during Amin’s regime, and that in this regime where we have done very many things, we seem to have failed to do equally good things abroad. 

We went to London. In London, there is - (Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to quickly add information similar to what the honourable member is raising. We were shocked when we were in China. The ambassador expressed his frustration because the Chinese Government offered land to the Ugandan Government in a very lucrative part of the city but the Ministry of Foreign Affairs totally frustrated this initiative. The ambassador even suggested that the Chinese Government can give us a loan and the money being paid for rent can service that loan, even that in itself was rejected by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. So, we really do not understand what is going on in this ministry and why we have unpatriotic people of that nature.

MR ASUPASA: Madam Speaker, further to that, in London the officers there were crying about failure by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to supervise that embassy. Long ago, Uganda regarded London as embassy No.1. Everybody would talk about going to London and we thought London was almost a brother or home to us. Now the Minister of Foreign Affairs somehow resides in London. The officials said that every weekend or every two weekends in a month, he goes to London and uses the official cars of the embassy but never visits the embassy at all when they have many problems at the embassy. 

In fact, they told us to help them and inform this House that their diplomatic immunity was withdrawn. They were asking us, “What is a diplomat without immunity?” They were crying to this country. How can they operate without immunity and the minister goes to London, knows that situation, uses the official vehicles of the embassy but leaves the situation as it is?

Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is very important that this House comes to the aid of our foreign missions. Otherwise, the type of picture we have abroad is not what we see in Uganda. We are held in low esteem because of what our embassies look like. Thank you very much.

3.46
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. If you look at the foreign policy objectives on page 29 of our Constitution, sub-section i(a) says, “The foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles of-
(a)promotion of the national interest of Uganda.”

Hon. Wamanga raises the issue of dilapidated buildings. If a structure is condemned and there are human beings living there, how can the ambassador promote the national interests of a country when he or she is living in a condemned structure? First of all, it is very embarrassing for a country like Uganda that over the years – I can assure you, those who have visited these embassies say the last paint on some of the embassy buildings was during Amin’s time. Here we are, 27 years later, calling ourselves patriotic enough to even allocate budgets for patriotism. How can you claim to be patriotic yet you do not paint structures or just do face lifting of your embassies abroad. 

Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate this is coming ultimately because most of our ambassadors are people this Government considers politically unelectable. Look at the current composition of our ambassadors. Quite a number of them were former Members of Parliament and now because they are not in this House, they must be deployed outside this country and they should sympathise and, therefore, appreciate the working environment in which they are. 

It is very unfortunate and very disturbing that the next time you and I lose an election we will be deployed in China in a structure which has never seen paint for three decades. How can somebody who is dissatisfied in his or her own country go abroad and promote a national interest? If you are deployed right now to China in a leaking house, if you are deployed to Canada, what can you say about tourism in Uganda when your own condemned structure is a tourist dis-attraction? (Laughter) 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the problem of the structures being bad notwithstanding, even the ambassadors who have recently been appointed are still lingering around in Uganda. They have not been deployed abroad. So, the issue of the face of Uganda abroad is really dying - sick structures and no people to explain how Uganda is doing. Those embassies are empty because the ambassadors are here.

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable. The underlying issue here is the government’s commitment. If you are going to attract foreign direct investments, if an investor from Canada, for example, wanted to come to Uganda, the first destination to Uganda would be the Ugandan embassy in Canada. Now that the structure is condemned, it means the country itself is condemned. Therefore, my appeal to Government – serious countries – look at our neighbours Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and visit their embassies next door and abroad! You get embarrassed. Ugandans are known for talking big and not working, and it is reflected in our embassy.

Until now, if you domesticate this matter, you would ask, a sensible country - a sensible establishment, after 30 years cannot be renting ministry offices. It would not happen but here we are, renting offices for our ministries. Meanwhile, outside the country, we cannot even sustain what our good-willed forefathers bought for us. (Interjections) We condemn Amin. Today, our ambassadors are sitting in residences which were bought by the taxpayers’ money during that primitive administration, so they say; but what has the “enlightened administration” done over the years?

So, my appeal is that as much as we want to appear good, let us appear good domestically and internationally, and restore the pearl in all the countries where we have missions. Otherwise, next time, any Member here – actually, all these ministers for Foreign Affairs, I really do not know what they do. They fly high and they are not embarrassed by the situations of their countries. (Interjections) You know, the one for Regional Cooperation is there. How do you regionally cooperate when you cannot cooperate with the paint on a wall? Very embarrassing!

Therefore, next time you are budgeting, please, think about those embassies out there. Otherwise, I will not sympathise with you at all because the embarrassment will go to our grandchildren and great grandchildren. Thank you.

3.52
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will make two points. One is about the image of Uganda, outside and the second one is about our embassies, the infrastructure. I got the opportunity to visit the embassy of Uganda in Abuja, Nigeria. What I saw is alarming. The area occupied by our office is not in very good shape, yet the Government of Nigeria has given an opportunity to Uganda by providing a plot of land where we can build our own house. The question I am putting before Government right now, when are we building a house in Abuja? 

Instead of paying people to repair our image outside as we are doing right now - they are paid every year, every month so that they can repair our image. Why don’t we provide amenities to our embassies so that they are attractive enough to bring us visitors? I am alarmed and I would like Government to explain whether we are still paying this so-called PRO expert to repair our image, including the repairing of corruption? (Interjections) I need an explanation from Government. Otherwise, there is no reason why we should continue paying $1 million to an expert to repair Uganda’s image, including repairing the image of corruption.

I want to put it to Government that the situation in our embassies is also alarming with regard to information. When one says, “Uganda is a beautiful country; it is the pearl of Africa; it is the glory of tourism and wildlife,” one must be seriously providing information that can be sold to outsiders. But one of the ambassadors I talked to in the recent past, it was in June 2011, I asked him, “Are you helping our people outside to know more about Uganda because I came here to address you on the environment, including oil?”  The ambassador said, “But we were told to say very little about oil unless we have got some extra briefing from Kampala.” Then I said, “We are in trouble.” 

Everyone is yearning to get knowledge about what is happening in Uganda pursuant to the discovery of oil, yet our ambassadors are insecure. They cannot talk publicly about oil in Uganda. Aren’t we in trouble? Do we have a serious government? What are you hiding about oil if John Ken-Lukyamuzi “the man” can articulate issues regarding oil production? Why not you and your experts in various ministries? (Member timed out.)

3.56
MRS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of other Members to thank hon. Fungaroo for raising this issue of national importance. I would like to support the prayer contained in this issue of national importance. 

When you look at the Police Force that is deployed in Somalia, these are people who come from our constituencies. When there are issues that arise, the electorate will ask us. So, we need to know the terms and conditions under which they are deployed in Somalia. The minister has to lay on Table the memorandum of understanding so that when the electorate demand an explanation from us, we can ably explain.

Further still, this Police officer deserves the right pay because the Bible tells us to give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar and to God what belongs to God. So, we would like to know how much exactly they are supposed to be paid, and why the deductions are being made. We want them to be paid the exact amount they are supposed to be paid.

I would like to observe that the Police Force has done a commendable job in maintaining law and order in this country. So, their welfare needs to be looked into because they have done very well in maintaining law and order. 

But even right here at home, when you look at the houses of the Police, they are in a pathetic situation. When you go to Naguru Police Barracks, there is only one house that has been renovated; it is opposite the office of the Police at Naguru. So, we would like to know from the minister why only one house was renovated. Those houses with tiles, it seems, were built before Independence. So, for the one which has been rehabilitated, is it the beginning of the rehabilitation of others or is it the end of the story?
There is a rumour in the Police quarters that one house was rehabilitated at Shs 500 million. We would like to know the exact cost of rehabilitating that house. And is it going to be rolled out to the other houses which are leaking –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you ruled on a point of order from my colleague, you said that people were free to talk about everything today. But I thought we need to be a little bit orderly. I thought we had finished with the Police and we were moving forward. And I thought we are on missions. I do not know whether we are going to talk backwards and forward until we have talked about everything. 

And for purposes of clarification, who are the backbenchers? I hear my brothers calling themselves ministers; are they also backbenchers? I thought this is an opportunity for us the backbenchers, but I see my brothers who call themselves shadow ministers joining me, a backbencher. 

So, Madam Speaker, are ministers also backbenchers and are all issues going to be raised at a go, making us go forward and backward?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is not a very big issue. One, about backbenchers - the one hour is for private Members’ business, not Government. So, all private Members can bring their business for that one hour. 

I believe my sister must have been caught up in the Police issues and that is why she is still there –(Laughter)– but I am sure she is going to conclude with Foreign Affairs so that we can move on. 

4.00
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD, EASTERN): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support hon. Wamanga-Wamai on the issue of the missions abroad. We are aware that the Committee on Foreign Affairs brought a report here, which indicates the status of almost all the missions of Uganda, including the properties and the issue of staffing. It was very disappointing that when the committee provided that we should at least have some money to celebrate the fifty years abroad, that money was cut, I do not know by whom. But we have heard from our missions that they did not celebrate the fifty years, yet we thought that would be the starting point of building the relations to see how we can work with the other people. 

Just last November, I was in Tanzania and we visited the mission. The mission is in an appalling state. We have land in a very prime area. All the other ambassadors have their houses there, but there is a bush in the Ugandan land, in the middle of other big developments. Then we entered the house and found over ten families being accommodated there. They were Tanzanians without accommodation. And when we looked at the boys’ quarters, they had piles of rugs and other things. We have photos of all this. 

So, Madam Speaker, there is need to debate this so that as we discuss the budget for 2013/2014, we need to do something for our missions. In fact, in Tanzania, it is very hot, but do you know that sometimes our people do not have fuel for the generator to power the AC? We were sweating in the room. It was like a sauna. 

So, as Members of Parliament, we are all Ugandans, we need to think about our image out there. When you reach there, you feel ashamed. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to look at the services. In the Tanzanian Embassy, there was only one old computer. So, I was wondering how they get data, how they keep it and how they communicate. The Ambassador who was leaving Tanzania by then gave us his experience and said he used some money to build an embassy in Egypt. And he was trying to sell the some idea. But when it comes back to the local offices here, there are stringent issues. 

I also want to bring it to the attention of the House that there is a policy, which is already in draft; I do not know when it will be ready. So, I want to know from the minister, where is the foreign policy? I know that we as a committee participated by putting in our issues. We want to see how we can take off. Maybe, it is the policy which is tying our hands. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have exhausted the one hour for the private Members’ business. But I just want to inform the government that maybe, next week, we shall just reflect the backbencher’s business for the whole week. Maybe, that will force them to come because if you are not courteous enough to come and do backbencher’s business, yet they are here every day doing work for the government side, I think it is not fair. 

The Minister of Health is not here and yet they are three; they were warned last week. The Minister of Defence is not here, they are two; one was here yesterday. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am not trying to protect my colleagues for not being here. But you know, the conduct of business in this House has changed a little bit. So, I think most of my colleagues have not yet caught up with the change. This might be one of the reasons they are not here. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am aware that when you raise a question for oral answer, they write to the minister, and before it is put on the Order Paper – it is one of the conditions of putting it on the Order Paper. I have raised one myself and I have not been put on the Order Paper yet the minister is still away. That means Parliament must have communicated. 

So, is the minister in order to allege that the business of Parliament has changed and, therefore, the ministers are yet to cope with the way Parliament is operating now, yet the Rules of Procedure of Parliament required the minister to attend the House and answer questions put to them by Members?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Thursday is a day for private Members’ business. It is the day established in this House; it is not new. My problem is that I warned the ministers last week; the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Health. I told them that on Thursday, you are answering questions. So, it is not a surprise to them. But I think they are not interested. Therefore, you are out of order my friend. 

Now, we shall expect the issues which have been raised here to the Minister of Internal Affairs, Minister of Defence, and Minister of Foreign Affairs – a lot of important issues have been raised. So, we shall expect a statement from each of those ministries. 

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday, we had handled only one clause. Can I invite the chairperson on clause 2? Are the copies distributed? Where are our stewards? They should distribute the amendments.

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we have copies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The amendments are available.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows: In sub-clause (1), insert the following new paragraph (a) “Establishing an effective legal framework to ensure that midstream operations in Uganda are carried out in a sustainable manner that guarantees optimum benefits for all Ugandans both the present and future generations.” 

The justification: To emphasise the establishment of an effective legal framework for the midstream sector to achieve optimum benefits as the critical purpose of the Act. 

Two, substitute for the current paragraph (a) the following and renumber accordingly: “(a) Enabling the development of petroleum refining, gas conversion transit pipelines and mainstream storage facilities.” 

The justification: To remove activities that belong to the upstream petroleum value chain and to include more activities that are part of the midstream operations.

In paragraph (b), substitute for the words, “petroleum processing, transportation and storage facilities,” the words, “midstream operations.” 

The justification: to separate the upstream and midstream segments of the petroleum industry. The consequence of such a change is that throughout the Bill, most references to petroleum activities should be substituted with “midstream operations.”

Substitute for paragraphs (c), the following: “(c) Regulating the planning, preparation, licensing, installation and maintenance of facilities for midstream operations.” 

The justification: Consequential amendment to separate the segments of the petroleum industry.

Substitute for paragraph (d), the following: “(d) Providing for security of midstream facilities.” 

The justification: The security envisaged in this clause is in regard to midstream facilities.

Substitute for paragraph (e), the following: “(e) Promoting equitable access to facilities for midstream operations.” 

The justification: To bring out the fact that the equitable access is to facilities in the midstream petroleum value chain.  

In paragraph 8, insert the words, “in relation to” immediately after the word “in” and delete the word “petroleum” appearing immediately after the word “midstream”. 

The justification: The provision applies to public safety and health, and the environment in midstream operations.
 
Substitute for paragraph (g), the following: “(g) Promoting state participation and national content in midstream operations.” 

The justification: To promote state participation and national content in the midstream petroleum value chain.
 
I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that new provisions as proposed by the chairperson – 

MR BYANDALA: I am not following, on page 2. He said in sub-clause (1), you insert (a); and then in two substitute and there is still “(a)”. Are there two (‘a’s) or what?

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Chairperson, I said that in the second (a), change the number and I think that will be handled accordingly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the new provisions as proposed by the chairperson be introduced in clause 2.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 3 – 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, on the interpretation, amend clause 3 as follows –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, shouldn’t we do that last? Are there no changes anyway in the text on the interpretation? Why don’t we skip it and then we will do it once at the end.

Clause 4

MR WERIKHE: Clause 4 is on page 11 of the document you have. Clause 4, “Compliance with environmental principles”. Amend clause 4 as follows –(Interruption)  

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I did not hear us pronounce ourselves on clause 3; we had an amendment on clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not considered clause 3. It will come last because there may be changes to the interpretation during the debate.  

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate that we are handling a very important piece of legislation. As we are aware, this document was given to the Members last year and you can see right now that most Members have actually misplaced the copies over the long Christmas recess, and now many of them are asking for another copy to enable them peruse through and appreciate issues therein so that as we proceed, all of us are brought on board. In the interest and magnitude of the issue of oil, which is being discussed, it would be very good that we all move together in harmony so that we can also explain to the country or to our constituents how the proceedings have moved on.

The guidance I am seeking is, wouldn’t it be prudent probably if these Members were allowed over this weekend to - just for the sake of harmony and it is not a delaying tactic - in light of the fact that even as we are starting right now, it is already 4.00 p.m. and the quorum of the House as you can see, is really scanty, and for the benefit of moving in harmony. I know my chairperson of the committee will appreciate how we moved on in harmony and we have gone so far, that we as the Northern people say, “One night cannot make the food go sour.” We could, for heaven’s sake, for this country, allow Members to peruse through the report this weekend and the first thing on the Order Paper on Tuesday, we handle this without any ado.

I seek your guidance, Madam Chair.
    
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I believe that all of you are represented on the Business Committee. The Business Committee sat and designed the programme for this session. Since Monday last week, this item has been on the Order Paper as business to follow. 

Yesterday, we had started on it and the Members asked for the harmonised text, which you provided after your meeting in Entebbe. Oil is important, but it is taking a lot of our time at the expense of other business. So, let us move on.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, sub-clause (1) under clause 4 is also proposed for amendment; to substitute the words, “Give effect to” in the second last line with the words, “Comply with” to read as follows: “A licensee and also a person who exercises or performs functions, duties or powers under this Act in relation to midstream operations...” that is an amendment; “to petroleum activities” amended to “midstream operations”; “...shall take into account and comply with the environmental principles prescribed by the National Environment Act and other applicable laws.” 

The amendment is to amend “petroleum activities” to “midstream operations” and also to substitute the words, “give effect to” with the words, “comply with.” That is the amendment in sub-clause (1).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think you better run through them all.

MR WERIKHE: Insert a new sub-clause (2) immediately after sub-clause (1) as follows: “A licensee shall ensure that the management of transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of midstream operations is carried out in accordance with environmental principles and safeguards prescribed under the National Environment Act and other applicable laws.”

b) 	By renumbering the current sub-clause (2) as sub-clause (3) and substituting it for the following: “3) A licensee shall contract a separate entity to manage the transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of midstream operations.”

c) 	By inserting a new sub-clause (4), as follows: (4) “For the avoidance of doubt, the licensee shall remain responsible for the operations of the entity referred to under sub-clause (3)”

d) 	By substituting for the current sub-clause (3), the following: (3) “The National Environment Management Authority in consultation with the Authority may grant a license for the management of transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste, arising out of midstream operations to an entity contracted by a licensee under sub-section (3) on terms and conditions prescribed in the licence.”

e) 	By substituting for the current sub-clause (4), the following: “A person contracted by the licensee under sub-section (3) shall not carry out those activities without a licence issued by National Environment Management Authority.”

f) 	By inserting a new sub-clause (7), immediately after the current sub-clause (6) as follows: “Regulations made under sub-section (6) shall be laid before Parliament.” 

The justification: For consistency with the upstream Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 4 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert the following new clause before clause 5: “Functions of the minister. The minister shall be responsible for:

    a) Granting and revoking licenses;
    b) Initiating, developing and implementing policy concerning midstream operations;
    c) Submitting draft legislation to Parliament;
    d) Initiating regulations from midstream operations; 
    e) Negotiating and endorsing agreements under this Act;
    f) Promoting and sustaining transparency in the midstream petroleum sector; and
    g) Any other functions incidental or consequential to his or her functions under this Act.”

The justification: To provide for the functions of the minister in midstream operations and consistency with the upstream Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question -

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am sorry that once again, we are having to, hurriedly, look at the proposed amendments vis-à-vis the original position. Madam Chairperson, it is true in the upstream Bill we had agreed to (a),(b),(c),(d) - I am not sure whether under (e), it is the minister alone, as a stand-alone, or we agreed on some position. Then (f), how will the minister, having done (a),(b),(c),(d),(e) promote transparency in the midstream petroleum sector and any other function incidental or consequential to his or her functions?

This is very broad, honourable minister, and I do not know whether a person in principle who grants and revokes; who initiates, develops and implements policy, and submits draft legislation, will at the same time go on to promote and sustain transparency in the sector of which he or she is the principal actor. 

I needed clarification on how the person who is vested with all these powers and responsibilities can at the same time be the very person to promote transparency in the same office. I need that clarification. And the problem I see is that we are now trying to jump – by the time we get to it, we would have already moved to another clause.

Can we be guided on this? Similarly, if we had slept over this - because since yesterday, we had come to your office, Madam Chairperson, to complain that until 1.00 p.m. we had not received these amendments. We are just looking at them right now, and you can understand how we are trying to look at the Bill, the harmonised report and the initial report. And that is how many of these major points of consideration will slip off unnoticed. And that is why hon. Beatrice Anywar had proposed that we look at the report again. But even then, can we have an explanation on how you are trying to put all the responsibilities on this bigger than the world minister. How will the minister sustain all this? 
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you recall that hon. Gen. Jim Muhwezi was one time a Minister of Health and he was not a medical person. He was heading the Ministry of Health. Now, supposing you put here hon. Kiyingi who does not know anything about petroleum to head the ministry; and he is the one to negotiate. That is why if you are saying, “to be advised by technocrats” I would want to know why we are getting people who are technical out of the picture and putting a politician to come and negotiate everything on behalf of the people of Uganda. What are the safeguards? Because in this case he grants, initiates and revokes. He initiates regulations, he negotiates and endorses, promotes -(Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we spent a lot of time discussing the Upstream Bill before we passed it into law. What we are dealing with now are sequential amendments, which means it has to just follow what was already agreed upon. So, I would like to inform you that what we are doing is to shift from Upstream to the Midstream. Please, be informed accordingly and please, let us continue. (Laughter)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, you will excuse me; I have an ugly cough. However, I would like to seek your guidance even though I seem to be repeating what has already been said. As a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, I tried to keenly follow the proposed amendments and the issues that were raised in Entebbe. I just got this copy, a few minutes ago, and my head is scattered. I have tried to read it and make a summary, but I seem not to see some of the things that we harmonised while in Entebbe, yet, we are trying to move on harmoniously. 

In the circumstances, Madam Chairperson, is it okay - after all, we cannot finish this Bill today because it is bulky. If it is in the interest of harmony and doing a smart job, can we just stand over this Bill, and allow some people like me, do some reading and make some comparisons so that I get convinced that I am moving in harmony with the rest of the House. Otherwise, there is already an issue of disharmony but which I am not going to talk about unless I am boxed into some corner. I, therefore, beg for time until Tuesday –(Interjections)- if you can please let me - because I have just got this bulky document, which seems to have left out some of the amendments we made in Entebbe, but I do not seem to see them captured in here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think it is not fair for the Committee on Natural Resources to hold this Parliament at ransom. That is not fair. We spent three months on the Upstream Bill at the expense of everything else. No, let us move on. If there are areas where we get to disagree, we will sleep over those. Otherwise, for now, let us move on, please.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, are you saying that we should now not suggest anything on this Bill –(Interjections)– yes!

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, do not impute improper motives; “they want to delay by an adjournment because they want to go and read it.” But I am saying they should not hold us at ransom anymore. If there are areas they do not agree upon, we will sleep on those, but let us move on. Just identify them and we can put them aside.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, one morning, a minister in charge will get onto a plane to London or America and will come back with signed agreements, signed on behalf of the people of Uganda. I want to plead with you - don’t you think it is better for us to stay this Bill and we – (Interruptions)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, allow me give some information. I recall that our colleagues on the other side asked to have this clause on the functions of the minister stood over thrice. It was only agreed upon when it appeared the fourth time. I also recall that all the issues he is raising were thoroughly debated that time by Members from both divides of the House.

What the chairperson of the committee is doing is intended to keep consistency between the mainstream and the midstream. That is the justification. So, when you say we stand over some of them, I do not know what we are going to sleep over. This clause, on the functions of a minister, delayed this Bill for almost a week. I was present in this House and I recall that very well.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, thank you very much for that information. Madam Chairperson, what I want to point out is that if this is included in the Upstream Bill, why do you put it in this one? If you believe this part is catered for in the other Bill, then it is not necessary to include it in this one. If we are making another law, then we should list the terms for that law. We do not have to necessarily pass it –(Mr Ruhindi rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us listen to the Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, it is true that we went through the Upstream Bill and this matter was exhaustively debated. I, of course, appreciate the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, when he says that this is a different Bill culminating into another law. But certainly, the subject matter is the same. We are only providing different legislations for different levels of managing a resource through the same institutional infrastructure.

Since the institutional infrastructure we passed in the Upstream Bill, we maintained the expression and use of the word “minister”. I do not see how we can change it in this Bill.

Even for purposes of simple and logical debates, really, when we refer – look at the definition of “minister” in the definition clause; it says “Minister” means “the minister responsible for...” meaning that the minister takes the responsibility for certain actions and activities in his/her organisation. It does not mean that that person will be the alpha and omega in the institutional framework, in terms of executing responsibilities. That is impossible and no one person can ever do that.

Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that we move on with the proposed amendments as put forward by the chairperson of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause 5 be introduced as proposed by the chairperson of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 6, on the functions of the Authority, the committee proposes the following:

i) (a) delete the word “petroleum” appearing immediately after the word “midstream” and the words “and activities in Uganda” appearing after the word “operations.”

The justification: To provide for the activities of the Authority in regard to the midstream segment of the petroleum industry; (b) amend sub-clause (2) as follows: In paragraph (a), substitute for the words “petroleum, refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words “midstream operations.” 

The justification: To modify the provision to restrict its application to the midstream segment of the petroleum industry.

ii) In paragraph (b), substitute for the words “petroleum processing, transportation and storage facilities” with the words “midstream operations and facilities.” 

The justification:  To modify the provisions to restrict its application to the midstream segment of the petroleum industry. 

iii) We also propose that we insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph (b), and renumber them accordingly: “Advise the minister in the negotiation of agreements regarding midstream operations and in the granting and revoking of licences.” (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise on a point of procedure. The issue of oil in Uganda is the only hope for this country and everybody is looking at how best to position themselves to benefit from it. We spent quite a lot of time on the Upstream Bill, and went into details to enable us appreciate and move together.
 
The Bill we are handling is very critical and how we make this law to enable Ugandans participate in these activities is paramount and historical to the institution of Parliament. 

Madam Chairperson, we have stood and pleaded with you to reconsider that much as we have many businesses, this is the most important business of this time, and how we handle it is going to be historical. I pray that it will be procedurally right if you allow the Members who have dissenting views or those who are requesting for more time to internalise and more so when you are saying that it is the honourable minister - one official, will handle activities single-handedly from – (interruption) 

MR ASUMAN KIYINGI: Madam Chairperson, the question of Members requesting for more time to consider this Bill has been raised by more than two Members from this side, and you have clearly, audibly and decisively ruled on the matter that we are going to proceed; but Members are repeatedly raising the question. Is the honourable member in order to repeatedly raise a question over which you have already ruled?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have already ruled on that matter. Let us proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: The justification: To include among the functions of the Authority the rendering of advice to the minister in the negotiation of agreements, granting, suspending and evoking of licences in the midstream segment.

iv)In the former paragraph (c), insert the words “pertaining to midstream operations” immediately after the word “plans.” 

The justification: The plans relate to midstream operations.
 
v) In paragraph (d), insert the words “and other applicable terms” -(Interjections)- I have guidance from the Chairperson. We have only one Chairperson in this House, honourable colleagues, and I have the green light from the Chairperson. 

Insert the words “and other applicable terms” immediately before the words “rules” and delete the words “and other contract terms.” 

The justification: To accommodate other terms the licensees may be required to –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw your attention to rule 23(3) of our Rules of Procedure, and the rules stipulate the number of Members required to conduct very serious business like voting on a Bill. I hold the view that Members present in the House are not one third of the Members and I would like to draw your attention to it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, take the Floor. 

MR WERIKHE: The justification: To accommodate other terms the licensees may be required to accord beyond those in the contract, for example, those in the licence or issued in directives. 

vi) Substitute for paragraph (e), the following: “administer any agreements and contracts between Government and the licensee related to midstream operations. 

The justification:  To reflect that the agreements or contracts referred to in the provision relate only to midstream operations. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, you are the custodian of our Rules of Procedure; the person expected to jealously guard the Rules of Procedure and the integrity of this House is the Chairperson. Our rules clearly stipulate that if the issue of quorum is raised like, indeed, the honourable members have raised, the business is suspended until you ascertain whether there is actually quorum in the House, because we are beginning to vote. 

Personally, I do not mind proceeding with the Bill, but we need to proceed in the correct way and in accordance with the law. The point of procedure I, therefore, rise on is, is it correct for this Parliament to proceed when the Members raised an issue that there is no quorum, and yet we proceed as if the issue of quorum has not been raised?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am ascertaining the quorum.

MR WERIKHE: (vii) in paragraph (f), substitute for the word “utilisation” the word “use.” 

The justification: The term “utilisation” that has been proposed for deletion as the resource management aspect of controlling utilisation of petroleum in the upstream segment is not present to the same extent for midstream operations. 

viii) Substitute for paragraph (h), the following: “promote, regulate, enforce and monitor standards of operations and code of practise for midstream operations. 

The justification: To delete and restrict the provisions of midstream operations and apply a more suitable word “promotion” instead of “encouraging.” 

ix) Substitute for paragraph (j) the words “gas processing” with the word “conversion.” The justification:  To remove “gas processing” from the midstream petroleum value chain and introduce the relevant midstream term “conversion.”
 
x) In paragraph (k), insert the words “in cooperation with other Government agencies at the beginning of the provision” and substitute the words “petroleum activities” with the words “midstream operations.” 

The justification: To require the Authority to cooperate with other Government agencies to ensure compliance with health and environmental requirements in midstream operations. 

xi) Substitute for paragraph (l), the following: ensure, monitor and facilitate access to and use of facilities by third parties. 

The justification: There is need to regulate competition to keep facilities within the required numbers that make economic sense, especially since they are too expensive to construct and costs can only be recovered when only the required number of facilities is put up, and to provide for ensuring monitoring and facilitating access to and use of facilities by third parties.

xii) In paragraph (n), substitute for the words “petroleum activities” with the words “midstream operations.” 

The justification:  The oil information required here is in regard to collection of taxes and ease of midstream operations.

xiii) Delete paragraphs (p) and (q). 

The justification: The role of developing regulations is a policy role to be performed by the minister. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.48
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.49
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012” and passed clauses 2, 4 and 5 with amendments, and clause 3 was skipped since it is an interpretation clause and will be handled at the end. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.50
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
