


Thursday, 15 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.08 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to thank you for finishing the process of handling the Budget Framework Paper. As you are aware, this is the season for the budget. Due to the fact that we have not had any break since that matter started, today we are very likely to go for a short recess to enable you catch up with other things in the constituencies. 

Therefore, let us see how much business we can do today, bearing in mind that we are likely to break off for two or three weeks. Thereafter, we shall come back and continue with the business of the budget.

2.10
MR MWINE MPAKA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance related to cybercrime caused by incompetence of the relevant ministry.

On Wednesday, 20 December 2017, the phone of a colleague, hon. Ishma Mafabi, was hacked and his Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card was cloned. We all received messages saying that he was in a meeting and he would call us later. Meanwhile, he had requested us to deposit Shs 980,000 using Airtel money on a SIM card registered in the names of Eunice Ssekyewa and he would refund the money later after the meeting. The message also stated that if we did not have the money, then we should borrow it. 

Unfortunately, some of us sent this money to our colleague to rescue him. However, when we met him later in plenary, he told us that he had not asked us for money. We thought he was playing monkey tricks with us and he had taken this money. We could not believe that a SIM card could be cloned. 

Mr Speaker, two days ago, my SIM card was also cloned. It was active but I could not call and neither could I receive phone calls. In the meantime, someone was using it to send messages to everyone I know, asking them for Shs 980,000 and people have lost a lot of money. 

Mr Speaker, we registered our SIM cards last year and we believe a SIM card belongs to one person. We managed to meet the Director of Uganda Communications Commission (UCC), Mr Godfrey Mutabazi, but to our surprise, he told us that the equipment they have in their ministry is not even at the level of that of the telecommunication companies such as MTN and Airtel. This means that they do not even have the capacity to regulate these telecommunication companies but also to safeguard Ugandans from cybercrime. 

As soon as I arrived in the country, I reported this case to both the police and MTN. After restoring my SIM card and my WhatsApp, I found myself on the Cabinet WhatsApp group, yet I have never been a Cabinet Member. My profile picture had also changed to that of Minister Christopher Kibanzanga. 

Therefore, I rise on a matter of national importance because this cybercrime is very dangerous. Can the ministry come up with a statement explaining to the Ugandans issues of their safety? This is because we are not only using these SIM cards for mobile money but also for mobile banking. Can the minister come up with a statement? If they do not have money to buy equipment, can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provide equipment to protect Ugandans from this cybercrime? Thank you very much. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): We will collaborate with the Ministry of ICT to make a statement. 

2.15
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Over the last three weeks, wildfires have swept through my constituency, particularly in a village called Nayonaiangikalio; 179 villages were burnt down. In Nabwal, two days ago, another huge manyata, comprising several families, lost all property including calves and goats that they had tied. Their huts were burnt down with beddings, saucepans, and people lost a lot of money from the savings groups. 

Mr Speaker, I have tried to bring this matter up with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. However, it looks like the majority of their focus is on our brothers and sisters from the neighbouring countries – the refugees. I am so hurt because you cannot be seen to be more concerned about the children of your neighbour when yours are starving and are in critical condition in a hospital. 

Mr Speaker, we would like to know from the Government whether Ugandans are not a priority when it comes to matters of emergency such as this one. It is not just affecting individuals. You know, in Karamoja due to the history of conflict, people build a lot of grass thatched huts covering so many households. When there is wind and a fire, people prioritise on rescuing human life and not property. 

In the countryside, particularly in Karamoja, due to lack of banks, a lot of people keep their money in Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisation (SACCOs). I am aware that about seven SACCOs have lost money worth Shs 111 million. In my district, Nakapiripirit, we do not have a single bank and so the people keep money in their homes, in gourds and metal boxes. 

Can Government explain whether such matters affecting Ugandans are of any importance to them or it is only now that we are focusing on refugees? It is not that I have anything against refugees. However, shouldn’t Ugandans’ problems be addressed when they arise, such as this one where I have been faced with a matter that I cannot handle as an individual? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is some concern from many Ugandans that a lot of famous Government schools across the country, including those in Karamoja like Moroto High School, Kotido Senior Secondary School and Kaabong Senior Secondary School, are not doing well. Personally, I left Karamoja to go and study in Gulu at a top school then. 

Is education in Uganda becoming a priority for only those who have money and are able to access quality education in urban towns in Kampala, Mbarara or Mbale? What is Government’s plan to improve the standards of education in the different regions of this country? It is a disaster. What are we doing to encourage people to leave Mbale and go study in Moroto or to leave Fort Portal and go study in Gulu? 

What is Government’s plan to normalise the standards of education in this country because as they stand now, it is only people who have money who can come here to Kampala and have access to education and pass. The rest of the country - When the results like the UCE results were released, we noted that if a student had not moved out of Karamoja, they were not able to score any kind of grade that can take them forward. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we take the concern of the honourable member. Obviously, we do value Karamoja and we have done a lot for the Karamoja region. The Karamoja people are Ugandans and they should be cared for like any other Ugandan. We will ask the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to come here to, first and foremost, attend to the issue immediately, but also to inform the House on the steps that they are taking to address that situation. 

On the issue of education, Mr Speaker you will allow the education minister either now or as he makes a statement, to respond to that question that has been raised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is here.

2.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Mr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. All of us are equally concerned about what is happening and we have a very good plan for all areas in Uganda so as to improve on the existing quality of education.

One of the measures we have taken is to re-tool the teachers who are managing our education institutions all over the country. In our plan, we have quite a number of refresher courses for the teachers beginning with those areas where things are terribly bad. 

As I have been telling you, we have a plan to make sure that each and every parish has a primary school that is very well facilitated and equipped with scholastic materials and with teachers who are professional and properly prepared to handle the business. I have talked about this many times. We are even reviewing the curriculum, right from primary, secondary up to the end, to ensure that where there are issues that do not prepare the kind of human resource we need today –(Interruption)

MR AKOL: Mr Speaker, education is very important for this country and when you look at the performance in the Government schools, it is very bad. Would it be procedurally right for him to give us this information this way? 

I would really request that he prepares himself to come out with written information for Members to know what the challenges are and how they are going to be addressed, instead of just coming up now and trying to figure out something to give us the information. It is very important. I request.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it depends on what method you elect to use in seeking information from the Executive arm of Government. If you choose to bring it under urgent matters, then they respond that way. If you choose any other way, they will respond differently with a comprehensive statement and all those other things. Therefore, the minister is proceeding very well.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For areas that are hard to reach, we have even introduced an allowance that will attract good teachers. In the past, good teachers were concentrating in the urban centres and in the city. Now we have introduced a hard-to-reach allowance to attract people to go to such areas. However, of course when the facilities are fully improved, definitely the quality will go up.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The clarification I would like to seek is whether Obongi is one of the places that you have included as a hard-to-reach area, so that we can get teachers there. Obongi is one of the places affected by bad performance. Are you talking about Karamoja only? How about the other hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay places like Obongi with poor performance in education; are they on your list?

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, hon. Fungaroo. This programme is not only for Karamoja; it is for all areas in Uganda that are hard to reach, and Obongi happens to be one of them since it is not easy to access. Our planning is targeting all areas in Uganda.

Where infrastructure is not adequate, we have planned to build more classrooms, put in place laboratories and everything that will make the learning environment conducive to learning. I submit, Mr Speaker.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I do not think giving teachers refresher courses is good enough to cover the gap. There is a serious gap of inspection, honourable minister. As with any work, without supervision people will tend to just relax. 

You now have district inspectors of schools, but these inspectors cannot inspect all the schools in the district. What is happening at the district is that the inspector sits at the district and the headmasters bring the visitor’s book. The inspector then signs in the book and goes back to school. 

Why can’t we have inspectors at subcounty level, even if they are at diploma level because it may be very expensive at degree level? Let us have inspectors at subcounty level so that the headmasters and teachers know that there is a supervisor nearby, other than having a district inspector at the district. 

Additionally, you send this money quarterly. By the time you send this money, this officer has already got his problems and he is ready to use that money for other issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, thank you very much. Let the member for Pian raise his supplementary issue and then we can close it.

MR ACHIA: Mr Speaker, through the Ministry of Education and Sports and the support of the Irish Government, 13 state-of-the-art modern secondary schools were built in Karamoja. They had all the facilities like laboratories and well fenced premises. 

Since the last time that the Minister of Education and Sports visited Karamoja, about four years ago, those schools have been left. I have a state-of-the-art school called Ariengesiep Senior Secondary School. Last week when I was in my constituency, I discovered that the teachers are not there. I went to the school and found two teachers who are on the payroll. The teachers who had been there a few years ago have left. 

When I talked to the District Education Officer (DEO) of Nakapiripirit District, he said he has no control over the teachers sent by the Ministry of Education and Sports. They have gone away and these children are there in that state-of-the-art modern school without any guidance from the ministry or any support to find out what is going on with the infrastructure they put in place. It is so painful to get bad results from this state-of-the-art modern school. It is better than some of the schools we have in Kampala here – (Interruption)

DR LOKII: Thank you very much, hon. Remigio, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issue of education standards in Uganda is very critical. The education system seems to be running out of hand and this can be proved by the results that are coming out from Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE), Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) and Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) exams. There is a lot that is required in as far as improving the education standards in Uganda is concerned. 

The information I would like to give my colleague is that Kaabong Secondary School, with a population of about 600 students, has three teachers only for both O’ level and A’ level. Now, how do you expect such a school to perform well when you have three teachers only managing 600 students for at both O’ level A’ level? I think the minister really needs to come in; otherwise, the situation is running out of hand.

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: I have a quick clarification to seek, Mr Speaker. Bundibugyo District, where I come from, was the third from behind in the last O’level examinations. You talked of incentives for hard-to-reach areas, where Bundibugyo falls. Areas that are hard to reach go hand-in-hand with being hard to stay in. What happens is that the teachers you send to us just accept to come, appear on the payroll and run away. 

At the local level, we have gone ahead to propose to the ministry that we change the mode of recruitment and do schools-based recruitment. This is because there are teachers who are not officially recruited by Government but are there in schools and are willing to teach if they are appointed. Your ministry has adamantly refused to follow that. For those who are there and are able to teach and stay there, why don’t you recruit them from there because they are already there? Why do you recruit people from Mubende, take them to Bundibugyo and after appearing on the payroll, they run away?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you realise that this issue is much bigger?

MR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I visited Karamoja last academic term and I would like to tell you that what my colleague is saying about Kaabong SS is not correct – (Interjection)– I will come back and give you the facts as they are. What I know is that this school has more than 13 teachers. If they have run away, I would like to ask my colleague – (Interruption)

DR LOKII: Mr Speaker, I have listened to hon. John Chrysostom Muyingo, the Minister of State for Education and Sports, labouring to explain the deteriorating education standards to this House and to Uganda in general. 

It perturbs me when the minister downplays the concerns which Members are raising. Is he in order to say the information I have supplied to the House and country regarding the three teachers of Kaabong SS is not true when I come from Karamoja?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The challenge I have is that I have not visited Kaabong SS. I am not the MP for that area and I am not the minister. Now, you have asked me to rule on a factual matter. It is very difficult. However, honourable minister, you need to harmonise your facts because the Member from the area says he found three teachers and you are saying something else. Are you talking about the same school?

MR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, we are going to harmonise. As I conclude, I would like to say that we have given inspection priority. Beginning with this academic term, which started this month, we have given the education offices in all districts vehicles. We have given inspectors motorcycles. 

Although these inspectors are operating from the districts, we have attached an inspector to each sub-county all over Uganda –(Interjections)– This is what I am talking about; we have attached them – (Interjections) - They belong to the districts. Finally, I have submitted to this House before that we have a challenge –(Interruption)

Mr MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, we talk here with a lot of pain because when the standards are very low, they abuse us, the MPs, as if we also pick chalk and teach in classes. 

I talk as a Member of Parliament who is on the ground. For all the time I have been in Parliament here, I have not seen any inspector at the sub-county. The inspector we have is at the district and like I have told you, the headmasters go with visitors’ books to the district to visit the inspector. Is the honourable minister, who is based here in Kampala, in order to disagree with us, Members of Parliament, who are on the ground?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, maybe your district is also hard to reach and the inspectors have left. Honourable minister, I think let us deal with things that are factual. If it is factual within the ministry then it is factual. If it is not and the Members are saying so, then you need to do something to harmonise these facts.

MR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, I think there are many issues Members would like to know concerning the interventions we have come up with. Probably, I will be given another time when I should come back with the detailed measures we are putting in place. Otherwise, the situation is improving greatly. Even when you look at the Uganda Nation Examinations Board (UNEB) results that have been released in the recent past, there are signs showing that we are moving in the right direction.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, when you come back, it will no longer be a response to a question; it will be your own statement, which will attract a full debate. Therefore, you are going to give us a comprehensive statement covering these issues that have been raised together with what you would like to brief Parliament about in that sector. This will be as soon as we resume Parliament.

2.40
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this matter of national importance. Around midday today, about 10 youth came looking for me with a copy of this newspaper. It has a screaming headline saying that an investor who robbed Ugandans fled, leaving almost 50 of them stranded, and he fleeced about Shs 2 billion from these Ugandans. One of the youths comes from Bududa. 

Mr Speaker, given the high rate of unemployment, unemployed youth have fallen prey to these quack investors. This particular investor had rented a floor on Plot 32, Lumumba Avenue, in Nakasero, Kampala. He is a Turkish investor. This information came much later after he had mysteriously disappeared. He duped a forex bureau of billions of shillings and he had actually opened up a posh spacious office on that floor.

Mr Speaker, it seems that our immigration system lacks the capacity to effectively monitor these foreigners who enter and leave Uganda. The investor masqueraded as the director of East African Capital Logistics Company. He actually had many businessmen from whom he acquired a number of equipment, including very expensive software. In fact, it is possible that some of our security agents could be aiding some of these criminals to execute their dirty missions here in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I am raising this clarion call to have Ugandans protected. Way back in the early 1990s, you remember some pauper came here with premier lottery to scratch for cash. He ripped Ugandans left, right and centre and he is now the tycoon of sorts. Therefore, Ugandans ought to be protected. 

My prayer is that these innocent unsuspecting gullible youth who were exploited by this investor be compensated. There should also be some tough immigration and investment laws to effectively monitor those who come in and leave in order to keep in check this dubious - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you confirmed that the laws are lacking in any way?

MR NAMBESHE: There must be gaps in the laws. Besides, those who enforce the laws could be violators of the laws. I think this ought to be investigated. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, investment is handled by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Development. What immigration does is to give someone a work permit. 

By the time we give a work permit, that person already has documentation concerning the business that he or she has registered, which is done by Uganda Investment Authority. This person would have already deposited the equivalent amount of money that they would wish to invest, or have evidence of that money being deposited, in Bank of Uganda. Therefore, in brief, our role as the Ministry of Internal Affairs is at the tail end of the investment process. I think the Minister of Finance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there a gap in the immigration law, which is being articulated hon. Nambeshe? Do you feel that there is a gap in the immigration law?

MR OBIGA KANIA: In terms of the law, I do not see a gap. However, operationally, we intend to have a one-stop centre under the Uganda Investment Authority. Therefore, it is not so much about the absence of the law but more to do with enforcement. 

MR KASIBANTE: Mr Speaker, I have attentively listened to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. The story that hon. Nambeshe has put across appeared in a Government newspaper. That newspaper is given freely to senior Government officials, and I am very sure that the minister is covered under that arrangement. However, the minister is just lamenting but not saying anything about what his ministry has done as far as this scam is concerned.

As a journalist, I am aware that if a story appears in the newspapers today, it may not have necessarily been committed yesterday. When you read details of the story, these Ugandans have complained, including the Uganda Police Force, and yet the minister is still lamenting.

Mr Speaker, is the Minister of State for Internal Affairs in order to go on lamenting instead of telling us how far Government has gone with the process of safeguarding Ugandans and ensuring that this quack investor can vomit this money? I have seen Ugandans being traced. The former Mayor of Kampala, Alhaji Nasser Ntege Ssebagala, was traced and arrested by the Government of the United States of America. We have a government here that even registered this quack investor when he was coming in. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to come and lament to us instead of assuring us that these Ugandans are going to be safeguarded after losing their money to this quack investor?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was not the specific issue raised to the minister. The specific issue that caused me to ask the minister to respond is whether there are gaps in the immigration laws and procedures that is causing this problem, which is a general policy matter. That is the matter the minister was addressing. Otherwise, the specifics of the people who were arrested were not raised by the Member. I am sure he had not addressed his mind to that.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, I thought I should thank you for giving this wonderful specific ruling, rather than going around. Thank you very much.

MR AGABA: Mr Speaker, I do not think the minister is safe yet. I would like to believe that the minister is being evasive on this matter. I say this because the Ministry of Internal Affairs gives these people visas to come to Uganda. Secondly, they are received at the airport and their passports are stamped, showing that they have entered. Thirdly, the Ministry of Internal Affairs also gives these investors work permits; they give their own workers work permits. 

Uganda Investment Authority may assess the investor, but the minister is also aware that the Ministry of Internal Affairs assesses the level of investment. That is the kind of permit they give. They also deposit some money with immigration so that when they run away, they do not cheat Ugandans. All this is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

Therefore, the clarification I would like to seek from the minister is whether he is aware that this process exists in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The attraction of investors is with Uganda Investment Authority but having them settle in Uganda and employing Ugandans to take care of their workers is under his ministry. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to attempt to describe the process. A person out there, for thousands of reasons, applies online to come to Uganda. Some of these reasons include to visit or to come and look at business prospects. When this person comes to Entebbe or to any of our border posts, we do not give them a work permit. We give them a pass to enter into Uganda and that pass is initially for three months.

After three months, if the person still needs more time to stay in Uganda for whatever reason, we extend the pass for another three months. It is during that time that the person goes around the country and to different ministries to express his or her interest. If that person is an investor, for example, they will then go to Uganda Investment Authority. They will brief him on the processes of registering a company, where he could register, the documents required and so on and so forth. That is all outside the ambit of the Immigration Department.

It is only when the person has registered or applied to be a worker that he comes back to immigration to apply for what we call a work permit. That work permit will be given for the period that the person applied for. Some are for six months while others are for one year, two years, three years. All that I am describing here is the role that immigration plays. 

We do have a role in facilitating investors and people who come here, when we give them work permits and visas to come into the country. However, beyond that, we will not know whether this person coming has the intention to come and cheat Ugandans. We will not know whether this person, deep down in his heart, is coming to mistreat Ugandans. I thought I should explain our role up to that point. Thank you.

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, a distinction should be made between an investor and a con person. 

Every single day, we receive good people because of the efforts we have put in place to attract investors into our country. They are coming in big numbers and we should welcome them to invest in our country. However, once in a while bad people come in, and not only from foreign countries, but even from within our country. You remember an organisation called Caring for Orphans, Widows and the Elderly (COWE), which moved around the country and fleeced Ugandans of a lot of money. 

Mr Speaker, in this particular case, we want to check, and we will check, whether we actually licensed this particular person as an investor or not. If he was licensed, it would be a lesson for us that maybe we need to do some good groundwork to check the background of some of these investors. 

I take this opportunity to appeal to all Ugandans to be alert. There are people who disguise themselves as doing good things when actually they are not. In this particular case, from the reports that we got, it appears that these are signs of a man who was desperately looking at how to con Ugandans. I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should follow this up. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.54
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of urgent national importance in regard a story that featured on television and radio stations regarding a child that was discovered acutely malnourished in my constituency. 

Mr Speaker, this child had been battered and mistreated by its carer, who is known to be an aunt or a sister to the father. The brief story is that the child’s parents separated. The father practises witchcraft in Kyenjojo District. The mother failed to look after the children and dumped them with the sister of the father. I am told she came back to Kampala and got married somewhere. 

The person who received the children, Nabukeera, a sister to the father, equally negated on her roles to parent and look after these children. Not only that, she mistreated and battered these two children. Unfortunately, if you see the 12-year-old sickly child, Sulait, you will shed tears because he does not even look like a four-year-old child. He was acutely malnourished. She used to tie him on a banana stem so that he could not move around for the community to see him.

I raise this as an issue of urgent national importance for two reasons: One, I believe most of the Members of Parliament, including myself and many Ugandans, have not been raised by their parents. The African way of raising children has been that children belong to the community; everybody cares about every child and as you grow up, you do not mess up anyhow in the village simply because you are a child of so and so.

Two, when I went to this village, Kinyaigara to find out why the villagers ignored such an act against a child, I was informed that they know Nabukeera as a witchdoctor. Therefore, they all feared to talk about it because they knew there would be repercussions against them if they did. 

The good news is that two children were recovered and saved. The sickly child has been resuscitated, but our prayer is that Government comes in to assist Ntara Health Centre IV. They only had the capacity to resuscitate this child, but they cannot nurse him back to normal because he needs specialised treatment and care. He needs a nutritionist to help with what he eats so that he can recover properly.

The news of a one Ssebanga is still fresh in our minds. Ssebanga had faced a similar situation, but even after he was resuscitated, he recovered but he finally died. Our suspicions are that this acute malnutrition and mistreatment might have caused this child some other impairment for which we seek the intervention of Government. We need to transfer the child to Mulago Hospital and then we can carry out tests for liver functionality, the heart and the other organs to be sure of what we are dealing with.

Mr Speaker, I would like to salute a lady called Mrs Mulumba. She is the director in one of the schools here. She gave me a call recently and they were able to support these children. They are two, but the one in a very bad shape is Sulait. I have resettled the young one, Bashir, in my home to closely monitor and see how well he picks up, because they are now homeless. 

I would like to appeal to us, the leaders, and also state and non-state actors, to get involved in mobilising our communities, our people and our parents back to their roles. When I went to the health centre IV, the nurses told me that they suspect that there are a few other children in the community who were like this one. I promised to facilitate them to go and pick them up. In two days, we got eight children, who were not necessarily suffering from acute malnutrition like Sulait, but they were equally abandoned and malnourished. We have them at the health centre IV. 

We arrested the parents of these children. However, these parents still have other children that they are looking after in the home, so it is also confusing. Somehow, you have to care of those children they have left at home or release the mother or father to take care of them. 

However, my appeal is to us as leaders to drumbeat this call and crosscheck within our constituencies. I never knew this was happening until I came face to face with it. We can also do this and help our constituencies.

Finally, I would like to seek the support of those who can, so that we can remedy the current situation and give this child and the others we have a better life like our own children. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Kinkizi County East, Kanungu District. They are represented by Dr Chris Baryomunsi and hon. Karungi Elizabeth. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you.

3.00
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of extreme public importance. 

On the 5th and 6th of February 2018, this country witnessed the death of two prospective investors from Europe. On 5 February 2018, a Finnish national called Terasvuori Petteri, 42 years old, died at the Pearl of Africa Hotel. The second person from Sweden, who was also an investor, Alex Sebastian, 41 years old, died at Sheraton Hotel on 6 February 2018. 

Whereas a while ago, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was lauding the country for attracting investors, it is strange that investors can be killed in such a manner in our country. Petteri was apparently in Uganda with his friend, Suvi Linden, who is a former communications minister in Finland. They had come to Uganda to contact topmost security persons, namely the Director General of the Internal Security Organisation (ISO). They were arrested at the Entebbe Airport, interrogated and at around 3.00a.m., they were escorted to Pearl of Africa Hotel and the following day, Petteri was found dead.

As for Alex Sebastian, he checked in from Tanzania on 6 February 2018 and he was booked at Sheraton Hotel. However, in the morning he was also found dead. 

The challenge, Mr Speaker, is the manner in which the security personnel were involved in arresting and escorting them to the hotels only to find out the following mornings they had died. What is worse is that the day before yesterday, a journalist by the names of Etukuri Charles, going about his normal business as a journalist covering this incident, was waylaid by armed people in military attire outside the New Vision offices where he works, and whisked him off in a white pickup, registration No. UAH 083A, to an unknown destination. Neither the police nor the army are able to tell the country or his relatives and employers where Etukuri is.

He covered the incident like a reporter but he was grabbed, bundled into a vehicle and driven off and now neither the police nor the army can tell us about his whereabouts.  At the end of last year, Rev. Isaac Baka, well known to Members of Parliament here, was also abducted in very similar circumstances and allegedly taken into custody. However, up to now, his relatives do not know where he is.

I am raising these issues because the country can progressively be derailed and insecurity takes over. How come these people, who were supposed to be guests of topmost security personnel, particularly the Director General of ISO, got arrested on the basis that they were fake investors or were not invited and ended up dead? That lawlessness created in this country, Mr Speaker, is very worrisome and yet no Government official has come out to make a statement. It is as if it is business as usual. 

We are crying for investors. I do not think these were fake investors because a former minister in Finland is relatively wealthy. Apparently, they smeared their lips with substances to show that they were taking drugs. On their hotel doors, they put “do not disturb” to hoodwink the hotel owners that the occupants were still resting so that they could do that mayhem and get away with it.

Mr Speaker, when all that is said, instead of coming up with a proper way of securing the lives of all people in this country, they are arresting innocent journalists who come to report the rot and killings in this country. When you read today’s papers, it says ISO is still investigating. This is the very ISO in whose hands these people allegedly died. Now, ISO is trying to investigate this matter themselves; they are not giving up the matter for police to take over. 

A while ago, I saw the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Minister of Internal Affairs seated here. Could they tell us where they are taking this country? Why are they making this country slide back into chaos where nobody could dare speak? Those who write and report about this are arrested or abducted in broad daylight. I thought this country had moved beyond that state. The minister was here talking to us about investors but we are killing them in our first-class hotels and there is nobody or no effort to apprehend the culprits -(Interjection)- I will take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are raising an urgent matter. Please, finish it.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, can we know from Government, here and now, what the fate of the people who were killed in our facilities at the hands of the security personnel of this country is?  Ordinarily, one would feel safer in the hands of the security but now, you are sure if you would die in their hands.

Secondly, what has happened to the journalists who went about their business of reporting for this country and also their employers? What has happened to Etukuri? Can Government tell us where he is? If he broke the law, he should be produced in court. Where is Rev. Baka and others who have suffered under similar hands? Is Government sliding back into the dark days? As Parliament, we need to be informed now.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I thank the honourable colleague for raising the matter of the two persons who died at Sheraton and Pearl of Africa Hotels. I am saying “died” because the cause of the death has not yet been established. 

It is not true that Government is doing nothing. Immediately these incidents were discovered, the investigative authorities went in. The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) officers, at the highest possible level, were called in. They are in the process of investigation, including sending the bodies of the persons who died to our hospitals for post-mortem. This is all part of the investigation process.

Sometimes, we believe, that in a situation where high profile people of that nature die, it does not help to rush and merely make a statement when the investigations are ongoing. It is because a public statement may derail the investigations. Therefore, the reason that Government has not made a statement here is not because we are not doing anything or covering anything but rather, we want to ensure that the right people are being queried, including the management in the various hotels. 

Colleagues should also know that the security in these various hotels is not necessarily provided by the state. Many of them have got their own private security, just like in our homes. We do not do that until we are called upon. Therefore, I ask for patience. When we have reached a certain level in these investigations, in the course of time we will definitely come and make a statement in this House on the matter -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to disagree with the minister, as I seek clarification. Not until the honourable member came on the Floor of Parliament to raise this matter- You are talking about hotels. We have been to Sheraton Hotel and they subject you to checking to the extent of opening your pair of trousers, and they also have cameras.

We heard the President himself stating that there is a problem between security organs, that they are clashing. This is what he said on CCTV. Are you aware of that statement from the President, well knowing that the honourable member has just stated that these people were supposed to meet ISO and at the end of the day, they were killed? Therefore, how shall we know that you have done something concerning these killings before we come to Parliament? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to guide us on whom you are getting clarification from. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Let me answer that first. Mr Speaker, what my colleague has raised is absolutely right and it is part of the investigative process. 

When the President says there is a difference or problem within the security organs or that there is bickering, - whatever you call it - that is a statement which is also part of the investigations. It does not stop there; it is a statement of fact because the President has more sources of information than all of us.

However, that does not stop the investigative arms from doing their work. Colleagues, the police have specific departments which you, through Acts of Parliament, have charged with the processes of investigation. All that I am saying here is that they are doing their job. In my view, it is still too early to say that the police have either failed or investigations are not being done. Give time for these investigations to be done and the whole country will be informed of the process -(Interruption) 

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. We are discussing a critical matter. Attracting foreigners and investment is one of the greatest plans that the Government put in place. Killing two foreigners in special hotels in Kampala City is enough to scare away other foreigners coming to Uganda.

I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister about the journalist. I would not have known about the death of these investors if this story was not in press. I am wondering why my brother, Etukuri, from the New vision was arrested and he cannot even be charged with any offence. For over one week, Etukuri has been incarcerated and yet the minister has not given any explanation regarding him.

Secondly, even though investigations concerning such a matter are so classified, we need to know: who is the person investigating this and for how long, and how does the public get to know the truth? I seek those clarifications from you as the minister. Thank you.

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, the registration number of the vehicle that carried Etukuri away has been mentioned here. Where is that vehicle? Are you aware of that car? Do you know it or its owner? Is it in possession of the military or internal affairs as a ministry? Where is Etukuri?

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, I have answered the question regarding whether investigations are being done or not and who is doing them. The legitimate criminal investigation is done by the CID. 

Regarding the issue of Etukuri, well my -(Interjections)- I do not know who Baka is. However, regarding the issue of Etukuri who is alleged to -(Interruption) 

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, It appears my brother, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, is not aware of Baka. Baka is a son of West Nile. He is a journalist who has been operating here in Parliament and many people know him very well. He disappeared before this incident of Etukuri. 

We, the people of West Nile, are concerned about the disappearance of our brother. Therefore, can you also tell us answer whether you are aware of the fact that he disappeared and what is going to be done about this. 

Lastly, there are many investigations of cases of mysterious deaths and cases of open deaths like school and market fires being done under the police and Ministry of Internal Affairs by virtue of the responsibility of that ministry to protect citizens. We have waited for the results of these investigations to be brought to Parliament in vain. 

Are we going to wait in the same way or you are going to give us a timeframe within which you are going to bring the report on the investigation of this particular case raised by my brother, hon. Ssekikubo? I thank you very much for raising this issue, my brother. God bless you.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Regarding the issue of Rev. Baka, I am not aware a person of that nature disappeared. However, I am willing to receive the details so that we trace him and find out where he is and who he is - (Interjection) - Let me answer the issue of Etukuri and then I will give way. 

Over the weekend, the issue of Etukuri was brought to our attention by the press. Immediately, we asked the police to furnish us with information on his whereabouts. By Tuesday, the police had not known –(Interjection)- Yes; let me tell you what we have. They had not known, but it is their duty to trace for Etukuri’s whereabouts. 

If he is being kept by a Government department, why hasn’t he been produced in court? It is our duty to make sure that he is produced in court for whatever wrong he has committed. That is the process that we are on –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Mr Speaker, in his presentation, hon. Ssekikubo even went ahead to mention the number plate of the vehicle and described it as a pick-up and said it is white in colour. All the vehicles in this country are registered and at least Government is aware of the owner of the vehicle. Can you shade light on that? Who is the owner of the vehicle whose number plate was mentioned?

MR OBIGA KANIA: That valuable information will help in the investigations. 

MS KABANDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give information to the minister concerning journalists. When we went to France for an international conference, Uganda was cited as one of the countries that are blacklisted for mistreating journalists. Uganda was asked to explain the disappearance of three journalists. 

The United Nations made a general appeal to all countries to create a conducive environment for journalists to do their work. After being blacklisted, we must take care and we should not accept to be recognised internationally as a country that does not respect journalists. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Well, I am not aware of that international blacklisting, but again it is information we can use –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I am at pains as I raise a point of order against the honourable minister. This is an honourable member, who was funded by you, Mr Speaker, to go for an international conference, and she has given information from the conference about the blacklisting of Uganda for not respecting journalists’ rights. She is trying to say that our Government and the country at large must at least refrain. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister, instead of appreciating and at least showing remorse, to stand up and say that he is not aware of such a situation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would it have been in order for him to say that he is aware, in which case it becomes out of order for him to say that he is not aware? He is simply stating his mind that he is not aware of those facts. That is all he is saying. Please, wind up.

MR OBIGA KANIA: Mr Speaker, I appeal to Members to give us time to investigate all these issues and come back as soon as possible. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is no way you can sit here and determine a deadline for an investigation; it is not possible. Let the people who are doing the investigation do their job. We cannot tell them to finish their investigation, for example, in one week. That would not be a reasonable request. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, you are right. However, for a person who is abducted in broad daylight and in the meantime, his life and that of his relatives are in danger, that cannot be a process for an investigation. Those who abducted him were in military uniform with guns and the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is here. Once we decide to wait for an investigation, we will not be helping the person who is crying out to this House to go to his rescue wherever he is.

Can we have rescue measures taken now? If he has any offences, let him be produced before courts of law. Otherwise, that cannot be a matter for investigation. They either have him or they do not; it is should be as clear as that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have any information on this matter? 

MR OBIGA KANIA: I think I said what I said. I do not defer with what the honourable colleagues are saying. The only difference is that when somebody is abducted, what does abduction mean? It means that person is taken and hidden somewhere and the process of finding that person is an investigation. 

Otherwise, if we knew where that person was, then it would be just a question of rescue. Give us the information about the location where the person is and we shall go and rescue him. That is why we are talking about investigations - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Defence, he was abducted by men in military uniform, is it true? Do you have any information?

3.26
THE MINISTER FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I am just learning from here that the people who are alleged to have abducted the person were in military uniform. That calls for me to check this. I cannot give a definite answer now because as you know, even criminals and wrongdoers are capable of putting on clothes similar to military uniform; it has happened before. It is something that I have got to check in order to give Parliament clear and precise information. 

3.27
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I a rise on a matter of national importance regarding Butebo District. 

On 13 December 2017, Parliament resolved the contestation that Kibale should remain in Pallisa District. I expected the Minister of Local Government to write to the Electoral Commission so that we can have elections in Butebo and Pallisa districts.

Some members went to court and fortunately, the matter was dismissed on 17 January. Court directed the Ministry of Local Government to conduct elections as per the parliamentary resolution. However, it is very unfortunate that up to date, the Ministry of Local Government has not written to the Electoral Commission to hold elections in those two districts. 

Mr Speaker, the two districts have now operated for the last two years without district councils, which is very unfortunate. A lot of money is being sent to these districts but we do not have people to follow up on these funds in these districts. I do not know the interest of the Ministry of Local Government in the operationalisation of Butebo District. I need clarification from the Minister of Local Government on why has this matter has lagged behind for so long. 

We are always tasked to explain this matter of Butebo. Out of the six districts, it is only Butebo that has not had elections for LC V and therefore, we do not have a district council. Therefore, the Minister of Local Government should explain to House why this matter has taken too long. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Local Government, do you have something to say?

MR BAHATI: Hon. Tom Butime, please come and answer the question. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Tom Butime, I used to think that you are the Minister of Local Government. (Laughter)

3.30
THE MINSTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Maj. Tom Butime): Mr Speaker, as far as holding of elections is concerned, especially for Butebo District, the matter lies with the Electoral Commission. Once the Electoral Commission has the funds, the election will be organised and held. Therefore, I do not see why this is causing problems with – (Interruption)

MR MUDUKOI: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the Minister of Local Government comes to the Floor of Parliament and tells lies. When I went to the Electoral Commission, the Chairperson said: “We are ready to conduct elections as long as we get a letter from the Ministry Of Local Government.” 

Therefore, is it in order for the minister to come and tell this august House that there are no funds to hold elections in Butebo, yet the five sub-counties, apart from Butebo, had their elections? They have the LC V and district councils?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you written to the Electoral Commission? 

MAJ. BUTIME: Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission does not work on orders of the Minister of Local Government. It is an independent body, which once it is satisfied as to when elections can be held, they take their own decision. I do not give orders to the Chairman of the Electoral Commission; I must make it clear. Letter or no letter, the Electoral Commission is free - (Interjections) – they have - the Electoral Commission is independent and it does not work on the orders of the Minister of Local Government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, where was the decision taken? Was it taken by Parliament? If it was - I remember this was a growing issue when we were trying to resolve the issue of the borders of the districts - if the matter was resolved by Parliament in December, how was the process administered to move the Electoral Commission - because the Electoral Commission has to be moved by somebody?

Was it supposed to be moved by the parliamentary resolution or was the Minister of Local Government directed by Parliament to notify the Electoral Commission? This is something that we need to resolve after here such that the matter can go on. Otherwise, as for now, let us leave it at that.

3.34
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding blood donation. All of us are aware that yesterday was a very important day for Christians and non-Christians. For the Christians, it was Ash Wednesday and at the same time celebrating St Valentine, who stood for love and Ash Wednesday for Alms giving. 

The Forum for Democratic Change (FDC) organised a blood donation drive together with the Uganda Blood Transfusion Service. What happened is that at the last moment, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services declined the invitation by Forum for Democratic Change saying that it was political. 

My question is: as a country we have been crying of the need for more blood and the question I ask myself - I have never known that blood has different colours. I thought that if they cut our bodies, it would be found that we all have red blood. It has no FDC, NRM, DP or independent colours; it is red. It was on that basis that the Forum for Democratic Change organised that noble cause. 

My question to the Ministry of Health is: are we now satisfied with our status, as a country, that we now have enough blood and no longer need blood donations from ordinary Ugandans? That is my question to the ministry because it is setting a very bad precedent that if any organisation comes up with such a noble cause, it is denied opportunity. 

I am a little disappointed and I pray that the Ministry of Health comes out to clarify on this matter. Otherwise, some of us who would wish to organise such drives in the constituency are even afraid to do so. I beg to submit.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): I am here in acting capacity as the Government Chief Whip. The Minister of Health is not here but certainly, the Uganda Blood Bank is an independent institution and does not involve itself in politics. Please, good causes should be taken as such and should not be politicised. 

3.38
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, if we are to talk about blood, I think all of us would be Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) members. (Laughter)

I am here, first of all, to express my disappointment. This Parliament in 2015 declared the 16th day of February a public holiday to celebrate the life of the departed former Archbishop, Janani Luwum. I had anticipated that during the week, a minister in this Government would come and brief Parliament about the preparations, which are going on for this celebration - because it is a national event - so that the Parliament is also part and parcel of that celebration. 

I have waited up to this moment and I have not seen anyone doing so. Therefore, I thought that as a Ugandan Christian and as a person who comes from the north and professes to be a dedicated Anglican and Catholic, I would like to say that this is a day we should never forget for whatever reason you may have in your mind. 

Mr Speaker, it is a known fact - we have read it and some of us do not even need to read because we have experienced the life of brutality in our history yet we have always thought that brutality in politics targets only politicians. We have also witnessed that a bad Government does not care who the targets are.  Archbishop Janani Luwum happened to have been a victim of a bad Government under President Idi Amin. 

Mr Speaker, there are three things we need to focus on during this year’s celebration. First, we need to find out whether what was promised to be done in Kitgum, in memory of the late Archbishop Luwum, has been done. It was promised that there would be some development in Mucwini; some schools would be rehabilitated; and that a museum would be built in memory of Janani Luwum and lastly, that a statue would be built in Kampala so that the young generation would be reminded of the life of the former Archbishop. 

These are matters I would have wanted the Government to come and update us on in order for us to know that we are not here just to make statements. However, we are here to make statements that can have an impact in the life of the people of Mucwini, who painfully lost their son that also happened to be a Christian leader.

The second thing I would like us to focus on is that Janani Luwum was not just an Acholi. Some people might think that these are matters that concern the Acholi and/or the people from the North - after all they had to die – (Interjections) - I am saying you have to convince me that you are not thinking like that. If you do not convince me, you open the window for me to fill in the blanks. 

The life of Janani Luwum has attracted the whole world. If you recall, Mr Speaker, in 2015, it was the Archbishop of York from the UK who presided over the celebrations. Last year, if I recall, I think the Archbishop of Canterbury, presided over the celebration. These are not minor people to step in Uganda and join us in celebrating this day but we, as Ugandans, think that it is not so important as to take five minutes of Parliament’s time to reflect on what happened in the past. 

Mr Speaker, what would matter most in Uganda is that when Pope Francis came to Uganda, he planted a tree which was code named “a tree of unity.” When the Archbishop of Canterbury came to celebrate with us last year, a branch from that tree was plucked and planted in Mucwini. 

To me, that symbolises not only the unity in the body of Christ that unites all Christians regardless of whatever sect they come from, but also the unity of Uganda generally because we are all one as Ugandans. It does not matter whether you come from Mucwini or Dokolo like me or Kisoro, where I married from; we are all Ugandans. If we have time in future, we should plant the tree of unity in every district to remind us that we are one. That is my prayer.  

I believe that the grandfather of Christianity in Uganda, who is now in heaven, would be very delighted to see that his death was not in vain. At least, he was able to plant the seed of unity in Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by asking fellow Christians as well as Muslims and other people who profess other religions to join us in Kitgum in Mucwini to celebrate this day. If you cannot make it to Kitgum, please pray in your local church. Pray for the people of Kitgum and all Christians to be more united than we have ever been. 

Above all, pray that the Government remains sensitive to what Ugandans are sensitive to. They should be mindful of our interests because that is important. The Government is like the wife in the kitchen. We wait for food, continue crying that the food is not coming; the kitchen door can be broken for nothing. I am asking the Government to always be alert and not to keep “borrowing” ministers to make statements. 

Now that I have spoken about the celebration of Janani Luwum Day, I would expect a statement from the Minister of Ethics and Integrity. He probably has some information but then I know Minister David Bahati will “borrow” a minister to say something about what I have said about this day. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government, do you have any information about celebrations in Mucwini tomorrow? 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): First of all, we would like to thank Mama Cecilia Ogwal for the statement. I think she has made that statement on behalf of all Ugandans for both the Government and Opposition sides because it is not a party issue. 

Yes, the celebrations are taking place tomorrow in Kitgum. We expect H.E the President or his representative to preside over the function. However, on the issues that have been raised concerning the commitments that we made, especially on the things that we are supposed to do to actualise the real day for Archbishop Janani Luwum, we would ask the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, probably before this sitting ends, to make a full and comprehensive statement over them. 

The life of Janani Luwum is remembered by all of us. Certainly the context used by hon. Cecilia Ogwal that there are people who think that because he was an Acholi, we do not mind, is certainly wrong. Archbishop Janani Luwum was an Archbishop for all of us and he died for those who believe in the truth and we remember him. That is the very reason why we declared this one as a day for Janani Luwum. 

It is a knock at midnight –(Interruption) 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, in the other years, there existed, a national organising committee. Probably by now, they would also be working hand in hand with the local organising committee. Is that national organising committee still in existence? 

Yes, indeed some of us have already received invitation cards but to me, it looks like the national organising committee is either non-functional, quiet or has ceased to exist. We would like to be briefed on the status of the national organising committee, which should actually be helping us. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tomorrow, which is a Friday, would ordinarily be a working day had it not been gazetted as a public holiday following a resolution of this House. All the National Organising Committee (NOC) meetings are under the auspices of the Office of the President. The NOC sits over time and the whole country is sensitised and there is mobilisation for that public holiday.

We, Members of Parliament, would even already be receiving our invitation cards amongst other national leaders. Apparently Government is making some public holidays to be more superior and pronounced than others. They make us believe some of these public holidays are of low intensity.

Mr Speaker, may we demand to see uniformity. Once a day is declared a public holiday, let it be accorded a national status. Why declare it as a public holiday but leave the intensity at a low level?

May the honourable minister tell us what happened here? Friday would have been a busy day but because of the historical importance of Archbishop Janani Luwum - we are all waiting to see how Government is leading in the marking of this public holiday. Short of that, we shall feel that Government is not committed. They just declared it for political purposes but the activities and mobilisation on the ground are not taken care of.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister, you still have the Floor.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened to the submissions from hon. Cecilia Ogwal and also looked at the situation where the late Janani Luwum was Archbishop of the Church of Uganda and died as such. I think this is going to be the third celebration in his memory and it is always done in Kitgum District. There seems to be a perception of the whole thing being looked at as a Kitgum District affair yet this was the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda. 

In my opinion, I would think the organisation should have been owned by the Office of the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda.  In that regard, I do not know whether it will be procedurally right for me to move a motion without notice to put it that these celebrations should not be localised to Kitgum simply because the Archbishop hailed from Kitgum. 

The day must be treated as a national celebration which should also rotate. If it is celebrated in Kitgum, it should be another diocese the following year - he was even Archbishop for Boga Zaire and Rwanda. That is the procedural issue I am raising.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, a decision was taken by the Government upon a resolution that was passed by this Parliament to make the 16th of February of every year a public holiday in commemoration of the passing of St. Janani Luwum.

The department of Government that is responsible for this is supposed to be the Ministry of the Presidency. That ministry is part of the team that sets up functions for national events that fall within that. These include Victory Day, Independence Day - Women’s Day is under the Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development. 

The functions that are within the Ministry of the Presidency are Independence Day, Victory Day, Heroes’ Day and Janani Luwum Day. The 16th of February is supposed to be one such event that is organised by the Office of the President and the National Organising Committee is supposed to take charge of this. I do not know what has happened because I was not abreast with the facts of what happened this time but that is what it should be.

The celebrations are not held in Kitgum as such; they are held at the shrine where the Archbishop was buried. I do not know whether that is symbolic or whether we are going to symbolically rotate it to say the shrine will now be moved everywhere else, imaginatively. 

Where the Archbishop was buried is where the shrine is. People go there to lay wreaths and pray. However, if there is need to have it moved around the country or region, that I think would be in order. The celebrations involve laying of wreaths on the grave and things like that and there is only that one grave and it is only in Mucwini. Probably, that is why it has so far been handled that way. That is not to say this might not change in the future. Let us handle this like that for now. Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, that if there is any day in our country that knocks at our conscience and reminds us of our bad history and how prepared we should be to avoid it in future, it is the day of Archbishop Janani Luwum. 

I would like to suggest that if you can allow us, we can actually use about 10 minutes to say something about it before we close.  I have noticed that many members would like to say something. The Minister of Ethics and Integrity is coming. As I said, we are all invited to Kitgum tomorrow. The invitation cards were sent and we apologise if they never reached. 

The organisations are in high gear. The views expressed especially by one of our colleagues that we should think about rotating the celebrations because he was a national figure - the cause that he stood and died for was a cause for all of us. 
For the particular reason that has been explained - because of the shrine where he was buried - is the reason why we are going to Kitgum. But the rotation proposal is something that we can think about in the future. 

I thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for raising this and the honourable members for passing this motion to declare Janani Luwum Day on the 16th of February.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. It is 4.00 O’clock and our rules say that at this time, we start the Prime Minister’s Question Time. 

The Prime Minister is here and so for the next one hour, we will be dealing with that matter. I still had one matter from the member for Kitgum which we will be dealing with after the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Okay, perhaps you can raise it quickly and then we start with the Prime Minister’s Question Time.

3.49
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About three days ago, the country was taken up with what was screened on television by a journalist, Sudhir Byaruhanga, showing the massive destruction of Mabira Forest. All Ugandans were concerned. 

We waited for official communication of what is happening and somehow Ugandans are still looking out for it. As a former shadow minister for environment and as one of those who sacrificed lives of Ugandans to save that forest, we have been keenly watching how it is preserved. I want to salute Ugandans for really taking keen interest to preserve the environment, particularly Mabira Forest.

I have two issues to raise in regard to this. I have some information about Mabira Forest –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are going to have to raise the urgent matter.

MS ANYWAR: Yes, Mr Speaker. That is why I am saying they are two. With your permission, allow me to provide this in-depth information to the House and it will probably be uploaded on the iPads so that Members receive this information about Mabira Forest and its current status. 

My concern is that I would like to find out – I request that the minister or Government comes up urgently to give us the situation of the forest cover in Uganda, particularly Mabira Forest which Ugandans are very sad to see being cut down. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is also information which we need to know and I have endeavoured to dig into. Mabira Forest has sort of two forms of ownership; we have the Griffin camp whose owners are the local Ugandans and they are within the forest, which we had asked the Government about. 

As the Government comes with the statement, what are they doing to ensure that these Ugandans who have their own right of land within the forests are compensated so that we have it all protected? 

Secondly, how far have you gone to ensure that the Police we provided to the National Forestry Authority – who are actually not many in number - are doing their job? These are my urgent concerns. 

Otherwise, we see the forest cover in Uganda reducing and yet we have a lot of misinformation. People are scared but the Government and in particular, the minister, is not addressing Ugandans on the facts which are within Mabira. 

For your information, we have about 200 hectares of land which is going to be destroyed from Mabira Forest for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway. Therefore, we also need Government to address this issue and let Ugandans know what is going to happen in the forest and why. I beg to submit.

4.03
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to express solidarity with hon. Beatrice Anywar for raising this important point. It is true and quite a number of us watched that television piece by Sudhir Byaruhanga after doing, in my view, very good work, exposing what was happening in Mabira. 

This matter was addressed by Cabinet on Monday and the environment minister was tasked to ensure that she addresses the matter as quickly as possible. In fact, I have seen in the media the minister having called a meeting.

However, the key point is to agree with the sentiment and views expressed by hon. Beatrice Anywar and to say the Government is concerned about the destruction of forests and the Government is embarking on a programme of massive reforestation by both Government and individuals. 

We are in full solidarity and the minister responsible will be called on to come and make a statement next week to update honourable colleagues on this important situation that is organically linked with our future.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Kilak North in Amuru District. They are represented by hon. Anthony Akol and hon. Lucy Akello. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know that Prime Minister’s Question Time takes precedence but there is this outstanding matter. 

On the Floor of this Parliament yesterday, hon. Nzoghu alleged that I, Kamateeka, was fired from State House –(Interjections)- I have grown up knowing that great minds discuss ideas and the less category of minds discuss people. When you make allegations against an honourable member, you must substantiate. You were all here in the House, honourable members, when the Rt Hon. Speaker directed hon. Nzoghu to substantiate today or withdraw.

Through you, Mr Speaker, I demand that hon. Nzoghu brings clarification or he withdraws. Let him withdraw, Mr Speaker - (Interjections) - hon. Ssekikubo, you have been here and presented matters which we listened to even when we should not have. 

This is an important matter as it affects the personality of Kamateeka. I gave dedicated service to the civil service for many years and left with honour. I demand that hon. Nzoghu brings evidence that I was fired from State House or he withdraws that statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have the information? My information is that you were given 48 hours but if you have it, it is okay.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I said yesterday that I was going to present this issue within 48 hours – (Interjections) - That is what I said. However, as I present the matter within 48 hours – [MS KAMATEEKA: “Order.”]- That is what I said – (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: The Speaker ruled that you present today.

MR NZOGHU: No. Mr Speaker, please check in the Hansard; I said within 48 hours. However, as I bring it, hon. Kamateeka, take note of three things:
    1. It would even be prudent for you to actually lay on the Table your appointment letter stipulating the contract for which you were supposed to serve and when you ended your service. (Laughter)
    2. You should also bring an explanation on the circumstances under which you left State House; and 
    3. You should also tell us what the President told you in a meeting. The President told you he had chased you through the main gate and now you had come back through the kitchen. (Laughter)

You should explain those three things. (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If it was 48 hours, can we let it pass for now and wait for the time?

MS KAMATEEKA: Yes, Mr Speaker. We will wait for the 48 hours. However, you allow me to assure hon. Nzoghu and this House that I have all my appointment letters. I have all my posting instructions and I was posted normally from State House, actually, to the Office of the Prime Minister and later to Uganda Law Reform Commission, which was my last station. As for this rumour of what the President told me, you can also come and verify.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

4.08
MR LAWRENCE MANGUSHO (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of national importance concerning the road in the east, which joins the whole of the Sebei region including Kapchorwa, Kween and Bukwo, and the other trunk road that accesses part of Sebei is the Muyembe–Nakapiripirit Road.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament passed a loan request from the Islamic Development Bank in March 2015, when I was not even in this Parliament. However, it is almost three financial years down the road. I must thank this Parliament for approving the loan but the impact is not there. According to the information I gathered from the Committee on National Economy, once a loan is passed, it continues to attract interest and this also applies to the Kapchorwa-Suam Road. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when this loan was sourced, the Ministry of Works and Transport agreed with the African Development Bank (ADB) that the procurement process would be done in advance so that by the time the loan is approved, the procurement process would already be finalised so that the time to implement the project is shortened. 

I have tried to follow up this project as I am seriously affected and as I talk now, my throat is not doing well because of the dust on the road. During rainy the season, we get stuck with the mud and during dry seasons, we also get stuck with the dust. When I tried to follow the matter, officials from the Ministry of Works and Transport as well as the Uganda National Road Authority (UNRA) were also equally lamenting about the procurement process. They did not have a solution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the question?

MR MANGUSHO: When will the road be implemented? Once you promise to cook food for a hungry person, that person becomes hungrier. It is better to inform the person that you do not have food and they endure as usual. However, once there is expectation of it – when will the ground breaking of Kapchorwa–Suam and Muyembe–Nakapiripirit roads take off? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am in sympathy with hon. Mangusho because the road from Kapchorwa to Suam is important but also difficult. This august House has already passed a loan. It is true that both our procurement procedures and the collaboration between Government and funding agencies sometimes take quite a bit of time, and a number of other projects have suffered as a result of this. Actually, Cabinet is coming here soon to get procurement laws reviewed again in order to make sure that we remove the bottlenecks that are causing delays.

In a nutshell, the road should be on course. The details can be got from the Minister of Works and Transport to see what the delaying point is so that it can be handled quickly.

4.14
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a question on Social Assistance Grant for the Elderly (SAGE) administration in Kaberamaido. A number of people have cried out that when SAGE was introduced in the district, they were on the payroll. 

However, when the transition to be paid by Post Bank was made, a number of names were rendered missing from the payroll and others deleted. Some other names were shifted to the list of the dead and yet they are still alive. They complained to the Community Development Officers (CDO) who go paying and each time they complain, they are told it will be worked upon. It is now two years but they have not been reinstated on the payrolls.

It is painful for an elder who has been receiving his or her SAGE payment through the payroll to be deleted when he or she is still alive. They are asking when this is going to be sorted out. When is the Government going to reinstate the people on the payroll now that we are in the budget process? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, changing payment modalities to go to the bank should not cause many problems that our sister has raised. Nevertheless, since this is a problem, I will ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the SAGE programme to quickly sort it out.

4.16
MR ALIONI ODRIA (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was almost petitioning your office but I decided to keep it low. My question to the Prime Minister is simple; I would like to know what a presidential directive is.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have a very big challenge that I am facing in my constituency. Last year, I wrote to your office and to the education state minister, who is here with us. I attached a copy of the presidential directive together with my follow up letter. On the 21st of December 2017, the President, again, gave another directive.

Mr Speaker, there are four sub counties in my constituency. Out of the four, there is only one Government secondary school and the remaining three do not have any secondary school. I receive calls from my voters asking for money to facilitate their children to go to school in other sub counties and districts. It is indeed a very big challenge for me.

Last year, before the new financial - (Interjections) - my question is; when will Government implement the presidential directive so that the other three sub-counties get Government secondary schools?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as colleagues know, it is Government policy to have a Government secondary school in every sub county. We are fully aware that there are some sub counties in the country that do not have these schools. Government has reviewed this matter recently and reaffirmed that policy position which is also consistent with the presidential directive. 

To answer the question about what a presidential directive is – this is a high priority Government position.

4.19
MR P.P OKIN (Independent, Chua County West, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only one question to the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, of recent, I have been moving around Uganda and I have seen gas and fuel stations mushrooming all over. I also know that we are interested in investments but when you look at the way some of these fuel stations are positioned, I do not know if they went through the Environmental Impact Assessment. 

Mr Speaker, some of the petrol stations are located where people are residing. Rt Hon. Prime minister, I do not know whether the guidelines for establishing petrol stations are being followed because some of them are the ones supplying us with fake fuel. 

Therefore, I would like to understand whether all these mushrooming petrol stations, some with two pumps and others with one pump by the roadside, are actually approved by the Government and are following the guidelines for establishing those petrol stations. Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, petrol stations are supposed to be approved after showing that there has been proper environmental assessment and the controlling local authority does the approval. If there are areas of concern or where you suspect that these structures may have come up without formal authority, you should bring it to the attention of Government for immediate attention.

4.21
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I come from the eastern part of this country and all the members of Parliament who travel east and north-east go through Mbale-Tirinyi road. This road has been discussed in this House for a long time.

I was very glad when you said that the procurement rules are going to be changed and possibly streamlined so that this road can be completed in good time. A contract was awarded to Dott Services and they did the best they could in spoiling that road; I can tell you. They spoilt that road and the bridges. 

After UNRA had rescinded the contract, State House re-awarded that contract to Dott Services for reasons best known to them. The people of the eastern part of this country are concerned that their vehicles are breaking down, transport is taking long, not to mention the dust they have eaten this dry season.

My question is, I mean if we could have the rules of procurement sorted, what guarantees do we have that we will not have interference from other offices? I am sure that UNRA had done a good job; they had awarded the contract and you know very well that the President’s office thought it was wrong. They have had to go back and forth and the people of this region are demanding that this road be handled and finalised. 

When do you think this road will be finally worked on? The people of that region, who support the NRM very strongly by the way, will be happy to support you better. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the commitment of the NRM Government is to serve all the people of Uganda, irrespective of political affiliations. Having said that, I have seen this road written about in the media quite extensively and I have heard the concern of the population. I know there have been delays in the procurement modalities. I have also seen the communication, which is present on that matter but all this is an attempt to break the impasse and make sure that the road is done as quickly as possible. 

The people concerned will be reminded to ensure that this work starts as soon as possible. This road serves not only the people of eastern Uganda but the whole country and people who go to other countries neighbouring Uganda.

MS JUDITH AKELLO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a very serious point of order regarding the Rules of Procedure of this House, which describes the way members of Parliament should sit. 

Is it in order for the honourable member – I forget his name - to sit the way he is seated; displaying his stomach and in a very scary manner, as if he is in his living room? Is it in order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House is made for the comfort of all the Members of Parliament –(Laughter)– and there are no rules on how you sit. The honourable member can sit in the best way he can to feel comfortable in the House. As long as he is comfortable, we have no issue.

4.26
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is; last year the High Court in Jinja stopped the elections of women and LC councillors on the grounds that the petitioners were legible for contesting, voting and being voted in those offices. When is the Government planning to conduct LC I elections, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, as far as I know, the legalities are clear and I know that the Electoral Commission is preparing for LC 1 elections. We are waiting for the date to be announced by the Electoral Commission.

4.27
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am concerned about the failure of rains that occurred last year. Many farmers in northern Uganda were given maize seeds but the rains failed almost all of them. I wonder whether the Prime Minister is aware of the looming famine, which has caused a lot of petty theft in most areas thereby leading to insecurity. May I know if the Office of the Prime Minister is aware and if so, what action is being taken so that maize and bean seeds are supplied earlier as we expect rains to come early this year? Thank you very much?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, we should endeavour to get advice from the experts to ensure that we plant early and as soon as rains come, let us take advantage of them. This will prevent the hunger and famine that my brother, hon. Gutomoi, is talking about. It is also good that people have known of the problem early enough. 

Fortunately, we had a bumper crop of maize in the country and we should endeavour to reserve as much of that as possible for harder times ahead. The advice really is to prepare the population to take advantage of the rains. When they come, they should plant as quickly as possible so that they can be able to have some food. 

With regard to maize seeds that may not have performed well, one should contact Operation Wealth Creation so that the suppliers can be tasked to make sure that in future, the seeds supplied will be wholesome and good seeds. 

4.29
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Two years ago, we amended our Financial Institutions Act, opening doors for Islamic banking. Two years down the road, the regulations are not out. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what has caused the delay for Islamic banking to operate?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that we all approved Islamic Banking some time ago and we want it badly. There were delays in issuance of regulations. During the last contact I had with the bank, they told me that the regulations were on the way. We request them to make sure that they come quickly because we are missing out on Islamic banking.

4.30
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2016 the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) officials came to Njeru in Buikwe District and summoned us, saying that the SGR was going to take over our land. They did it quickly and we thought that the railway was coming quickly. 

Surveys were taken and they came for evaluation but a year down the road, we do not know what is going on. This is despite the fact that they left instructions that nobody should carry out any new developments. Might you have some idea of what is going on? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Honourable member, I have some idea. (Laughter) It is true that all of us are expecting the Standard Gauge Railway. Indeed, to build it requires a lot of time for planning. It is also true that the process for procurement of land has been going on and that is why you have been advised not to put up buildings in the identified areas.

Two things are now happening: one, payment for the land that has been identified. Secondly, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on behalf of the Government of Uganda, together with his counterpart in Kenya, are discussing with the People’s Republic of China to finalise the loan modalities for the Standard Gauge Railway. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nzoghu, would you like to raise a point of order without pointing fingers? (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is not giving this House the right information concerning the Standard Gauge Railway. As far as I can recollect, one of the critical issues as to why the railway has not taken off is because the cost has been grossly inflated compared to Kenya and other countries that have undertaken the same project. That is why the Chinese Government has been very careful in releasing the money for the railway.

Therefore, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to misinform Ugandans and this Parliament that land compensation is the reason for the delay of the railway?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It sounds like a point of clarification. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to clarify?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if there are issues of cost of the railway, those are some of the issues that are being discussed.

4.35
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Abim District started in 2006 and from then till now, we have our district headquarters in darkness. Actually, when you pass there at night, you have the feeling that you are passing near a cemetery and ghosts are about to feed on you.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you used to like that district when we still had our son as a member of the “Gang of Four”. When are we getting electricity in the district headquarters of Abim? More so, there is a parish, which connects Abim Hospital to the said district headquarters called Kalakala. In my language, Kalakala means bypass. It has no transformer. When are you coming to appreciate our problem and connect us to electricity? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is not only Kalakala that has problems of power connection. As you all know, we are going to have substantial power supply from Karuma, Isimba and other projects. Government is coming up with a programme that will make it easy for the people of Uganda and institutions to get connected to power so that this power can be consumed. Abim District will not be left out of this programme.

4.38
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the Eighth Parliament, rural electrification was extended to Kapchorwa sub-region and in the Ninth Parliament, power was extended to Sebei sub-region. From the time that power was extended, there is no office, which can control any accidents of electricity. If a pole falls, we have to rush to Mbale. 

Therefore, I do not know what will happen when there is a problem in Bukwo; at the extreme border with Kenya where there is already generation but no office to run to. When shall we have an electricity office that can help the people of Sebei sub-region in general and Kapchorwa in particular to regulate issues of power?

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Only one issue -

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I expected that there would be an Umeme office in Kapchorwa. Now that it is not there, Government will reinforce you to make sure that Umeme responds to the popular call of the people of Kapchorwa to have a local centre or office to address their power problems.

4.40
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have heard an allegation that over 60,000 refugees are coming to Uganda from Israel and Ethiopia. I would like you to confirm or deny this. If it is true, where are they going to settle within Uganda? Is it our new policy? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am fully aware of the many refugees from our neighbouring countries, especially South Sudan and DRC. However, I am not aware of any programme of bringing or receiving refugees from Israel.

4.41
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Buhweju is among the few districts that do not have tarmac roads. In 2011, His Excellency the President pledged a road from Bwizibwera-Bihanga–Katerera. These are eight years and nothing has been done. I need an answer to tell my people of Buwheju. Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there are quite a number of roads due for upgrading to tarmac roads and the road to Buhweju is one of them. With resources becoming available, it will definitely be worked on.

4.42
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, during the 26 January 2018 NRM day celebrations in Arua, His Excellency the President of Uganda appreciated the concern of many Ugandans suffering on Ugandan roads and directed that police should bring order to those who drive on shoulders and do not respect traffic lights.

Mr Speaker, many Ugandans suffer in traffic jam because of the traffic police’s failure to create order. Is there any programme to this effect or was it mere celebration or assurance on NRM day in Arua?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, there is a programme being spearheaded by the Ministry of Works and Transport.

4.44
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently in Budadiri where I come from, a man went to a Catholic Church to worship with a panga in his gum boots. Shortly after the prayers, he hacked his colleague to death in broad daylight.

My question is, why has Government abdicated its responsibility of providing security to church goers, especially in major places of worship like was the case in Budadiri?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my piece of advice is that we should be our brothers’ security provider wherever we can because Government works through people. It is not possible for Government security organs to be everywhere. Every facility, school, home, church should have some wanainchi security mechanisms so that wrong elements, like the one you have described who use a place of worship to take people’s lives, can be handled by the population themselves.

4.46
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Mr Speaker, you may recall that Parliament amended the Local Government Act to include two workers’ councillors per district. To date, those positions have not been filled. My question to the Prime Minister is: when are the workers’ councillors’ elections going to be held? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I do not have specific information on this. However, since it is part of the law, it will be implemented or the law will be amended. 

4.47
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, my question is related to the Refugee Act, 2006, which provides that when refugees come to the country, they should be taken to refugee settlements. Those who do not want to go to refugee settlements should be directed where to settle on their own. It goes ahead to provide that from time to time, they should be monitored and they should report to the nearest local council.  

As we speak, the whole of Kerwa sub-county is being settled, including the border area. You will find that it appears as if it is a settlement. This has brought a lot of security challenges with killings in the area.

Government might be aware that a Member of Parliament from South Sudan came to visit his relatives in Uganda and he was shot at. In addition, there are rampant arrests of people.

Therefore, my question is, why doesn’t Government implement these policies the way they should? Efforts to go to the nearest OPM offices to effectively handle these issues have never yielded any efforts. Can these people be cleared from the border points so that those going to the camps go there and those who do not want to go to the camps are directed by Government on where to settle? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I share the views of the honourable member that refugees should live in Uganda according to the laws of the land and they should also be off from the main border of the country where they are coming from because temptations are very high, either for them to be attacked or for the refugees to go back and cause more problems.

Therefore, Government will do all it can to ensure that, that is adhered to. Suffice to say that Government of Uganda continues to welcome many refugees. In fact, as of yesterday, we received almost 2000 refugees from DRC and Government, together with her development partners, are doing whatever they can to handle the situation.

Let me take this opportunity, Mr Speaker, to pay special tribute to the host communities for being humane, sharing the little they have with the refugees and for welcoming them to Uganda, as they are our brothers from the neighbouring countries. 

4.50
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the 2011 and 2016 elections, the President promised electricity to the people of Buvuma. We saw some surveyors but we do not know whether they were sent by the Government or they were on their own business, and it has taken two years since then. When will Buvuma get electricity?

DR RUGUNDA: Honourable colleague, I am sure you are referring to the ferry. Mr Speaker, Buvuma, a very rich island cut off from the mainland Uganda, is due to get a ferry. I know the Minister of Works has been working on that programme –(Interruption)

MS EGUNYU: Hon. Prime Minister, I did not talk about the ferry. My question was: When will Buvuma get electricity as promised by the President in 2011 and 2016?

DR RUGUNDA: I appreciate the correction. Power, as I said, is going to be in plenty in Uganda and will be able to reach as many people as possible, where it has not yet reached. 

However, I would like the minister responsible to be able to give you the specific programme for connecting Buvuma people and Buvuma Island to the national grid, or for that matter have a special programme for Buvuma Island.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, when the Prime Minister pronounces himself on something, it becomes an assurance because he is the representative of Government. The Prime Minister’s Question Time is not a mere formality but a function and responsibility of Government. It would be prudent for the Prime Minister, during question time, to mobilise his line ministers to come with him so that the critical and particular questions that go to those ministries are addressed.

Where the Prime Minister is not particular with a matter that a Member has raised, he can always consult and task the line minister to respond. Otherwise, we may come here and Prime Minister’s Question Time ends without any particular action to follow. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Prime Minister to fully prepare for question time and always ensure that he mobilises his line ministers to be in the House? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this has been an issue that we have tried to give guidance on, but it still has its challenges. Rule 41 tries to do something about it. There is an authority under subrule (3), which says that in the absence of the Prime Minister, a minister may make a statement or answer questions put to him or her. Would the minister do it in the presence of the Prime Minister? Those are still challenges with our Rules of Procedure.

However, that is what was initially proposed; that could it be possible that we generate areas of questions that are going to come early enough, like it is done in other parliaments, so that the Prime Minister comes resourced with responses. Even when we know that the honourable member for Busongora North is going to ask, the Prime Minister will have prior knowledge and will have an answer that is resourced. 

However, we have not reached far with this because you, Members, refused to submit to the proposals of having these questions generated in advance and ideas shared with the Prime Minister, so that by the time he comes, he has sufficient information on specific issues. There is a limit to spontaneity and how well you can handle that. Maybe this is still an area that we need to improve on in terms of our Rules of Procedure. 

In the circumstances, the Prime Minister is trying to do his best with the limited information. However, as a piece of advice, the Prime Minister could also have a system of receiving information when a question is being asked - instant information whether by SMS or something else – but I do not know how that will be handled. That is how complicated it would get. 

You ask a question now that relates to a particular matter and there is an officer of Government who is on the ground who knows the facts, but there is no system that can help the Prime Minister tap into this knowledge so that this Parliament is properly informed. This area is still problematic but as we move, we will see how to improve on it. Thank you.

4.58
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the UPDF constructed a radar on Sungira Hill in Nakasongola Town Council and the Uganda National Roads Authority also constructed a road leading to the radar.

A number of people’s houses and churches were demolished for this purpose. Valuation took place and people expected to be paid. However, it has now taken over two years and people have not been compensated. What plan does Government have to compensate those people so that that problem is solved? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I agree with your statement of how we should work together to improve and make the Prime Minister’s Question Time as useful and productive as possible. 

Secondly, on issues of compensation, it would have been very good to have this information earlier because I would have just come and given it to you. However, I will take your information and ask the responsible minister to give you a specific response.

4.59
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I have a question and concern from the people of Kween, which I have always asked, and I expect the Prime Minister to give an answer that will be helpful to my people. It is about the resettlement of the people of Sebei subregion. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware of the issue of resettlement in Sebei subregion. People were resettled in a temporary area from 2008 and there are no social services in those areas. These people are not going to school, they do not have health centres or roads and they are in a terrible situation. 

We are talking about Vision 2020 where we state that we want to move to a middle-income status, but my people do not have homes. You know that when you are not settled, you cannot develop because your mind cannot think.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when are these people going to be resettled? Can I get an answer, because whenever I go home, they ask me the same question, which I have failed to answer? Can you help and give me an answer to tell these people? Thank you.

DR RUHAKANA: Mr Speaker, it is true that I am quite acquainted with this matter. We have in place a team led by Brig. Gen. Oluka, who is looking at the issue of resettlement in the Sebei region. We are waiting for a final report of his work. We believe that it will help us to effectively answer the issues that you have raised.

5.01
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, arising from the 1981-1986 war, the Government of Uganda put up a ministry in charge of Luweero Triangle and there are several projects that were supposed to be carried out by that ministry. However, 32 years down the road, there is nothing on the ground. 

Don’t you think now is the right time to scrap such special ministries like the Ministry of Luweero Triangle, the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs et cetera? This is because billions of money was budgeted but when you reach the ground these billions are siphoned right from the ministry. Therefore, don’t you think that it is the right time to scrap them since they are not doing their special work? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my view is different from that of hon. Luttamaguzi. I think that the ministry responsible for Luweero Triangle is significant. It is also true that when it was started, it did not have sufficient resources to carry out significant large-scale programmes. However, it is true that Government is now re-scaling it to enable it embark on more tangible programmes that would focus on development of the area, just like the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme and other related programmes. Therefore, it is a key and valuable ministry, in my view.

5.03
LT COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, like we are all aware, Government has been recently trying to restore sanity on the lakes by deploying the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) to improve and fight bad fishing practices. However, there are some practices that are coming up, which seemingly may erode the achievements that the UPDF has been able to register and may taint the name of the UPDF. One such practice is trading in enuuni (fish maws) from Nile Perch. It is the most expensive part on the Nile Perch. 

However, allegations are that people who fish are not allowed to sell them. They are sold separately from the fish and it is the most expensive part because I am told that a kilogram of costs about Shs 1 million. The licence is not granted to the fishermen but to someone else. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may we know what the Government policy is on trading this particular product that is very expensive yet someone else benefits at the expense of the person who should actually own it? What is the Government doing about compensating this person who fishes?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am rather surprised that Ugandans are not allowed to sell what they produce from the lake. This is a serious matter and I am going to ask the minister responsible for the sector to come to this House and pronounce himself on the matter. I do not see why people should not be allowed to sell what they produce from the lake.

5.06
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is a programme that we have been seeing in the newspapers called Development Initiative for Northern Uganda (DINOU), and it is intended to eradicate poverty in northern Uganda and also to handle issues of under nutrition. I have also read that it is going to be operational in the areas of Lango, Acholi, Teso and Karamoja. I would like to know when the leaders of that subregion will be involved and be informed about such an initiative. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that several programmes have been sent to northern Uganda and they have not been so much beneficial to the people simply because the leaders have not been involved. Also, there is an outcry in the Office of the Prime Minister, especially on the issue of mismanagement of funds. Therefore, at what point will the leaders of Lango, Acholi, Teso and Karamoja be involved in DINOU? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if the leaders, both political and civic, have not been involved in this programme, it is either an error or there is some problem. Therefore, this is going to be straight away brought to the people concerned to ensure that when the project takes off, there must be input of the critical stakeholders, who are the leaders of the people. I am glad that you have brought that gap to our attention; it shall definitely be corrected. 

5.08
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I rise to bring up the issue of the people of Kasensero in Kakuuto County, Kyotera District. The concern of these people is the road from Kyapa to Kasensero Landing Site. 

Kasensero Landing Site is one of the main landing sites that generate a lot of income for this country. However, for many years, the people have been lamenting about the need to have their road worked on. During my campaigns, they told me that in 1994 after the massacre in Rwanda, His Excellency President Kagame of Rwanda promised to tarmac that road but the Government of Uganda said, “No, we are able to do it”. 

In 2015, the road was so bad to the extent that a lady that was going deliver at the nearest hospital in Kakuuto Health Centre IV died before she could reach the centre. There has been a lot of suffering. Up to now, the road is just being partially maintained. A company delivered substandard murram and the people are suffering. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is the Government willing to support these people and if so, when will they be able to do that? If not, would it not be prudent for them to go back to the President of Rwanda and beg him to come and tarmac that road for the people of Kasensero? There are graves there and the President wanted the road to be done well. Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the capacity of the people of Uganda to improve the road infrastructure is very well known. Therefore, asking a neighbouring country would be inappropriate. 

Secondly, on the question of improving roads, sometimes contractors that take the contract to improve roads are not adequately supervised by both the technical and the political leadership. Let us insist that when contracts for improving or maintaining roads are signed, we, the political leaders, know what is going to be done so that if there is a gap in maintenance, then it can be filled.  

Thirdly, Government has recently imported equipment, which is now based in districts. It should be able to help us improve on the road infrastructure in our respective areas. 

5.11
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in 2017, we got a circular from the Ministry of Local Government and I believe many Members also received it. That circular was actually showing us the subcounties and town councils in our constituencies. I got three town councils and five subcounties in my district. 

Unfortunately, on 30 November 2017, there was another circular from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, stopping all accounting officers in Uganda from operationalising these subcounties and town councils. I wonder whether the permanent secretary has the right to stop a document that came from the Ministry of Local Government and has been gazetted. Secondly, when are they going to be operational because the date of the letter is unknown? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true Parliament and other organs of Government took a decision on this issue of municipal and town councils. It is also true there has been some debate created over the matter and Cabinet is due to meet and resolve the issue.

5.13
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been having health centres II, which are very important and close to the people, especially for immunisation and antenatal care. However, Government has come up with a policy that these health centres II should not be supported. Government has also stated that the existing ones can be upgraded to health centres III. 

There are some areas in my district like Ombachi and Midia parishes that are very large. They are actually as large as some of the subcounties in other districts. These people are now urging Government to give them health centres III in those areas. Can the Prime Minister tell me when they will consider those parishes, which are very large and they neither have health centres II or health centres III? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Government policy, as you all know, is to ensure that in every subcounty, there is a health centre III. Government intends, as much as possible, to upgrade the health centres II to health centres III in case there is no health centre III in a subcounty. 

The Ministry of Health is now actively carrying out a programme of reviewing and taking decisions on those health centres II to be upgraded to health centres III to serve the subcounties that did not have health centres III. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this evening, we have Members of the Scottish National Party: hon. David Linden who is a Member of Parliament for Glasgow East and Emma Armshaw who is from the Westminster Foundation for Democracy and also a Member of the Scottish National Party. They have come here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, rule 41 of our Rules of Procedure gives us a timeframe under which we should conduct this business and that time is up; so, let us have the Leader of the Opposition.

5.17
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I would like to appreciate the time slot to generally reply to the information given to the House by the Prime Minister and the response to the several questions from both sides of the House. 

Allow me to observe that we have adopted the Commonwealth model of Prime Minister’s Question Time but we should probably have remodelled it to adapt to our own situation. This is because when you sit in the British Parliament, sometimes the reply is with one word. However, the important thing is that the Prime Minister should be smart enough to have a team of ministers around him so that when these questions are asked, the ministers take note of what the country is concerned about. I think that is important. 

Otherwise, allow me to respond to two or three issues which I thought were very important. First of all, Mr Speaker, last year, we were burdened by famine and as a result, Parliament was under pressure to raise money to supply seeds, food and all these necessities including hoes. Up to now, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we have not received accountability concerning what happened to the food that was imported. 

I remember at the time we gave the money for relief, there was already a huge amount of food in the stores and we requested that those supplies be distributed first. I would like to testify that Dokolo got only one consignment from the stock which was already in the country.

We gave the Government billions to import rice, maize and other things but we have not received any accountability about where the food ended, if at all the food was imported. Therefore, I think the country is interested in knowing that. The only way we can cure the famine that is affecting us again this year is to have seeds early, before the rains, so that we can prepare our people to start planting early. That is one of the issues I would like you to respond to. 

The second issue I would like you to respond to is the issue of equal opportunity. The law that we have focuses on gender and people with disability but does not take care of regional spread. I think it is high time that the law, or the Government by its own sensitive method of doing things, ensures that when appointing persons either in the public service or in political positions, they are mindful of all facets of equal opportunity - not only gender or people with disabilities but also regional spread. 

Recently, and I think even now, the Speaker is vetting judges. We would like to know, how many judges are we getting from the north? How many are we getting from the south? We want to know as a country, because we want equal opportunity to be practiced, not just to be preached. 

I would also like to put it to the Prime Minister that the issue of insecurity in the country should not be belittled. You should take it as very serious information from the Members because it is affecting us across the divide. In Lango, right now, you hear of insecurity even in rural areas, something which was very rare. Now, if the top police officers who are supposed to protect us, who have the guns, who are trained to protect us, are the ones who are actually involved in causing insecurity, robbery, corruption and killings, what is the Government there for? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when Members raise the issue of insecurity, be humble and please relay the matter to Cabinet so that they seriously discuss it because we want to see a change. (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for giving way. I would like to give you information on the issue of insecurity and also the non-performance of police and probably other security organs. 

Recently, a girl who was working with Umeme as a cashier was killed in Karuma and her body was dumped in River Nile. Fortunately, her body was recovered, but it happened near an army barracks. Up to today, there is no clear information on why and who executed that killing. This shows that security agents are not doing much. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Thank you very much for that information. That is to confirm my point. I am sure if given the opportunity, many Members would have testimonies from their areas. 

Mr Speaker, it is unfair for the Prime Minister to say that the wanainchi should take care of their security in their places of worship. I think you do not have wanainchi in the areas where you come from. Our wanainchi from Dokolo, those ones who brought me here, are real proper wanainchi. Now to tell wanainchi, “when you go to church, go with a knife in your pocket or with a panga so that if there is any panga wielding man who comes, start fighting”, I think you would be promoting chaos in this country. 

We want the Government to provide us with security. If I want to go and pray in church, the Government must make sure that I am protected. If I go and sleep, the Government must make sure my house is protected and that my community is protected. Now, you tell us to go and buy cameras, - whatever cameras you are talking about. Even I, who is a Member of Parliament, do not know those cameras. Now you are telling me that if I want to make sure that my home is secure, I go and look for this camera. I think you are really abusing us. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I think you better talk properly to the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, so that he knows the right message to convey to the team that is taking care of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you were talking to the Prime Minister directly. (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: We talk to the Prime Minister directly every day but we do not see change. So maybe the Prime Minister should find another mode of getting the message for it to be translated into action. 

I would like to comment about the presidential pledges. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, these presidential pledges have no beginning and no end. As a long-serving member of the Committee on Budget, I can tell you that we are always talking about topping up the money for a given year so that we do not hear about presidential pledges the following year. However, the following year you will find that the figure has gone up. When will the issue of presidential pledges end in this country? 

Secondly, where you have made a promise to the people of Uganda, please make sure you fulfil the pledges; for example, this issue of electricity that the member from Buvuma is talking about is important to the wanainchi. They think you are useless in Parliament. They wonder what the point of being in Parliament is, if the President came to them and promised and you are the person who links them with the President and now two, three, five years have gone by and still the promise is unfulfilled? (Interruption)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for giving way. As the Committee on Government Assurances, very soon we will bring a list of broken promises. There are so many promises that have been made since 1986 but up to now, they have never been fulfilled. We are going to bring a list of broken pledges so that they can be deleted.  

MS OGWAL: Thank you very much. I think that will help us. From Dokolo, for example, the President pledged a tourist centre to be built in Kangai where we hosted the Kabaka of Buganda during troubled times and also the Omukama of Bunyoro. “There should be a tourist site there”; every year, the President makes that promise and now I do not know what to tell them. 

The next time I will ask them to go and meet the President and put their case directly to him. I am glad that the minister holding that docket comes from Buganda and yet he does not realise that that the people of Lango actually protected his Kabaka with their blood. He is not willing to go and put up a site and yet he is a Muganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by saying, Operation Wealth Creation – (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: I would like to give information to hon. Ogwal that I have visited the site and the ministry has planned to put a structure there. We are in touch with the subcounty and the district. I have visited the site about three times.

MS OGWAL: That is the best message I have heard this afternoon. 

On Operation Wealth Creation, we had a very detailed report presented to the House, if you recall, and I expected the Government to come back with a detailed response. Apparently, it is over five months and we have not yet got a response. I hope the Prime Minister is taking care of that through his team of ministers, who are rare in the House, anyway.

Mr Speaker, allow me to put to you a few outstanding questions which have been put to the Prime Minister over and over by the Office of the Leader of the Opposition –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. He is running away; is it in order, first of all, for hon. Mukitale to sit on the side of the Government yet he is an independent Member? Is it also in order for him to run away when I am raising the point of order? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Running away is testimony to a feeling of guilt. (Laughter)

MRS OGWAL: If you allow me, I would like to read them, Mr Speaker: 

1. 	First of all, I would like the Prime Minister’s response on the roadmap for commencement of the oil production in this country. We want a roadmap. We have heard that oil will be a reality come 2015, 2016 and now we are now in 2018. 

2. 	We would like to know the implementation of affirmative action in Busoga subregion, so that we finish with the issue of jiggers once and for all.

3. 	We want a statement on the performance of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and strategic goals of Uganda in regard to the AGOA relationship with the Government.

4. 	We want clarification on the criteria used for selection of national candidates for international posts and how you select persons for political posts and public service posts.

5. 	We want to know from the Prime Minister what the Government has done to deal with the issue of rampant land grabbing, particularly the one affecting the people of Nakaseke.

6. 	We want to know from the Prime Minister about the remittance of grants to Ngora District. We have a reason why we have put Ngora as a test case.

10. 	We want to know from the Prime Minister about the deployment of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) in West Africa – Equatorial Guinea. If possible, let us have the agreement tabled on the Floor of Parliament so that we can look at and debate it.

11. We want to understand the implementation of informal training –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, should I repeat it for the Prime Minister? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is if he has not heard.

MRS OGWAL:  I am speaking in English and I understand why they are comparing notes. 

12. 	We want to understand the harmonisation of power connectivity in the country.

13. 	We want a statement on the actualisation of Khadi Courts. Remember we passed that law. 

14. 	Finally, we want the Government to give us the programme on aiding Madiba Secondary School in Kasese District.

Mr Speaker, I end this statement by requesting you to allow the Prime Minister to also respond to the issue of the Janani Luwum celebration tomorrow. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, maybe you could also consider Item No.3 (1) on the Order Paper and handle it together with all the other issues.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start with the point you have made on Item No.3 (1), on the protection of Very Important Persons (VIPs). I had a discussion with the Minister of State for Internal Affairs today and the minister will be making a statement on the matter. We agreed that early next week, depending on availability of time on the Order Paper, the statement will be made available.

Let me also say that, friends, the Leader of Government Business and the Deputy Leader of Government Business as well as the Government Chief Whip have an office here in the Parliamentary Building. It is manned by young capable officers who are always ready and available in case you have something that requires the attention of the leadership of Government business. By the way, it may even be appropriate, if there are issues where you may need extensive answers, to submit them to that office so that work can be done and more satisfactory and beneficial answers could be given. Therefore, I am appealing to colleagues to be able to use that office. 

It is also true that there are technical officers from the different ministries whose work is to be liaison officers between Parliament and their ministries. Those are also available for you to get information. They can do ground work both for their ministers and for the Leader of Government Business. I believe the work of Parliament would greatly benefit from utilising those facilities. However, let me just make a few comments with your permission, Mr Speaker. 

Let me say that my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, was fairly provocative. I do not intend to be provoked. I have immense respect for her. For the issues we have, we will settle them when we meet outside this House –(Interjection)– Ndugu Fungaroo, could you stop putting fuel to fire. (Laughter) I can see he is enjoying the escalation. Fortunately, there won’t be any escalation. 

Let me start with what our sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, raised – issues that have been longstanding. On the roadmap for oil production, to the best of my knowledge, the honourable minister has come both to Cabinet and this House and outlined some essential information about oil production. However, it is true that there have been significant developments and it is only fair and right that Parliament should be kept abreast and briefed about what is happening, so that the input of Parliament can be put into consideration.

Affirmative action for Busoga: The Office of the Prime Minister is working on this with the leadership of Busoga, including the Speaker and Busoga Parliamentary Group, to deal with this subject. Progress is underway.

On AGOA, I would want the minister responsible to come to the House and give a more extensive statement. Let me say that while we are here, we have officers who take down all these points and immediately after, write to honourable ministers to come and respond to issues. The Speaker is always copied in these correspondences.

On international jobs and public servants’ jobs, my brief response would be as follows: Uganda, I must say, has done reasonably well in terms of competition for international jobs. This depends on a number of factors, including regional consideration and consideration for Africa in comparison with other continents. 

However, qualifications, capabilities and credentials of individual candidates also play a very important role. This is very well illustrated in the case of Justice Ssebutinde, who is at the International Court of Justice; there had to be repeated intensive lobbying and voting by the United Nations General Assembly - (Interjections)- Colleagues, I propose that you spare me so that I can use this little time to round up the answers. Let me allow hon. Nzoghu, to give me information –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the Leader of the Opposition was very precise, especially with the last issue where she raised points from number one to 12. 

These issues have been raised since October 2016. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you put on the record of Parliament that you would come back and provide comprehensive responses to these issues. Actually, what the Leader of the Opposition requires from the Prime Minister is not spontaneous responses. These issues require comprehensive responses.

In the interest of this country, I think it would be fair that the Prime Minister is given a period of one or two weeks to respond to these issues, because he committed himself to do so. Kindly, get the Hansard and confirm that you said you would come up with comprehensive responses. Mr Speaker, these matters require comprehensive responses as per the Prime Ministers’ promise. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I note the information from hon. Nzoghu. However, some of the issues are very straight and clear like the point I am talking about the performance of Uganda in competition for jobs on the international arena. There is no way the Prime Minister could have said that he is going back to prepare because in fact, the Prime Minister has some reasonable amount of knowledge on this. He has also been actively involved in lobbying for Ugandans for some of these jobs. 

Mr Speaker, let us save the time of Parliament. If I may conclude on the point of international jobs, I would like to –(Interruption)

MS WEJULI: Mr Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is in regard to the statement of the Prime Minister. It seems some of the issues raised needed a comprehensive response. If the Prime Minister says some of the questions require straight answers, are we proceeding well if he does not tell us the questions that require straight answers and those that would require a compressive report?

I would like to re-echo the issue of the comprehensive report. This is because we are out of touch with the Office of the Prime Minister on the progress of the special programme for Busoga. I would be happy if the Prime Minister came to the Floor and gave a statement on the progress of that programme so that we can get updated information. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question has been raised but it is also within the discretion of the Prime Minister to see which questions can be answered directly and those he could request someone else to answer. We do not have to push a list and say, “Please, tell us which questions you will answer now and those you will answer tomorrow.” Let us leave it to the discretion of the Prime Minister and in due time, the responses will be brought to Parliament.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take your points seriously. It is true I may make comments on some of these issues but it does not stop Government from coming up with a more comprehensive response. The whole essence is to promote understanding instead of being mechanical about this or that. Let us endeavour to work together and ensure that the House has the information it requires.

I was concluding on the issue of international jobs. Uganda has just taken another big job, and you saw this; Justice Bbosa was elected to the International Criminal Court (ICC), and it is a big responsibility. While we want more jobs in the international arena, we should take cognisance of the good progress we have made in that sector as well.

On the question of civil service jobs, it would be good to get more specific information so that when the Minister of Public Service comes to explain these points, he can focus on some of those areas. Otherwise, it is a bit dry. However, I am sure the   Chief Opposition Whip will make more information available. 

On land grabbing in Nakaseke, the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should be able to come and explain.

Concerning Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF) in Equatorial Guinea, this point has been raised before. I responded and said that our brothers and sisters are in Equatorial Guinea on an agreement between the two countries to promote bilateral cooperation and understanding, especially in areas of security. I think it is okay –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was even a statement from the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs on that issue to Parliament.

DR RUGUNDA: Thank you. I deeply appreciate the technical and political support from the Speaker. The information is available and has been extensively discussed.

Finally, let me talk about Janani Luwum Day tomorrow. Before, I came to this august House, my colleague, hon. Bahati, had already responded to this very point. If he did not, I will tell you, as all of us know –(Interjection)- I have got credible information from the Frontbench that hon. Bahati made some responses on this matter. Since hon. Bahati, has been very elaborate, I will add one or two points.

All roads lead to Mucwini tomorrow. You go to Kitgum, move about 10 to 20 kilometres and then you will be in Mucwini. The road is a first class paved road; so for as many colleagues who can make it – I know time is not on our side, but you will be more than welcome.

Archbishop Luwum needs no elaboration. All of us know the grotesque manner in which he lost his life as a freedom fighter. All of us also know that his death galvanised the resistance against dictatorship in Uganda and led to the final blow that kicked out the Amin regime. Therefore, it is a day that all Ugandans should unite to celebrate. 

For those who will not be in Mucwini, do your best to recognise this day, to think about it and to use that opportunity to rededicate yourselves to our country, Uganda, to freedom, democracy and the values –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: You came in early, but a little bit late, so the matter of Janani Luwum had already been disposed of. However, hon. David Bahati stated that before we leave the House, somebody, and I think he meant you, would come and give us more elaborate information on this.

One, is it a national celebration handled by the Office of the President? We want to understand. Two, is the event called, because it is being held in Kitgum, Mucwini or were there ideas that we could rotate it like we move other national events? If you were to seek my opinion, I would say “no”, because Janani Luwum’s remains are in Mucwini, just like the remains of the martyrs of Uganda. 

We feel that by going to Mucwini, we are not only remembering his death, but we are also spiritually interceding for the country. Therefore, having these celebrations in Mucwini means a lot for us as Christians. We would like you to put on record whether this event is being funded and managed by the Office of the President or it is hanging in the air.

We feel that there is no other activity in the country to show that the Janani Luwum Day is a national event. It is as if it is an Acholi event, probably with a bit of colour of religiosity. It is more or less like an Acholi event and all the mobilisation is taking place in Acholi. The Acholi will be there, and even some of us from the north will be there, but can you promise us that it will remain a national event that will cause the Bakiga from Rukungiri and the Karimojong to go to Mucwini to pray. That is what we want to know from you. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, what my sister is asking me to state is really issues that define a national day. A national day, as Janani Luwum is, is for the whole country. It is for all Ugandans and friends of Uganda from outside. It is a day to be celebrated by all of us and that is why I said all roads should lead to Mucwini.

Secondly, Cabinet on Monday was briefed by hon. Simon Lokodo, the minister of state responsible for ethics. Actually, I did indeed expect that a statement would be made in this august House to also ensure that colleagues are properly informed. I need to find out why this has not been possible. 

In spite of that, this is a national function and there is a national organising committee that has been handling this matter. The same committee has already sent a team to Mucwini. However, I agree with my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, that there should have been a statement on this matter to this august House because it is a national day.

Should the function be in Mucwini, Kampala or elsewhere? My view is that it remains there. Actually, this point has been made by the Speaker. The remains of our hero, Janani Luwum, are in Mucwini. It is only fair that we should go there and pay our respects, remember him and get inspiration from being in a place where he was laid to rest. 

There are grand plans, which have been made to build some critical monuments and even to redo his grave so that it becomes another centre for Ugandans to recommit themselves to Uganda. I think it is proper that that is the meeting place. We do not always meet at Kololo. There must be meaning in celebrating something in a particular place. In my view, for the moment, I do not see any convincing reason that should take us away from celebrating St Janani Luwum Day in Mucwini. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Prime Minister. Honourable members, we will always seek to perfect this process of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. The value is actually big. We could solve a lot of policy issues in this one hour, if we can improve on the way we do it, so that it delivers its purpose. That is what we need to achieve. Let us think through it properly.

I have a message from the Speaker regarding Parliament of Uganda hosting the 2018 Commonwealth Parliamentary Association – Africa Region, Youth Parliament: 

“Honourable members, as you are aware, Uganda is a member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) and Commonwealth Parliamentary Association - Africa Region.

One of the events of CPA Africa Region is the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Region Youth Parliament. The CPA Africa Region Youth Parliament brings together young people aged between 11 and 21 from across the Commonwealth nations from Africa Region. 

The youth Parliament offers participants an opportunity to experience being a young parliamentarian and gain practical skills of the parliamentary systems under the guidance of selected members and officials of Parliament. The participants further experience Parliament as a key institution, which underpins democracy and good governance. 

Honourable members, during the 48th CPA Africa Region Conference, I, the Speaker, pledged on behalf of Parliament of Uganda to host the 2018 CPA Youth Parliament, which will take place from 14th to 19th April 2018 at Hotel Africana, Kampala. The CPA Uganda branch is spearheading preparations to host the youth Parliament. I, therefore, call upon you, honourable members, to accord the organisers and the youth Parliament assistance where required. Thank you.”

This is directly from the Speaker of Parliament.

Honourable members, as I communicated earlier, the time is now 6 o’clock and some Members would like to be released to get ready to travel to Mucwini. I will, therefore, pause these proceedings here and this House will be adjourned. Business of the House that has remained is, therefore, deferred for another day. From now, we go on recess. This House stands adjourned sine die.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 
