Tuesday, 19 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
                                                                         
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I was hoping that most of the chairpersons would be here, but I think all the whips of all the parties are available. I wanted to register my disappointment with the conduct of some of the committee chairpersons.

Last week, two committees opted out of this House without informing the Speaker, so we were not able to conduct business on Thursday because 50 Members were absent; apparently, they were having a workshop somewhere in the middle of the week, and yet they had agreed with the business committee that no workshops would take place during the week. So, I just wanted to say that I do not expect committees to conduct other work to compete with the plenary.

If you have workshops let them be on Friday, Saturday, Sunday and Monday. Do not interfere with weekly programmes. 

Please join me in welcoming 7 members of the Standing Committee of Chairpersons in the House representatives of Zanzibar; they are up there. Please stand up. You are welcome. They are here to witness the proceedings in the House. 

Then with so much pleasure, I want you to join me in welcoming my voters who are sitting up there; please stand up. These are Tibwamulala farmers group from Buzaya in Kamuli. We are delighted to have them here; they are also here to witness the proceedings of the House.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS BILL, 2012

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “Public-Private Partnerships Bill, 2012 be read for the first time. This Bill will provide the legal framework for the operationalisation and implementation of public-private partnerships and it is supported by a certificate of financial implications, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by the Government Chief whip and the minister for Energy. So, it is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.
  

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ON THE STATUS OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY IN PUBLIC UNIVERSITIES

2.49
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, on the status of science and technology in public universities.

The committee moved under rule 173(c) of the Rules of Procedure. 

The objectives of the field visit were:

    i. To establish funding committed towards research in public universities; 

    ii. To establish research activities and their impact in transforming the community; 

    iii. To establish the capacity, staffing infrastructure and equipment of public university to teach science and technology. 

    iv. To identify challenges faced by public universities in achieving research, innovation and development objectives and suggest a way forward in overcoming the identified challenges.

The committee visited five public universities, namely: Busitema University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology, Kyambogo University, Gulu University and Makerere University.

Facilities such as laboratories including medical pathology and joint clinical research, computer, biology, physics and chemistry were toured, and meetings were held with university administrators and staff on the funding committed towards research.

Funding

Public universities are funded by Government through wage recurrent, non-wage recurrent and development budget as well as internally generated resources.

However, the committee learnt that the universities experienced sudden and unplanned cuts in their budgets that affected their operations. For instance, Gulu University experienced a cut of Ugshs 300 million in financial year 2010/2011.

The committee was also informed that the recurrent non-wage revenue allocated to research in public universities, on average, ranged between Ugshs 70 to 90 million per year per university.

This allocation was expected to fund research work, supervision and undertake community outreach programmes.

Dependency on donor funding - I am not going page by page; I am only looking at key areas. 

While some universities are unable to supplement the meagre research funds by using internally generated revenue, others were able to supplement their meagre research funding through external resources, especially from donors.

Busitema University, for example, received US$ 1.2 million grant from the millennium Science Initiative Project for establishing and improving the textile engineering programme.
The university has a cotton ginnery and intends to establish a modern textile factory on campus to facilitate practical training in cotton ginning, production of yarn and production of textile.

The committee visited the ginnery and ginning machines and saw a demonstration of the ginning models used to teach students.

Funding of science and technology initiative by his Excellency the President

The committee learnt that the Presidential Initiative on Science and Technology had been started to enhance development of science and research in Uganda. The iniative sought to advance scientific research through better funding and organisation.

In December 2009, the President issued a directive for the Government of Uganda through the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance to financially support the innovations of the Faculty of Technology at Makerere University to a tune of Ugshs 25 billion spread over a five-year period with Ugshs 5 billion committed in each financial year.

The Ugshs 25 billion five-year project financed or being financed by Government and implemented by Faculty of Technology of Makerere University funded 10 projects, among others: the cluster project, irrigation project, vehicle design project, Solar Technologies Project, Industrial Parks Project and MAKAPADS project. The money has since been remitted on an annual basis. However, this funding was provided only to Makerere University despite other universities being involved in science teaching, technology and innovation.

Observations

Remuneration 

Remuneration at all Universities was poor and was a major reason for labour turnover. Medical personnel preferred to go to better-paying countries such as Rwanda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi and Southern Sudan. At the time of the Committee’s visit, 6 lecturers were, for example, expected to leave Gulu University by 31 December 2012.

Noting that universities are at the forefront of research in the country, the funding allocation to research is too small to enable them meet the enormous research requirements. Additionally, staff development and advancement has also been curtailed. 

Dependence on donor research funding 

It was noted that the externally funded research was restrictive and was driven by donor objectives that did not necessarily address the research needs and priorities of Uganda. Universities have little say on the outcomes of the research and the data obtained from such research is at times not adequately shared with the institutions involved.

The Committee noted that the President’s initiative to support science, technology and innovation was extended to Makerere University and not any other Institution. It is important that such funding is spread to other institutions to create a wider coverage. 

Research activities and their impact in transforming the community

Findings

Mechanisms for establishing innovations in the community

MUST University had established a community-based training programme for obtaining instant ‘on-spot’ feedback to its work within the communities, including research.  Through this system the university was able to assess and identify community challenges and needs and develop optimal solutions for solving such problems.

At MUST, research projects in renewable energy (biogas) and recycling of plastics (using a granulator prototype machine) were demonstrated. Several in-house research products were developed to simplify work, for instance, a system for capturing student data (name, registration numbers, payment of dues and balances). Another innovation was underway to use mobile phone technology to improve maternal health in rural communities.

At Kyambogo University, both award research (undertaken by staff) and non-award research (by students and staff) are undertaken. Both students and academic staff undertake research in the following ways: Group projects (by third year students); individual undergraduate research projects (fourth year students); teaching staff (studying for Masters and PhDs); and non-award research.  

The research projects are undertaken in several areas including: indigenous textile and ceramic research; presidential initiative fund for banana flour project; environmental studies; an integrated information management e-campus project designed to ease the management of students, staff and resources available for successful running of the university; to manage records (storage and retrieval); establish convenient and time conscious procedures for speeding up various teaching, evaluation and payment activities.

Makerere University has the following projects:

A tele-education centre, where 787 students were being facilitated to learn (through virtual learning resources); Centre for Innovations and Professional Skills Development (CIPSD); Microsoft Innovation Centre; incubated and supported ICT-related innovations; mobile and computing applications (in the areas of crop disease monitoring; road congestion monitoring; crime monitoring; safe water management; weather information; maternal and child health service delivery; implementing local e-government in Uganda, among others. 

In late 2001, the College of Engineering Design Art and Technology (CEDAT) undertook several research projects such as developing and launching an electric vehicle (Kira EV II) developed to create sustainable transport solutions for Uganda and Africa. At the time of the committee’s visit, a project to design a 28-seater commuter electric vehicle (KAYOOLA) for public transport in Kampala city was underway. Other research projects that were undertaken were: a low-cost irrigation project; Makapads project through which sanitary pads are made from papyrus and paper waste; the Academic Records Management (ARMS) project; Centre for Research in Energy and Energy Conservation (CREEC) project, among others.

Gulu University conducted both basic and applied research. The projects within the university visited by the committee included:

The comprehensive and effective processing of the African mango fruit, which focused on the effect of mango seed extract on weight loss and other metabolic processes in overweight/obese individuals; Value-addition and processing of vegetables and fruits through solar drying; Police data management system; multiplication of banana suckers; water nano-purifier project; salt extraction (prototype) project, among others.

Busitema University had greatly impacted on the community through research and innovation despite the limited funding available to it. The ongoing projects and innovations (both donor and government funded) at the Busitema campus included: Maize hullers; ox-ploughs; cassava chipper; coffee grader; groundnut paste pulveriser; ox-drawn groundnut planter; treadle irrigation pump; ox-drawn weeder; solar water heater and animal feeds mixer. 

The committee was also informed that the ICT students were involved in the manufacture of computer software and had developed a sensor project for security and traffic systems management to monitor and record vehicle speed, sending signals to a Police station in case a vehicle violated the speed limits. 

Busitema University was also linked to the communities through student-led scientific societies that operated within the communities. The Faculty of Agriculture trained farmers in mushroom growing technologies in Serere District. 

The Faculty of Agriculture of Busitema University introduced weekly seminar series to train the community on topical issues through visiting scientists. The seminars were an opportunity for the students and staff to interact with other stakeholders and likewise share their findings with the faculty. 

Establishment of a Science and Technology Park 

The committee was informed that Busitema University was working with the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) to establish a science park at the university to enhance science and innovation. The park is intended to work as an incubation centre for research ideas that can be translated into development and innovative ideas.

Makerere University on the other hand was denied an opportunity to acquire free land in the National Science and Technology Park in Namanve Industrial Park. This was contrary to the intention of establishment of the parks which were to facilitate incubation of research ideas both from industry and the research institutions (including universities) and transform them into commercially viable businesses.

Despite the fact that they were not allocated a park, Makerere established a food technology and business incubation centre, which was established to turn research into business enterprises. Accordingly, eleven agro-processing plants were set up to produce products such as: Bottled juices; fortified foods; sausages; smoked meat; and lemon grass flavoured tea. 

Infrastructure 

The committee checked on the facilities in public universities including laboratories (computer, medical, pathology, biology, physics and chemistry); lecture rooms, libraries and workshops. The general state of infrastructure varied from university to university. 

In Busitema University, the infrastructure was in a very poor condition and was inadequate to accommodate the growing number of students. In Mbarara University, the library had a sitting capacity of 700 seats. This was insufficient to cater for 3,163 students. 

At MUST, there was no generator, yet they experienced irregular power supplies that affected the experiments in the laboratories. There were frequent water shortages due to inadequate supply from National Water and Sewerage Corporation. The chemicals and reagents were inadequate to enhance teaching of sciences. Likewise, the ginnery at Busitema University was affected by frequent power cuts that undermined its operation and compromised its potential for commercial viability.

Kyambogo University lacked the requisite infrastructure for developing science and technology, and vocational studies. Unlike other universities, most of the requisite equipment had been procured, but there was no space to keep the equipment. The available infrastructure required complete overhaul.

Makerere University also had inadequate infrastructure for the laboratory and field-based practical training, as well as research and development laboratories. The laboratories and equipment required for training in some cases were obsolete. 

The committee was informed that the Makerere University Agricultural Research Institute was able to be shifted to the off-campus site at Kabanyolo to enhance innovative teaching, learning and research, and develop modern infrastructure. The cost of the transfer was estimated at Ugshs 250 billion. 

The library at Busitema University was ill-equipped and housed in a single poorly ventilated room. It lacked ICT infrastructure to enhance access to electronic reading materials and the book racks were dilapidated and in a state of disrepair. There were few current books and materials available. 

At Gulu University, the library lacked up-to-date books. Government had not provided adequate funding to permit the purchase of up-to-date books and supplies for the library. The library at the Faculty of Medicine lacked connectivity to the national Internet Optic Fibre Backbone which affected the capacity of the library to utilise Internet-based electronic reading materials.

Equipment

Generally, the equipment looked at in most public universities seemed dilapidated, irreparable or obsolete. Most of it required to be either updated or modernised. The equipment seen was also the basic equipment required for undergraduate studies, and was not suitable for graduate student research.  At Busitema University, for instance, the obsolete equipment available could not be repaired because manufacturers had wound-up, leading to lack of a source of spare parts. 

Likewise, at MUST, the medical laboratory equipment was obsolete, out-dated and needed to be modernised. Some of the medical equipment that was donated about five years ago by the Italian National Institute of Health, under an anti-AIDS Great Lakes Regional Programme in Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, required replacement. 

Observations

MUST/Kihumuro Campus Land

The committee visited the new site which covers 182.2 hectares at Kihumuro on the outskirts of Mbarara Town. Works had commenced, and the estates and works building had already been constructed.  The committee was informed that a master plan to be financed by Government was developed in 2004.  However, the funds that Government had provided were inadequate and it was unlikely that the master plan would be fully implemented. Even though Government had made arrangements to fund the project through an African Development Bank (ADB) loan, the proposed loan was small and, therefore, insufficient to complete the project. 

Land for Expansion of Gulu University

Gulu District authorities had leased 742 hectares of land to the university for expansion. However, the university lacked funds to compensate all the claimants to enable it fully access the land.  Lack of appropriate equipment affected students’ training, and development of practical skills and experience. 

Challenges 

Location of public universities

The committee learnt that lecturers in Gulu, Busitema and Mbarara universities commuted to Kampala on weekends to visit their families; while others often frequented Kampala where they run side businesses that supplement their income. The frequent movements thus affected their productivity at the universities.  It was also alleged that lecturers at the same rank were offered different salaries, a fact that demoralised those who received lower salaries. 

National research agenda and strategy is lacking

Uganda lacks a national research agenda to prioritise and guide research based on the prevailing national needs and requirements. Most research is haphazard as it is not guided by a strategic research plan, and is mainly donor-driven and funded, since it is dependent on donor funding.  

Staff motivation

Staff motivation was low due to inadequate salaries and lack of promotion opportunities, caused by the staff recruitment and promotion moratorium introduced by the Ministry of Education and Sports.  At the time of the committee visit Government had not yet implemented its proposed 30 percent pay rise to scientists across Uganda. 

Lack of adequate funds for internship

Students spend only two weeks, instead of three months, on industrial placement. The funds provided were inadequate and yet the students had to pay for their upkeep while the university had to pay the supervisors. 
Recommendations

The committee recommends that funding in public universities in Uganda should match the recommended funding of one percent of national budgets for the nations of Africa as agreed and passed in the AU Summit of 2005, in one of its resolutions.
Funding allocated towards research, innovation and outreach programmes at public universities should be increased.

Funding science in secondary schools

In order to encourage research and innovation, Government should increase funding towards science teaching in secondary schools through construction of science laboratories and provision of requisite equipment and consumables such as chemicals and reagents for the students.

The funding models should be reviewed and streamlined so as to increase the number of beneficiaries for the research funds.  They should evolve a national research fund to be competed for by various individuals and institutions. 

The Presidential science and technology funding should be extended to all public universities involved in research and innovation.  

Government should expedite acquisition of the ADB loan meant to fund the Kihumuro Campus Project. Alternative sources of funding should also be sought to enable the project to be completed.

The Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) should also provide a road surface remedy and consider supporting MUST in constructing the required overhead bridge as this has resulted in a number of accidents at the campus.

A government policy on the promotion and funding of graduate studies should be immediately instituted. Government should encourage development of research by availing funds to sponsor outstanding students for graduate studies in specialised areas.  

Funding towards universities

Government should provide more development funds to newly established universities, especially those that have low levels of internally generated resources. 

Finally, the committee also recommends that in line with the provision of chapter 6 of the National Development Plan of Uganda, Government considers establishment of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. At an appropriate time, the committee intends to move a motion towards that direction, either for this ministry to be created separately or for us to urge Government to consider upgrading the current Ministry of ICT into the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee be adopted. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson for your report. Before we proceed, I want you to join me in welcoming a delegation from our neighbor, the Legislative Assembly of Southern Sudan. We have a number of committee clerks; Mr Simon Akot, please stand up. You are welcome. Mr John Laku, please stand up. Welcome. Mr Robert Samuel Paul, you are welcome. Ms Jackline Yangi, you are welcome. Mr Piok Dak, Secretary, Office of the Clerk. You are welcome.

Honourable members, I understand there is a committee planning to go to Kalangala tomorrow. I am directing the clerk to withhold the funds. No workshops during the week. Please withhold the funds. If you go on Thursday night, there is no problem. [HON. MEMBER: “Thursday morning.”] No! No! Clerk, any committee trying to go out, block their funds. 

Where is the chair? Had you wanted to do both or we can do one?

3.15
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, we had wanted that, if it is agreeable to Members, the vice-chairperson presents the status of science and technology in Uganda Technical Colleges, so that we amalgamate the two reports and have one comprehensive debate on both reports. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What do you think, hon. Wadri? 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, following the directive that you have given to the Clerk, and what my brother is proposing to have a second report so that we discuss the two reports at ago, I think that will be fine and time-saving. Nevertheless, I think it is not only field trips and workshops. It is even our own internal arrangements like caucuses. As I talk right now, you can see the other side is empty because they are busy caucusing in the new Presidential building. If all of us were here -(Interjections)- we would certainly be able to work. It is as dangerous as going away on a field trip , if we are going to have caucuses during plenary time. I think let us have our caucuses on Fridays or weekends so that parliamentary work can proceed.

3.17
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Lumumba): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) We had our NRM Parliamentary caucus from 9.00 a.m. up to 1 O’clock and there is no caucus of NRM which is going on right now. Can the honourable member give evidence?
 
THE SPEAKER: No, there should be no committee work in the afternoon.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, no two sides are wrong on this, because committee work is as important as a caucus. So, when you deny us quorum in our committees because of caucuses, as a country, we feel cheated.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I stand here because this morning, I was in a committee meeting. [HON. MEMBER: “Which one?”]  Committee on National Economy. [HON. MEMBER: “Only that one?”] No, but how can the honourable Kassiano Wadri Mulondo -(Interjections)- come to confuse the House that caucus has stopped committee work when this morning, I was in the Committee on National Economy from 10.00 a.m. up to 1.30 p.m. Is he in order to misinform the House? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to rule on caucus issues. I do not attend any of your caucuses. I cannot rule on your issues of the caucus.

Honourable members, the question was, do we start with one report or we wait? The second report? They are here unless you think each report will have its own issues.

3.19
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) This is a timely report and I want to thank the chairperson and Members of the committee - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a view that we receive both before we speak. Okay, honourable chairperson, let us go to report No.2. 

3.19
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (Mr Robert Kafeero): This is a report of the Committee on Science and Technology on the status of science and technology in Uganda Technical Colleges.

The Committee on Science and Technology monitored, evaluated and made an assessment on science and technology activities in Uganda Technical Colleges in accordance with rule 173(c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.

The intention of the committee was:
 
i) To establish the status of Uganda Technical Colleges (UTCs);

ii)To establish the role played by UTCs in teaching and training technicians and scientists; 

iii) To identify the challenges faced by technical colleges; and  
iv) To recommend to Government an appropriate course of action.

The committee visited four out of the five public Uganda Technical Colleges and these include: Elgon UTC in Mbale, UTC-Lira in Lira, UTC-Kyeema in Masindi and UTC-Bushenyi plus students’ projects in Bushenyi. Due to financial constraints, the committee was unable to visit UTC-Kichwamba in Kabarole District.

The committee also held meetings with college administrators and staff. The interactions enabled Members to make a situational analysis of teaching and training in those institutions. 

The committee undertook a guided tour of the facilities at the colleges including classrooms, workshops, laboratories, libraries and dormitories. The intention of the visits was to physically assess the state of the science infrastructure plus science training and teaching at the institutions.

The details of the status of Uganda Technical Colleges is well-evidenced on pages 4 up to 10.  Through you, Madam Speaker, I invite Members to read through on their own. 

Page 11, the aspect of teaching and training technicians and scientists was also looked at during our visit. I also invite Members to peruse through -(Laughter)- pages 11 to 13 in the interest of time. 

On page 13, the colleges too face a number of challenges and these challenges include staffing levels. 

The organisational structures in the colleges were not fully filled. The Ministry of Education and Sports had not yet recruited technicians and workshop assistants to facilitate practical training of the students; a fact that impacted negatively on the practical skills-training received by the students.  Most of the non-teaching staff were not on the government payroll and were being paid from internally generated revenues. 

Recruitment and training of staff was difficult due to the low pay provided by the colleges as compared to other employers in related fields. Most staff were in acting positions, a fact that demoralised them.

Infrastructure

The lecture rooms, office space, student and staff accommodation were all inadequate. Most of the existing structures were dilapidated and in a state of disrepair. In some of the colleges, the structures were built as far back as between 1930 and 1956. In UTC Elgon, the residence of the College Principal had been partitioned by plywood and converted into makeshift dormitories to accommodate the overwhelming number of students. Teachers’ residences and workshops and a grinding mill house had also been converted into students’ dormitories. 

The committee also realised that most structures were still asbestos-roofed and yet the material was condemned by the World Health Organisation (WHO) a long time ago. On a sad note, according to Mr Charles Ojilong, the Principal UTC Lira “a staff member died after using water harvested off an asbestos roof in UTC Elgon; his eyes swelled and shortly afterwards he developed complications and later on died”. 

On the issue of equipment, most of the Colleges had obsolete and outdated equipment that was not in conformity with the modern technologies currently being used in the market place. The committee was also informed that the modern computerised equipment was expensive and the colleges could not afford to buy them with the meagre resources received from Government. Though there was functional equipment some of it had been abandoned because the colleges had failed to repair them. For instance, in UTC Bushenyi, they had imported a tool and cutter grinder from England in 2009, without certain essential parts, rendering it unable to work to date.  

Transportation 

Technical colleges lacked adequate transportation to enable them serve the existing number of students and staff; and to support industrial and field studies for students and staff. The situation was exacerbated by the adoption of Competence-Based Education and Training (CBET) that requires regular field and industrial visits. UTC Bushenyi, for example, had a single vehicle, which is a truck, that was provided by Government of Uganda in 1982. The vehicle was old and no longer able to satisfy the transport needs of over 500 students and 35 teaching staff in the college. 

The committee hereby recommends that:   

    1. Government should provide modern computerised equipment for students to enable them compete effectively on the job market. The technicians produced from such institutions are generally practical and hands-on and should be thoroughly trained to meet the prevailing challenges in the highly-skilled personnel on the market.

    2. Government should carry out an assessment of the equipment presently owned by the technical colleges. The dilapidated ones should be repaired and where need be, purchase modern and up-to-date equipment to enable the colleges to provide highly skilled and competitive students. 

    3. Hydra-form machines should also be availed to the colleges to enable students learn how to use them before they get out to the field. 

Infrastructure 

    4. To meet the accommodation needs of the colleges, Government should provide funding to enable them construct appropriate buildings. 

    5. In view of the accommodation challenges faced by the UTC-Elgon, in particular, the Ministry of Works and Transport should unconditionally hand back Orion Block in accordance with the memorandum of understanding signed between the two parties. This will enable the college to reduce on its accommodation problems.

    6. If feasible, the proposed infrastructure development loans for technical institutions from the Islamic Bank should be fast-tracked by the Ministry of Education and Sports to enable Colleges create adequate and decent accommodation for students, staff and lecture rooms. Furthermore the colleges should be facilitated to develop master plans to guide them in developing and using the available space to meet both the current and future needs of the institutions. 

    7. Uganda Technical Colleges should be facilitated with State-of-the-Art libraries.

    8. On the issue of the roofing materials, Asbestos sheets should be immediately replaced so as to avert the health and safety hazards associated with its usage. 

    9. On the issue of funding, Government should increase funding to support activities of the colleges. The funding requirements include, but are not limited to infrastructure development, rehabilitation, acquisition of training materials, industrial training, and capitation grants. Government capitation grants should be increased from the current rate of Shs 1800 per student per session day to the recommended Shs 7600 per student per day due to the challenges involved in student upkeep and other expenses.

    10. Government should expedite the provision of the requisite funding to UTC-Kyeema to enable the college to offer services that are commensurate to its status. 

    11. On the issue of transportation, Government should immediately provide appropriate vehicles to enable Colleges meet their transportation needs; which needs should be contemporary and commensurate with the needs of various institutions. 

    12. Madam Speaker and honourable members, in order to promote skills development research and innovation, Government should enact laws and make policies that encourage the private sector to admit more students on internship programmes. The laws should promote Government subsidy and tax exemptions on training requirements and materials for nationals admitted on internship programmes. 

13. 	Also, different technical colleges should offer short development-oriented courses in various regions in which they are located. The courses can focus on development of skills in road construction and maintenance, and should target offering basic road training to the district leadership, for example, so as to improve the monitoring and evaluation of Government programmes in the area. 

14. 	Madam Speaker and honourable members, considering that the Ministry of Education and Sports adopted the competence-based education and training approach in which the acquisition of skills and appropriate training is a core requirement and the basis for performance assessment, priority therefore should be given to release of funds for instructional materials.

15. The Ministry of Education and Sports and that of Information Communication Technology should ensure that UTCs are connected to the Internet Optic Fibre Network to facilitate research and ease access to electronic library materials. 

16. Furthermore, affirmative action should be applied in UTCs to increase girl-child enrolment. 

17. Capacity building of lecturers, especially through training at institutions of higher learning should be emphasised. The Nuffic initiative to train lecturers was positive and should accordingly be supported.

18. Government should rehabilitate, facilitate and improve upon the management of the existing vocational institutions before opening new ones. These institutions should be managed as economically-sound businesses, Madam Speaker, than being opened for political purposes.

19. A resettlement package should be offered to UTC-Lira College to enable it to rehabilitate the facilities and pay the outstanding utility bills. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, a modern College like UTC-Lira should have an entrepreneurship course to enable the students to be able to set up enterprises thereafter.

And also, in order to encourage science and innovation, Government and the Private Sector Foundation should deliberately work with the colleges to establish incubation centres for research ideas. This shall facilitate the learning and sharing of ideas thereby boosting innovation and creativity and also improve upon as well as commercialise products developed therein. 

Finally, the responsible Ministry should ensure that land belonging to UTCs is titled and land titles should be handed over to the heads of those institutions.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be adopted by this august House. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, honourable chair and vice-chair. I want to congratulate the Committee on Science and Technology for setting a really high standard. I think this is the fifth one during this session and we congratulate them. (Applause)

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a point of procedure. As much as I appreciate my brother for our report, I am wondering how we shall proceed when a good number of pages that should have been, in my view, summarised by the chair of the committee and left to us to read on our own - how we shall proceed debating this and yet it is a very important issue? Would it not be prudent that if we probably got a summary of those pages that were left out because we have other things to read as we are debating? How shall we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thought that the findings were really clear. The findings identify the problem.

3.31
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): I thank you very much, Madam, Speaker. I want to seek your indulgence since there are two reports, and I want to thank the committee for this report. 

Madam Speaker, you remember that it was in the Seventh Parliament that the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology appealed to your office for the creation of a specific committee to deal with science and technology. 

Whereas the report is very good, when you look at the recommendation - and I want to urge the chairperson and the members of the committee - that we need to look at the roles and the responsibility of Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. This is an institution that is established by an Act of Parliament.

It is a semi-autonomous body established in 1990 and its role is to advise Government on policy matters as regards to development of science and technology in this country, on matters of research, to link with institutions of higher learning and with agricultural and international researchers, to advise Government on budget allocations, and to look at issues of ethics and standards. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to urge this committee – I know that they have talked about technical institutions like the one I have in Mella – technical studies are intensive and extensive and require substantial amount of money, but we need to find out within our budget framework how much money do we allocate to this institution that is supposed to guide Government. Do they have the required personnel? Do they have the capacity to monitor the entire research in this country? We as Parliament are supposed to work with them so that they can guide us and then inform Government. 

If we work in isolation and leave them out, even if we did not direct with the Ministry of Education or the Ministry of Agriculture, we shall be uncoordinated and uncoordinated movement of troops is very dangerous in third world countries. Therefore, I wish to urge Government that as we prepare for the next budget, we need to allocate appropriate amounts of money to this department and institution. 

What is happening is that we now have Government giving money to ‘researchers’ who go to Europe and get electrical vehicles and then they come here and say that they have manufactured electrical vehicles. Where do you manufacture? You just go and buy a battery and parts –(Interjections)- that is what is happening and I am telling you the truth, Madam Speaker –(Laughter)- but we need to work with the institution. 

If you go to supermarkets in Kampala, you find innovations and products that have been developed by UIRI, for example, and they are needed all over the world, but they have to get clearance from Uganda National Council of Science and Technology. 

Therefore, I want to urge the chairperson that in their next report, let us evaluate the role and responsibility; let us find out whether they have the necessary capacity and potential and whether we need to amend the Act to give it the necessary strengths instead of recommending the creation of a new ministry – a ministry is a bureaucratic institution and is consumptive; you will bring another minister with vehicles, a permanent secretary, but the institution that is supposed to monitor agriculture, land and the fisheries department is so weak. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. 

3.43
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members. We thank the two chairpersons for the report and I beg to submit that you find that most schools and institutions in Uganda do not have land titles so we seek that the ministries concerned should ensure that before these schools are even closed, you get land titles for them.

Another thing is that the process of promoting instructors, lecturers and teachers is a bit vague. As an English teacher, I will use those words, “a bit vague”. So, you find that a person has worked, but the promotion policy is not in favour of that person. We request the minister concerned to ensure that they are people who are really efficient.

Another thing is regarding the issue of asbestos. I happened to traverse five sub-countries over the weekend and by chance, I moved through Kaliro. Kaliro National Teachers College has asbestos; Iganga Secondary School has asbestos; very many primary schools which were built in the 1960s and 70s still have asbestos. So, we beg the people concerned – because I understand that money was passed a long time ago to have asbestos removed from schools. But up to date there are many schools with asbestos. 

Madam Speaker, there are also certain technical schools which were established but are not in operation. For example, in Kigulu North, there is a school which was set up by the government; it was roofed; but there are no workers. 

So, we are saying that if a school is put in a region, if it is for the sake of regional balance, that school should be functional.

Lastly, funding to public universities. We would like to appreciate the government for the funding to public universities. But you find that in most cases the funding is only for consumption, but not for structures. 

We think that if ministries could consider funding for development, we would appreciate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.46
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to salute the chairperson of this Committee on Science and Technology for the report well presented; and also for the second report. However, I have observed some serious gaps which have been omitted by the two reports. If we want to –(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, much as we don’t like thieves to steal money from PRDP, is hon. Fungaroo in order to dress the way he has dressed in this honourable House. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I invite you to go and remove the red “thing” and remain with the shirt and tie. (Laughter) Please go and remove the T-shirt. I shall give you your time.

3.48
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would also like to thank the committee for presenting this report. 

I have three issues to raise and I will start with the issue on computers. I had the opportunity of visiting Elgon Technical College, and I was shocked that they were using Windows 2000. In my opinion, if we are going to impart knowledge to these students regarding the use of computers, we need to bring many of these institutions, including secondary schools, up to the basic level which is acceptable in the ICT sector. 

Secondly, on the issue of asbestos. Tororo hosted the asbestos factory then. In this very House, I have raised the issue several times. Once Asbestos comes into contact with the changing weather patterns, especially sunshine and water, produces carcinogenous substances. These are substances that cause cancer. Basically, the word carcinogenous means “it causes cancer”. 

I thought that Tororo was the only area suffering with asbestos roofs. We were promised by the then Minister of Health, Dr Mallinga, that the hospital in Tororo will not have asbestos sheets. To date, I want to report, we have asbestos sheets in a hospital in Tororo. Secondary schools in Tororo are still covered with asbestos. To make matters worse, they harvesting are water –(Interruption)

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable Member of Parliament from Tororo Municipality in order to insinuate that I am still the Minister of Health and that I am responsible for the removal of asbestos from Tororo hospital. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member said that you made a commitment on behalf of Government when you were the Minister of Health. And he says up to today, the commitment has not been fulfilled. So, he is in order.

MR TANNA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I would like to support the recommendation of the committee in regard to asbestos. As a Parliament and as a nation, the use of asbestos was globally banned in 1980. Why are we still exposing our people to the dangers of using asbestos?

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House takes this recommendation extremely seriously. (Member timed out_)  

3.52
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your advice that I should not put on that T-shirt in the House because the writings on it were not good. 

THE SPEAKER: It was not the writings. You were not properly dressed.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Now, back to the point. If we want to improve science and technology in Uganda, we do not need to only focus on the training institutions, which comprise of the lecturers, the welfare of the lecturers; student welfare; scholarships; and the laboratories, which have been mostly covered by the two reports. 

There are two gaps. First, the market of the products of science and technology, which are the major factors that trigger the brain of a scientist to think scientifically and to do motivation.

In the two reports, I wanted to see mention of the home-grown science products, for example, Sembule Electronics. There was a factory here manufacturing radios and steel. These are the kind of things which make science and technology to develop. It stimulates the thinking of a scientist to think productively. 

Madam Speaker, almost all of us in this House are culprits in discouraging the development of science and technology in Uganda. We buy products from abroad. Look at this environment; the furniture we have was most likely imported from abroad. There are tables which were bought from Dubai when the timber was from Mabira or from around Uganda. So, if we can discourage importation of products which can be made at home then it means we shall be encouraging our own scientists to produce things for their own markets. 

Secondly, retention of scientists; we train people from Makerere University and we train people from Mbarara University, only for them to be employed in Rwanda, in the US and in Southern Sudan because we cannot pay them very well. So, why do you want to pay to train a scientist extensively in Uganda when he cannot be used in Uganda? We should put a strategy to retain our home-trained scientists in Uganda here.

Kigumba Institute of Petroleum and the products of this institute; when you go to a petroleum exploration company, you will find that a job which can be done very well by a Ugandan is done by a foreigner, and if a Ugandan is good at it, the Ugandan is not paid the same rate like the foreigner. So, why do you say that you want to improve the production unit of scientists, the schools and the institutions when the end product is not well taken care of? 

Madam Speaker, in the new government that we have planned to put in place in Uganda, we are going to create a force that will attract scientists here by paying the scientists highly, and by making sure that the products of science and technology made in Uganda are utilised in Uganda –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA MUGARA(Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report. But I am a little bit dissatisfied because in the report, out of the five technical institutions, you only visited four. You said that you ran out of finances before you visited Kichwamba. 

I would like to know from the chairperson why you deliberately ran out of funds before visiting Kichwamba, because it is a very important technical institute in my area. It is the only one we have in the Rwenzori region. It lost so many students and I thought among the recommendations, you would include something like a memorial block. So, to me, this report is incomplete minus you visiting Kichwamba Technical College and finding the problems there as well. 

Secondly, according to the chairperson, apparently there are only five public UTCs. How many private UTCs exist as well, because five are very few and if you only have five, then it is a problem? So, we would like to know how many private UTCs exist as well so that Government can get to know how much effort to put in establishing others. 

But most importantly, please consider Kichwamba Technical College. Go back and visit it before this report is taken. We, the Members of Parliament from Rwenzori, will not take this report as complete until you go back to Kichwamba and find the facts down there. Thank you. 

3.58
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to join the rest in thanking the committee for this report. However, I have the following comments: 

On the issue of inadequate research, what makes a university a unique centre of learning is the essence of research. Therefore, I agree with the committee report that we must invest more money to ensure that research is enhanced, and it is one of the ways through which we can work on the high level of unemployment because creativity is one of the aspects that is inbuilt.

On the issue of the Presidential Initiative to Makerere University, I believe Presidential initiatives have been fairly good, but the concern here is that some universities have not benefited from them. To me, that is another concern and there are ministries which are entrusted to work in this country. Therefore, it is negligence of the various ministries to fail to ensure that good initiatives by the President are spread to other institutions or universities. I, therefore, wish to state that let the ministries see how good initiatives like these are spread to other universities or ministries. 

On the issue of the structural status, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I believe this is the essence of poor planning because as Government, we invest so much in primary and secondary education. However, ewe do not plan to accommodate our products at university level. So, this is an act of poor planning. We must invest to accommodate our products at university level just as we invest at primary and secondary levels. 

Donor dependency; in this report, it has been indicated that when we get monies from donors, the output we get does not meet our priorities. So, why should we accept some of these offers? In the end we lose time, and it affects our planning. So, I am of the view that if donors come with their monies yet in the end we shall not benefit, then there is no need for us to get donor monies –(Member timed out.)

4.01
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and I thank the committee for the report. We have been talking of training Ugandans not for white collar jobs, but for work that can be done wherever a person comes from. This is now an opportunity for us as an institution of Parliament, to guide on how to implement this. My concerns are as follows:

Madam Speaker, we have been talking of ICT and it is a driving force for anything we are planning and undertaking. My worry and my query is, how are we incorporating this ICT roll-out in the whole country in light of the fact that even the electricity supply, which is supposed to enable it run, is not distributed everywhere? With that I want to say that we should, as Parliament, direct that rural electrification and other programmes of Umeme should clearly target this oil so that we can implement ICT across the country. 

Secondly, asbestos is a very serious thing. As we talk, in Kyambogo University there are houses roofed with asbestos. My proposal is that immediately we pass this resolution, there should be a budget in this House to specifically eradicate all the asbestos across the country. The minister should bring a budget here and we pass it and we ensure that in one year, the decision is implemented and we call it history.

Madam Speaker, we have so much research going on in the country and we are relying on science and technology. As I said, we have a very serious issue and dilemma about the nodding syndrome. 

There is so much dilemma around around this problem that the resolution so far is to have a research carried out to establish what its cause is. I am wondering where science and technology is being incorporated in this research before we can fund or rely on people who are doing research outside the country? I would like to see this incorporated so that we intensify the research on the Nodding Syndrome. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk about the technical colleges and about our personnel going outside Uganda, I would like to propose that in order to retain our very own, all the technical institutions – I think this Hydraform business which was brought through the Office of the Prime Minister – some of them are lying around unutilised, including in my district - should be taken to these technical institutions so that our children take on the practical training of it deliberately and engage them so that all the construction like in our PRDP sub-regions which has now gone to the dogs –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use just half a minute.

MS ATIM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was making the point that we use our own technical team in the region to construct the schools because these are children we are supposed to train on the job so that we do not have to rely on other people who are constructing shoddy buildings and yet we have technical schools in Uganda that could handle the work.

Lastly, I would like these contracts to specifically be given to the technical schools which can help them train their students as they equally earn some money, but supervised by specialists. This is my recommendation and if this House adopts it, we shall go a long way. Thank you.

4.06
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this good report. My comment is on how science and technology is performing in Uganda. It is important to note that science and technology started way back during the Stone Age. At this time, as Ugandans, we should think of how we can improve on what we found established by the first man. With that background, I request that science and technology goes directly to lower primary. We cannot start discussing science and technology at the higher levels of education like secondary school and university without having it in primary school.

Madam Speaker, it is again important to note that science and technology is the machinery behind human civilisation. I, therefore, beg that the committee goes back and together with the minister finds a means on how we can incorporate science from lower primary school. 

I wish to thank the President who started the initiative of awarding salary increment to scientists in the country. It is important because this is one way of avoiding brain drain. The most experienced people outside the country – I was sharing with some people that in Kenya the expert doctors are from Uganda. So, Madam Speaker, I think this would also be a milestone towards improving science and technology in Uganda. And, it is vital that we have it because without it, other countries will leave us behind and yet development is dependent on science.

However, this comes with challenges; challenges like loss of jobs. But still, with improved science and technology, we can have it go up to entrepreneurial level. Creativity can go up to the entrepreneurial level when science and technology is effectively utilised. 

I thank the committee for its report, but we request that at least every region in the country gets the best institution that can produce the brains that can handle science and technology in Uganda. Thank you.

4.09
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this good report and I totally support any resolution that promotes, enhances and encourages technical schools because they are part of the engine for developing this country.

Madam Speaker, the major reason I have stood up is on point 5.5 on page 16 of the report - “Unconditional Return of Orion Block to Elgon”. 

My Ministry took over this building when it was dilapidated; it was not being used and we approached the technical school and we signed a memorandum of understanding they are talking about. We rehabilitated this building and expanded it. We now have a lot of work we are doing with our development partners, DANIDA. We have talked to the administration, but there are some people still confusing the administration there. 

The Ministry of Works and Ministry of Education are both Government institutions. We have told the technical college that since they have big land, for the security of our developments, let us have a few acres with titles under the Ministry of Works and Transport. And we are ready – and they are aware – to build another big block for this technical college. We have made this offer for years, but because some people are telling them to kick out the Ministry of Works –you cannot have a Government ministry kicking out another Government ministry; we have to work as a team. All we are asking them to do is to give us a few acres and we title it under the Ministry of Works and Transport, then we build them another block, and we shall co-exist harmoniously. We are committed and the college knows about this.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, Elgon Technical College has got 200 acres of empty land and the committee is emphasising technical education. The school which was started by the Ministry of Works with the help of DANIDA is training labour-based technologists, and these are the majority now working on our roads.  

Therefore, we had better work harmoniously; we requested for a few acres to have a modern building for them and the Ministry has been budgeting for it year in, year out. But then there is somebody else telling the college to kick out the Ministry of Works, as my minister has said. How can the government kick itself out?

4.13
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for the good work they have done. I would like to advise the ministry and this august House that our major problem is not the training; our problem is the market. If you looked carefully, Government is doing enough to train Ugandans. The technical institutions, much as they have problems, produce graduates year in, year out. But the challenge is: Do we have market for these products? –(Interruption)

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Is the honourable member holding the Floor in order to continue deliberating while wearing the very T-shirt for which you sent hon. Fungaroo out for? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, I did not send out hon. Fungaroo because of the T-shirt only, he was dressed badly; the T-shirt was inside the coat. I hadn’t seen that, what are you wearing? 

MS ADONG: It is a T-shirt, but I dressed like this from home. It is inside like a camisole, Madam.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at least hon. Fungaroo had something remaining when he removed the T-shirt but if she does, she may have nothing. Proceed.

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The point I was driving at is, as a country we need to focus on, and do research on the market of the skills that we are imparting in these students. You will see that we are training students in carpentry and joinery, metal works and others, but where is the market? That is our biggest problem and that is why people are unemployed.

I challenge each one of us. How many of us buy products from these Ugandans? Check in your sitting rooms and even in Parliament. We should know that the moment we buy products from these Ugandans, we are giving them employment, but we are very busy giving employment to Chinese and other countries that are making fake products and bringing them into the country. So, Members, I request that we do more research in marketing the products and the skills that we have.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, it the committee reported that most of these universities have got few teachers; or half of what they  need in cases because there is a ban by the Ministry of Education on recruiting staff in these institutions. Most of the staff in these universities or institutions are serving in acting capacities while others have acted for more than two years and it is so demoralising.

I would like to seek clarification from the Ministry of Education. What is wrong with confirming those teachers who are already there so that their morale is lifted as they continue teaching and giving the appropriate skills as they concentrate on their work?

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, much as we say these universities lack new books, we all pay fees for our children and there is an amount we pay for library fees and for buying books, but year in, year out no books are bought. Can we really find out what exactly they are doing with the money because sometimes they misuse the money and -(Member timed out.)

4.17
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had the privilege of going to Kyeema Technical Institute and what the committee has reported is exactly what is  on the ground. I want to thank them for a very good report and a very good picture that they have given to the House today.

Madam Speaker, one of the issues that we are battling with obviously, has been skilling Uganda, and a lot of times we have interfaced with young people and they say, experience has become another university of learning. A lot of times when jobs are advertised, even by Government, people are not trained to deliver the required skills on the market because of the required two years’ experience and all that.

Therefore, one of the recommendations that the committee has given, to strengthen the area of internship, is very good because what we have been working on in terms of strengthening that area. I would like to recommend to the Ministry of Education that this is a big area; it is not only for trainees from vocational institutions, but is also for trainees in other universities and tertiary institutions.

Madam Speaker, I think we need to adopt a broader approach and ensure that all graduates from all these institutions undergo internship training, industrial training and that some of them can actually engage in voluntary services to strengthen this area. I think that if we do this, we can also alleviate unemployment among the young people because if somebody engages in skills development for one year, that is a way of offering training.

So, our appeal, as the youth leaders representing young people, has been that if we can have a national policy that encourages provision of internship training by every sector, be it Government or private, for these young people. I believe it will be a milestone in our time as we battle with the issue of unemployment generally in the country; and as we battle with the issue of lack of skills in the market. This is my recommendation and I really want to commend the committee and thank them for that every expository report. Thank you very much.

4.20
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for presenting us with the challenges of research in universities. As they have rightly put it, we have been depending a lot on donor support for research, which is unfortunate. Even the few times that Government gets money for research, it is overly concentrated on one project yet a number of the other universities could  be facilitated with some of the money. 

If, for example, we gave 30 percent of what was given to the banana project to other universities. We could then allow the private sector to partner with these universities to replicate the research findings. Our problem is not just research, but translating research findings into appropriate technologies and practical life, and working with the private sector partnership synergy to ensure that we replicate as much as possible and make research relevant to our people. I think that is where the problem is.

This also reminds me that ever since the days of ICT, the words “science” and “technology” were beginning to fizzle out. I think we need to re-think this. Why do we disconnect ICT from science and technology? Some countries are doing it holistically and we may have to also revisit that.

I would like to add that technical colleges are indeed in a very sorry state. We have been visiting some of these colleges. They are very archaic and don’t even have the right laboratories. I would like to request Ministry of Education to fast-track the 14 plus five plus four technical colleges, which we passed in the last parliament. This will at least reduce the pressure on the very few colleges available, and would improve the situation.

The Ministry of Education has another challenge. Some of the students being trained in Kyambogo to become trainers are not being recruited by the Education Service Commission and the Public Service Commission. So, we also need to address this because all the trainers might end up getting very old and there will be no young people to train. 

We also need to invest - and I am saying this because we are now talking of skilling Uganda. I want to agree with those who say that without skilling Uganda, the current UPE and USE is a time bomb! Given our demography and challenges, Uganda needs more technicians and plumbers. We are not yet, for example, training people even for the oil and gas industry.

In Juba, it is not that people are going there only to sell food. A number of our carpenters and masons are making money, which is not registered in Juba because they are the contractors to our neighbour. So, we really need to put effort in those areas where we can help our people. I will not complain so much about brain drain –(Member timed out.)

4.23
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am saddened by the state of the technical colleges in Uganda. The main mandate of these colleges is to offer professional training in the areas of skills development and job creation towards self-sustainability. But how does a student achieve this under the circumstances which you have just heard? When you talk about staff motivation, motivation is the driving force towards attainment of any goal. But here you find the staff are demotivated because of low pay, and most of them are in acting positions. So, you wonder what type of students they churn out. And when you talk about the existing structures, I was saddened by Elgon UTC, where a grinding mill has been converted into sleeping quarters for the students. How do you expect such a student to learn and later on become a job creator? So, I think our Government should come up with a completely new investment plan for these technical colleges as soon as possible.

When I look at the public universities, on a lighter note, I am actually encouraged by the innovations going on in Busitema University. The innovations which include maize hullers, ox ploughs, cassava chipper, groundnut paste pulveriser and the ox-drawn groundnut planter, I get very encouraged as a member of the committee on agriculture.

These innovations are very relevant to Uganda, taking into account that over 70 percent of the population of Uganda gets its livelihood from agriculture. So, these innovations would go a long way in the area of mechanisation, to help our agriculturists to realise big and better harvests and they would, therefore, be saving on time and energy. The same technology is very relevant in the creation of value-addition to the products from the farmers. So, I commend this innovation -(Member timed out.)

4.26
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee, but I would also like to correct their report. Apparently, by the time they reached Uganda Technical College - Kyeema, the committee was tired. You can see the scanty information they have given about Kyeema, yet very good things are happening at Kyeema Technical College -(Interjections)- yes! You have not mentioned the type of courses they are doing or how many students are there. I will tell you, Madam Speaker and the House, that Kyeema started as a project aimed at reducing child labour especially in tobacco growing areas. It has just been taken over by Government and upgraded.  

For the record, on page 10, Kyeema Technical College has not received any funding from any oil company. They gave their proposals to Tullow and Total but none of them has given it any funding. But suffice to mention that Kyeema has an understanding with the Uganda Petroleum Institute Kigumba and it is hosting some of its students. But there is no oil company that has supported Kyeema at all.

There are challenges that have been raised as faced by these technical colleges, but I know we have passed loans in this House for some of these technical colleges. However, there is no mention of these loans. I thought that the loans were supposed to tackle some of the challenges that these colleges are facing. So, I would like to know from the committee, or maybe the Ministry of Education, how far they have gone as far as implementing the loans that we passed in this House. 

If you are going to hold a memorandum of understanding between Ministry of Works and Elgon Technical College, I think the recommendation by the committee is correct. If the Ministry of Works wants to continue staying on Elgon Technical College land, let them renew the memorandum of understanding. I want to agree that all these technical colleges must title their land. If you hear that Elgon Technical College has over 200 hectares which is not titled and it is redundant, why wouldn’t anybody, including a government ministry or department want to partake of this land? So, please formalise your stay on Elgon Technical College land -(Interruption) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Member for giving way. We have been in talks with Ministry of Education and the management committee of Elgon Technical College, for more than three years now, and we have actually written - it is in writing, and even the minutes are there - asking for an extension, and also we have asked for sharing of the land since both are Government institutions. In the minutes it is very clear that since the Ministry of Works has got a donor component where they have invested their money, we are ready to construct another block for them because that donor component is the one which is bringing us problems. We agreed as Government and we budgeted for that block. So, to say that we have not asked for renewal- no, we have renewed -(Interjections)- that is information. Yes, we have asked for renewal except that it has not been extended to us.

MRS MASIKO: Madam Speaker, the minister said that - actually it was a repetition. However, I am saying, formalise your plans. I believe Parliament should not have been the one to tell you what you are supposed to do between yourselves.  

On page 15, 5(c), about the hydraform machines, this technology was popularised sometime back, but I do not know why nobody talks about it, and why are we not using the hydraform machine.

4.32
MR GEOFFREY OMARA (NRM, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think if we have to take a decision as a country to develop science and technology in this country, then we have to start with technology appraisal, which has to be done by the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology in different sectors or ministries - 

THE SPEAKER: Oh, he is a member of the committee. No. Then why were you standing up? Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye.

4.32
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Sheema): Thanks a lot, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I also wish to thank the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson of the committee for a good report. But I wish to comment on three issues.

One, when you look at the report on technical colleges, this committee managed to visit four out of only five technical colleges we have in the country, but they did not prioritise Kichwamba. To see that they wanted to get money to go to four they missed out one college, Kichwamba, which was hit by the ADF. We had students die and the college was damaged. It would have been good that this Parliament gets to know what is in that college since that tragedy took place.

The committee also mentioned UTC Bushenyi and highlighted the importance of having modern computerised equipment for training. I wish to thank the committee for that observation because it hurts to find that in many institutions, especially medical institutions, when we need equipment, we have to import engineers from Belgium and other countries to come and do minor repairs or even minor servicing of equipment, yet it could be done by our people in Uganda and they earn that money. But because the equipment they use in the training is obsolete yet the equipment we use is modern, the engineers we churn out cannot be able to work on this equipment.

It is also worth noting in the Report on Science and Technology in the universities that we cannot talk about science and technology in the universities without talking about the students. We have very many students who qualify to do university science courses like engineering and medicine, but cannot afford tuition. It is, therefore, important that this Parliament and the government work on the Students’ Loan Scheme to enable students who are intellectually capable to undertake courses in science and technology rather than those students missing out on those courses and then other students who are not so good but have the money undertake such courses and we end up churning out not very good products and miss out on very good students.

It is also worth noting that research in universities is mainly externally-funded. It is hurting to know that Mbarara University, for example, received only Shs 70 million for research. Of course we recognise the Presidential Initiative on Science and Technology, but also note that it has mainly gone to Makerere University. It is important to note that if you get money for research from abroad, then you have got to do research for which they want results.  (Member timed out.)

4.36
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Science and Technology for a very good report. I have been touched by three areas. One is the recommendation on gender. We have realised that in these colleges, there are very few ladies, and in some, they are none. It is because, first of all, from secondary school, the ladies are not encouraged to take sciences. As a result, they end up doing art subjects and do not qualify to go to those colleges. 

Secondly, they believe these jobs are for men and women are not supposed to build or do carpentry; yet I have observed that the best builders are women. They are not corrupt. They mix the right component of the materials. So, women can perform. I, therefore, urge that affirmative action is given so that women enter into the arena of technology and perform like other men. Women should not be marginalised.

Secondly, the committee talked about entrepreneurship. Indeed, our students - our products, lack entrepreneurship. As a result, when they qualify, they go on looking for jobs and yet, if they had training in entrepreneurship, they would be able to create jobs for themselves. They would be able to produce machines, as mentioned earlier, like ox-ploughs, sewing machines and so forth. They should be able to produce things so that we have our own products made by our own people. Therefore, these entrepreneurs must be part and parcel of the technical colleges. Also, after completing, these students should be provided with loans so that they can invest and create jobs for our people.

Regarding the distribution of these colleges, the report said they should not create more colleges. I would like to inform the committee and the House that the colleges are too few. For example, in West Nile, we have only one in Moyo, where all the students are crowded, and going up to Lira is very expensive. So, I encourage creation of more colleges so that the services are taken nearer to the people. If you take the example of Koboko, we do not even have a single polytechnic. The children have to go elsewhere. It is important to add more technical colleges to what we have. 

In addition, we should improve the quality of teaching there so that when our products are churned out, they are able to produce quality products. For now, we buy furniture from the Chinese because our own people cannot make us good furniture like the Chinese. The issue of quality must be emphasised if we are to do it from our colleges. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to argue further the point made by hon. Baba Diri. I have a small building in Kamuli and one day, I received a call, “The painters have come. There is even a girl.” You know, they were shocked that a girl was painting.  It was very strange to them.

4.40
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you Madam Speaker and the committee for the good report that you have presented to us to consider and adopt.

My concern is only one; that is on page 17. I stand to support the recommendation that the government should immediately provide appropriate vehicles to enable colleges meet their transport needs.

I also want to inform the House and above all, the committee and the Ministry of Defence – because during the war, Kalong Technical Institute which was uplifted to Kalong Technical College had a lorry that was taken by the National Resistance Army during the war,. They took that vehicle. Up to date, that vehicle has not been taken back to Kalong Technical Institute. The college does not own any vehicle or even a motorcycle. I think, this is the right time to present this since the Committee on Science and Technology is now considering these issues, so that they include it while we are following it up. They need their vehicle back. 

Lastly, about the labour-based training which was being conducted at Mt Elgon Technical College. We are benefitting greatly. Some people were taken to get the training and the knowledge from there. Unfortunately, in Northern Uganda, in Lira technical colleges, this knowledge is not being applied. People are not being trained adequately in labour-based technology to enable them construct the roads - the community roads and all other roads required. I also urge that if it could be incorporated in the syllabi of technical institutes and colleges even in other parts of the country; this will make construction of roads cheap. I thank you so much, for giving me this opportunity.

4.43
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for this good report or two reports.

The report on public universities on page 21 with a title, “National Research Agenda and Strategy is Lacking” - I think this is the most serious observation the committee made; that as a country, we have no direction. We are just experimenting on each and everything. We must choose. If you went to Rwanda, the obsession is ICT. That is where they are directing all their research. However, here in Uganda we are doing research on everything and almost about nothing. So, it is just an obsession with science. So, we must have a recommendation. Before we recommend funding for anything, we must have a national research agenda. What do we want to achieve? 

Earlier, colleagues were talking about training people and they go away. I actually do not care! Here you prove two points; that you do not have to train because your people will end up in Rwanda and Burundi. That means there is something you have got to sort out. I was in Texas and most of the health facilities there are run by Pakistanis; the Americans do not have to train because someone else has done so.

The second point is about the obsession to access everything by everybody. You do not have to turn everybody into a scientist; everybody must go to primary; everybody must go to secondary; everybody must do science – do we know the human resource that we require in science? How many doctors do we train in a year and what is our absorption capacity as a country? Or do we just train and find doctors teaching; and teachers selling mandazi –(Member time out.)

4.46
MR JACK WAMANGA WAMAYI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Chairman of the Science and Technology Committee for the good report. But you cannot talk about science in universities and technical schools without talking about science in primary and secondary schools. The situation in all these schools is so bad. When you go to secondary schools and visit the labs, there is nothing. The equipment is obsolete. The children who are in town are a bit lucky. But when you go to the countryside, the children cannot do anything. They cannot even perform scientific experiments because they do not have the equipment and the chemicals. Therefore, they have no chance of passing science subjects. 

Now, when you go to technical schools, like Elgon which you have been talking about, the equipment are obsolete; even in Makerere or Kyambogo, there is nothing to promote science in this country. Research is donor funded. This government has not put aside money to interest our bright students; those who were number one or two in science subjects to carry out research. There is nothing at all.

They talked about asbestos. Asbestos was burned in the Western countries way back in the 70s. But the Ministry of Works who have been talking here have got asbestos buildings down here. The Ministry of Education has got asbestos buildings – I have seen them down here. Madam Speaker, one of the issues we should talk about –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am forced to call my friend to order. I sit in Ministry of Works and Transport; that is where my offices are and I want to testify that there is no single asbestos building there. 

Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to insinuate and tell lies to this House that as Ministry of Works and Transport, we are sitting under asbestos? 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Works down here – the workshops behind where they do foundry, the building is roofed with asbestos, I do not know why the minister should come and tell lies to everybody here. 

MR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I sit in the Ministry of Works; in the workshop behind there. And my office is roofed with iron sheets. What the honourable member is saying that there are asbestos buildings in the Ministry of Works – I think he should tell us which building it is. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I do not know why the government side should start arguing, because asbestos is there in schools; everywhere in this country there is asbestos. So, what we should do is to accept and ban asbestos because it is dangerous to lives in this country. 

Madam Speaker, this Government should come up with a policy; this science can also be dangerous. The obsolete computers that are being loaded onto this country, we have no policy of how to dispose of this equipment, and it has caused problems. If you went to Mulago Hospital, there are so many cases of cancer because of the equipment that is loaded into this country and we do not have a policy of how to dispose of this equipment. This is a very serious issue. They should come up with a policy. A computer’s lifespan is five years. Now, what do we do with this equipment when they are obsolete? We do not have a policy. Therefore, for us to promote science, we must acquire modern equipment. Doctors are going away from this country because there is nothing in Mulago. There is modern equipment coming on the market; every month there is something new –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you. I now put the question that the reports be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Reports adopted.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

Clause 6

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, I propose to substitute clause 7 with the following:

7(1) “The National Oil Company established under the Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Act, 2012 shall be deemed to be established also for the purpose of this Act.

(2) The Government shall support the building of the capacity of the National Oil Company to enable it perform its role in midstream operations.

(3) The Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet decide that the National Oil Company shall participate in midstream operations”.

The justification: It is important to ensure that Government builds capacity of the National Oil Company to perform its roles under this Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed - 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much. Madam Chair and committee chairman, clause 7(1) which you propose for an amended is exactly the same as what the Bill is providing for. Probably the chairman will look at it, but 7(1) in the proposed amendments is exactly what is in the Bill. So, I would propose that you look at other sub clauses and that sub-clause (1) remains. 

And also, when you say, sub-clause (2): “The Government shall support the building of the capacity of the National Oil Company to enable it perform its laws in the midstream operations.” Midstream operations could be limiting. Why don’t we look at the long title and give effect to that because the midstream operations – fine, even if it is one and the same, where is the harm in looking at what is provided for in the Bill like petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation – so that we know exactly. And, sub-clause (3) is more less redundant bearing in mind sub-clause (2). 

So, I propose that this sub-clause (3) really serves no purpose, Mr Chairman, and sub-clause (1)  is restating what is already provided for in the Bill. There is no improvement, and there is no amendment that we are making. Then, our sub-clause 7(1) is the same as sub clause 7(1) in the Bill. I propose that the chairman could look at those issues, Madam Chairperson.
  
MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification. Why can’t the committee chairperson just reproduce a word instead of using the word “deemed” because in recent times, Government had lost money in the Income Tax Act and the Finance Bill because of the law not being explicit. So, I would like to seek your guidance on whether there would be a problem if you quoted the right word which you want instead of stating, “it shall be deemed”. You stated it here that the National Oil Company shall be deemed to have been created for the purpose of this Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But has it not been created in the other law? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the same oil company will deal with issues of this Bill. It is already there under the other law.

MS NALUBEGA: I thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to seek your guidance and maybe from the chair. When I look at the committee report, I don’t see sub-clause (1) under 7, but I see (g) and clause 3, but what they are referring to, I cannot trace it in the committee report. I do not know whether we are dealing with another document or I have a wrong committee report.

MR WERIKHE: I think hon. Nalubega has wrong text. If you look at the harmonised amendments on page 16, it is exactly what I am referring to. These were given out and if you don’t have a copy, maybe you could share with your neighbour. You are looking at the old report, but we have a harmonised report.

MS AMONGIN: I thank you, Madam Chair. I rise to seek more guidance on a procedural issue in respect to what the chairman terms as harmonised because like hon. Nalubega, I have a committee report and I want to read rule 193. It states, “Report to be signed by the Chairperson and Members” – (1)“A report of a committee shall be signed and initialed by at least one third of all the Members of the Committee, and shall be laid on the Table –

    (a) The members of the committee making the report shall be collectively responsible for the decisions contained therein and shall not debate the report on the Floor of the House;

    (b) in case of a compliant as to the authenticity of the report, the Speaker shall halt the debate on the report and refer the matter to the Clerk for investigation who shall report back to the Speaker before the next sitting of the House; 

    (c) Upon receiving the report from the Clerk, the Speaker shall inform the House of the findings and a decision will be taken on both the compliant and the report.”

And further, under rule 119(2), it states that, “The chairperson of the committee to which the Bill is referred or a member of the committee designated by the committee or by the Speaker shall after the motion for the second reading has been moved under sub-rule (1) and seconded, present to the House the report of the committee on the Bill.”

So, the procedural guidance I want to know is, which one is the committee report which has been initialled and signed as per rule 119 and 193  sub-rules (b) and (c), because what you are terming as harmonised position is not initialled by members or a report from the committee. The report from the committee that we have is in my hands and I have been trying to follow what you are reading and it is not part of the committee report.

So, procedurally, how do we proceed in the circumstances that we are now introducing a new harmonised report that is outside the Rules of Procedure and at the same time we have an official committee report that is with us? How do we proceed with a report that is not signed when we have a report that is signed with us? What is harmonised? Who harmonised it? Why is it not initialled by the committee members? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I know that the report was laid before this House and it was even debated and none of the Members, including the members of the committee, protested the content. This is referring only to the amendment, but the chair can explain.

MR WERIKHE: When the reports were presented to the House, the Speaker in the chair guided that rather than proceed by having Members come up with amendments here and there, we were tasked to go and actually meet – and this is actually the directive of the Committee of the Whole House, and I believe that the Committee of the Whole House is superior to the sectoral committee. So, it was a directive of the Committee of the Whole House that members could sit and go through the amendments and come back and resent the amendments to the Whole House and this is what we have been following. 

And even in the Upstream, that is how we proceeded, Madam Chair, and that is how we actually ended up concluding on the Upstream Bill. 

MS ANYWAR: I thank you, Madam Chair. I am a member of this committee and I very well know that when these Bills were introduced in the House, as a committee, we went into so many meetings to get a harmonised position on the Upstream and we even had so many consultations and that is how we came up as a committee with an agreed position.

As a member of the committee and shadow minister for that matter, this harmonised position of which I actually have a copy, and as I look into the face of the chairperson of my committee, we did not sit down as a committee to go through and agree on these old clauses as a harmonised position for the Midstream Bill –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Anywar, you performed a delegated function of your committee and you reported to this House. The House directed you to go back and harmonise the amendments – yes, that is what it is.

HON. MEMBERS: As a Whole House –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. Upstream was finished long ago. Upstream was done before Christmas – yes! 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I would like to support your argument because any report forwarded on the Floor of the House is not owned by the committee – but it can even be amended – it does not mean that the amendments that are harmonised here cannot be amended, but it was this House – because everybody was bringing an amendment and it became a problem, and we ordered the committee that all those people who are interested should go to the committee and forward their amendments and they bring them together, and those who are not satisfied in the committee, we amend them on the Floor as you are in the chair there. Any Member here can amend what is not agreed upon in the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us stick to the substance of the amendment, please. Honourable chair.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, many of the colleagues who are now speaking, including hon. Anywar, were among the members who participated in meetings in Munyonyo, Entebbe and these are the amendments they contributed.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, I stand on a point of order. With due respect to the chairperson of the committee, I stood here as an individual to give my position. I believe that I know my participation better than anybody else. As you see from this report, it was written in February and most of us were in the constituency. I am saying that I have not really gone into details on this. Is the honourable colleague in order to insinuate that when I was participating I was not seeing myself? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go to the substance of the amendment. If you have an objection, go straight to the substance.

MR WERIKHE: Honourable colleagues, if you have amendments, you can make amendments. This is not cast in stone. You have copies; you can go to clause 7. I am raising the proposed amendments and you can amend accordingly. You have your report; whether old or new, you have the report. I will be reading the amendments and you follow the report. (Interjections) What is wrong with that?

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, we do appreciate the explanation given by the chairperson of the committee. This is the most critical stage of law making, where we all need to be on the same page. If only you could give us the most current copy that you are using because what we have is different. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, last week you demanded for the copies and you demanded for time during the weekend to read them. This was your demand and you secured it. That is why hon. Alaso is not saying anything. Please, proceed. 

MR WERIKHE: Honourable Ssekikubo raised the issue of sub clause (1) and (3). I think in the submission that I am making, I said “substitute clause 7 with the following”, taking into account what is existing in the Bill and the amendment so that the whole clause flows. I wanted to have the whole clause rewritten so that it flows accordingly. (Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Chairperson, the subject matter we are dealing with is a very important one to the lives of 34 million Ugandans. Our rules provide that for us to take a decision, Parliament must be properly constituted. Are we, therefore, procedurally right to continue when we do not have quorum?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should stop abusing the Rules of Procedure. First, you said you did not know about the report, and then you said you do not know what they are reading and now you are saying we are not there. Can you ring the bell.

Clause 7

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 7 was substituted with the following: 

Sub clause (1) is enshrined in the Bill and it stands as it is. Sub clause (3) is important because in order to have the National Oil Company participate in the midstream operations, the minister will have to take a decision on that.

On the issue of midstream operations, the interpretation clause explains exactly what is supposed to constitute midstream operations. Throughout this Bill, where we have petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage, actually we do refer to midstream operations. The reason is that we should have a proper delineation between the upstream Bill and the midstream operations. That is why we have these –(Interruption)-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am raising a procedural issue. Rule 23 says, “The quorum of Parliament shall be one third of all Members of Parliament entitled to vote.” Is it procedurally right to proceed when we do not have quorum?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean your ears cannot hear because there is no quorum?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are the custodian of these rules and the law says what the quorum shall be. We are voting and we are making the law. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, with a heavy heart I rise to seek your guidance. A matter of procedure has been raised and it is the same matter that we had last time. 

At the same time, we members seem to be urging the Chairperson of the whole House to proceed when the blame is entirely ours. We are having such an important legislation and apparently, we have no quorum. Where are those Members? We ended at that very point last time and now, instead of organising ourselves to sit here, we are urging the Chairperson to proceed when we know it is irregular and illegal. Why are we putting the Chairperson in a difficult situation when we are to blame? We come here and we decide to go away. Why aren’t we honest for the first time and we resolve this matter instead of telling the Chairperson to proceed? 

Madam Chairperson, is it procedurally right for Members to sit here without you invoking the rules to compel them to sit in this House and we debate and pass this important matter? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have asked the clerk to ring the bell. Please, ring the bell.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am extremely surprised and I wish to register my disappointment maybe for future guidance. The Members who raised issues of procedure for lack of quorum have fled the House; how do we account for that? [Hon. Members: “But the bell is ringing.”] Maybe, let us wait for them. I wish to see hon. Semujju Nganda – (Laughter)

MR KATOTO: Madam Chairperson, I signed in as No. 186 in our register. So, can you guide us on whether we can bring those books and we see the Members who signed and ran away - specifically, the other people who want to stampede this - so that they are exposed because our side who signed are here. There are many people, over 200, who signed in the book but they are not here; they have run away after the Bill was brought. So, don’t you think that there is a hidden agenda? Madam Speaker, I would like your guidance on that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have here a list of 247 members who signed the register but they are not here. I think I should take a roll call. (Applause) 

Hon. Adong Lily 		Present 
Hon. Kasule Lumumba 	 	Present 
Hon. Irene Muloni 	 	Present
Hon. Mulimba 		 	Present
Hon. Lyomoki 
Hon. Mathius Nsubuga  		Present
Hon. Agnes Nabirye 	 	Present
Hon. Ayena-Odong
Hon. Mathias Mpuuga
Hon. Kiyingi Deogratius
Hon. Aleper Simon Peter
Hon. Aceng Joy Ruth  		
Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce  	

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, the word “absent” is not being captured on the record. I think it would be procedurally right that our constituents who elected us know what Members are doing in this House. Therefore, I do not know whether it is procedurally right for us to continue saying “absent” and yet it is not being captured.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, if you are here, please go to the microphone and answer to your name. Let us start again:

1. 	Hon. Adong Lilly  			Present
2. 	Hon. Kasule Lumumba  		Present
3. 	Hon. Irene Muloni  		Present
4. 	Hon. Mulimba  			Present
5. 	Hon. Dr Lyomoki			
6. 	Hon. Matthias Nsubuga  		Present
7. 	Hon. Agnes Nabirye  		
8. 	Hon. Ayena-Odong  			
9. 	Hon. Mathias Mpuuga  		
10. 	Hon. Deogratius Kiyingi  	
11. 	Hon. Aleper Simon Peter  	
12. 	Hon. Aceng Joy Ruth  		
13. 	Hon. Yaguma Wilberforce  	
14. 	Hon. Martin Bahinduka  		
15. 	Hon. Michael Ayepa  		
16. 	Hon. Betty Amongi  		Present
17. 	Hon. Mary Tuunde  			
18. 	Hon. Stephen Ochola 		Present
19. 	Hon. Nauwat Rosemary  		Present
20. 	Hon. Kase-Mubanda 	 	Present
21. 	Hon. Acire Christopher  	
22. 	Hon. Twa-Twa  			
23. 	Hon. Amodoi Cyrus  		
24. 	Hon. Justine Khainza  		Present
		
THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mulimba John again -I think there is a problem here.

25. 	Hon. Aol Betty Ochan  		
26. 	Hon. Kyooma Xavier  		
27. 	Hon. Iriama Margaret  		Present
28. 	Hon. Ogwang Peter 		Present
29. 	Hon. Sam Amooti Otada  		Present
30. 	Hon. Hood Katuramu  		
31. 	Hon. Odoo Tayebwa			
32. 	Hon. Dr Bayigga			
33. 	Hon. John Byabagambi 		Present
34. 	Hon. Stephen Tashobya  		Present
35. 	Hon. Kabahenda Flavia  		Present
36. 	Hon. Brenda Nabukenya  		
37. 	Hon. Ayoo Tonny  		Present
38. 	Hon. Amuriat Oboi  	
39. 	Hon. Bagiire Vincent  		Present
40. 	Hon. James Kakooza  		Present
41. 	Hon. Harriet Ntabazi  		Present
42. 	Hon. Peace Kusasira 		
43. 	Hon. Fredrick Ruhindi  		Present
44. 	Hon. Atim Ogwal Cecilia  		Present
45. 	Hon. Nandala-Mafabi  		Present
46. 	Hon. Margaret Komuhangi  	Present
47. 	Hon. Karooro Mary Busingye  	
48. 	Hon. Shinyabulo Mutende  	Present
49. 	Hon. Latiff Sebaggala  
50. 	Hon. Yorokamu Katwiremu  	Present
51. 	Hon. Jacob Oboth  			Present
52. 	Hon. Jovah Kamateeka  		Present
53. 	Hon. Ernest Kiiza 	 		Present
54. 	Hon. Nelson Sabila  		
55. 	Hon. Phyllis Chemutai  		Present
56. 	Hon. Alengot Proscovia  
57. 	Hon. Theopista Nabulya  		Present
58. 	Hon. Fred Badda  			
59. 	Hon. Flavia Nabugere  		Present
60. 	Hon. Simon Lokodo  				     
61. 	Hon. Amongin Aporu  			
62. 	Hon. Moses Kasibante  			
63. 	Hon. William Nzoghu  		Present
64. 	Hon. Atiku Bernard  		Present
65. 	Hon. Gilbert Olanya  		Present
66. 	Hon. Ongalo Obote  		
67. 	Hon. Atim Joy Ongom  		
68. 	Hon. Ssemmuli Anthony  		Present
69. 	Hon. Kezekia Mbogo  		
70. 	Hon. Hassan Fungaroo  			
71. 	Hon. Muhumuza David  		
72. 	Hon. Micah Lolem  			
73. 	Hon. Peter Lokeris  		
74. 	Hon. Achieng Sarah Opendi  	Present
75. 	Hon. Fred Omach  			
76. 	Hon. Abraham Byandala  		Present
77. 	Hon. Kevina Taaka  		Present
78. 	Hon. Nyakikongoro Rosemary  	Present
79. 	Hon. Kiboijana Margaret  		
80. 	Hon. Michael Mawanda  		Present
81. 	Hon. Nulu Byamukama  			
82. 	Hon. Amali Caroline Okao  	
83. 	Hon. Werikhe Kafabusa  		Present
84. 	Hon. Grace Byarugaba  		Present
85. 	Hon. Wilfred Niwagaba  		 
86. 	Hon. Ibi Florence  			Present
87. 	Hon. Alaso Asianut 		Present
88. 	Hon. Mugume Roland  			
89. 	Hon. Capt. Susan Lakot  		
90. 	Hon. Andrew Baryayanga  		 
91. 	Hon. Aboud Kitatta  		Present
92. 	Hon. Naggayi Sempala  			
93. 	Hon. Rosemary Najjemba  		
94. 	Hon. Evelyn Kabuule  		
95. 	Hon. Amos Lugoloobi  		Present
96. 	Hon. Joseph Matte            		Present
97. 	Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar   	Present
98. 	Hon. Santa Alum              		Present
99. 	Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe
100.	Hon. Jack Wamai-Wamanga
101.	Hon. Angelline Osegge       	Present
102.	Hon. David Wakikona           	Present
103.	Hon. Alex Onzima              	Present
104. Hon. Matia Kasaija
105. Hon. Wilson Asupasa Isiko
106. Hon. Henry Banyenzaki
107. Hon. Peter Bakaluba Mukasa
108. Hon. Lucy Ajok
109. Hon. Dorothy Nshaija          	Present
110. Hon. Alex Ndeezi
111. Hon. Fox Odoi
112. Hon. Wamakuyu Mudimi 		Present
113. Hon. Olivia Kwagala		Present
114. Hon. Jessica Ababiku 
115. Hon. Anne Auru
116. Hon. Dorothy Mpiima
117. Hon. Aston Kajara
118. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi 		Present
119. Hon. Tom Aza Alero      		Present
120. Hon. Rebecca Amuge Otengo
121. Hon. Paul Mwiru              		Present
122. Hon. Prisca Mbaguta Sezi
123. Hon. Rose Akol                		Present
124. Hon. Sarah Netalisire         		Present
125. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi 
126. Hon. Eddie Kwizera 
127. Hon. Rose Lilly Akello        	Present
128. Hon. Manoah Achile 
129. Hon. Samson Lokeris
130. Hon. Deogratius Besisira
131. Hon. Stanley Omwonya
132. Hon. Ibrahim Nganda Semujju
133. Hon. Zerubabel Nyiira        		Present
134. Hon. Robert Kafeero Sekitoleko
135. Hon. Grace Namara             	Present
136. Hon. Kenneth Lubogo          	Present
137. Hon. Mabel Bakeine 
138. Hon. Betty Mbabazi            	Present
139. Hon. David Ochwa
140. Hon. Stephen Ekuma
141. Hon. Kassiano Wadri           	Present
142. Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo      	Present
143. Hon. Migadde Ndugwa           	Present
144. Hon. Bazana Kabwegyere       	 Present
145. Hon. Sarah Kataike            		Present
146. Hon. Stephen Chebrot          	Present
147. Hon. Mariam Nalubega          	Present
148. Hon. Joseph Ssewungu
149. Hon. Anthony Okello          	 Present
150. Hon. Jacob Opolot
151. Hon. Jacob Wangolo 
152. Hon. Jalia Bintu              		Present
153. Hon. Juliana Modest Auma     	 Present
154. Hon. Abdu Katuntu
155. Hon. Helen Kahunde
156. Hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny 		Present
157. Hon. Linda Timbigamba         	Present
158. Hon. Stephen Mallinga
159. Hon. Julius Maganda           	Present
160. Hon. Atwooki Kasirivu
161. Hon. Martin Mugabi Muzaale   	Present
162. Hon. Iddi Isabirye           		Present
163. Hon. Sarah Mwebaza           	Present
164. Hon. Amelia Kyambadde
165. Hon. Sarah Mateke
166. Hon. John Baptist Lokii 
167. Hon. Hatwib Katoto           		Present
168. Hon. Stella Namoe            		Present
169. Hon. Sarah Lanyero           		Present
170. Hon. Medard Bitekyerezo      	Present
171. Hon. Naome Kabasharira       	Present
172. Hon. Margaret Aleper Achilla 	Present
173. Hon. Terence Achia Sodium  
174. Hon. Kabakumba Matsiko
175. Hon. David Bahati 
176. Hon. Monicah Amoding
177. Hon. John Amos Okot          	Present
178. Hon. Ruth Lematia            		Present
179. Hon. Lowila Oketayot         	Present
180. Hon. Patrick Nakabaale 
181. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye
182. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze         	Present
183. Hon. Florence Mutyabule
184. Hon. Saleh Kamba            		Present
185. Hon. Sanjay Tanna           		Present
186. Hon. Margaret Baba Diri     	Present
187. Hon. Charles Bakabulindi
188. Hon. Nyombi Thembo
189. Hon. Milton Muwuma          	Present
190. Hon. Ahmed Awongo		Present

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Grace Byarugaba; didn’t I call her already? Yes, I think so.

191. Hon. Todwong Richard	
192. Hon. Nekesa Oundo		Present
193. Hon. Stephen Mukitale
194. Hon. Simon D’Ujanga
195. Hon. Agnes Egunyu Akiror
196. Hon. Nankabirwa Ann Maria
197. Hon. Nakayenze Galiwango	Present
198. Hon. Arinaitwe	Rwakajara	Present
199. Hon. Kasaija Stephen Kagwera 	Present
200. Hon. Joy Kariisa	
201. Hon. Musa Ecweru
202. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace		Present
203. Hon. Margaret Makhoha		Present
204. Hon. Godfrey Kiwanda Ssubi	Present
205. Hon. Abdi Chemaswet
206. Hon. Patrick Mulindwa
207. Hon. Tete Chelangat		Present
208. Hon. James Baba			Present
209. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth
210. Hon. Safia Nalule Juuko
211. Hon. Nakato Kyabangi		Present
212. Hon. Nakawunde Sarah
213. Hon. Syda Bbumba		Present
214. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa
215. Hon. Boaz Kafuda			Present
216. Hon. Bakandema Musasizi
217. Hon. Paula Turahikayo		Present
218. Hon. James Kyewalabye 		Present
219. Hon. Mbagadhi Fred Nkayi		Present
220. Hon. Kenneth Omona		Present
221. Hon. Ninsiima Ronah		Present
222. Hon. Musasizi Henry
223. Hon. Waira Majegere
224. Hon. Simon Mulongo
225. Hon. Maj. Gen. Charles Angina
226. Hon. Sempala Mbuga 		Present
227. Hon. Muyingo J.C			Present
228. Hon. Jack Sabiiti 			Present
229. Hon. Businge  Rusoke		Present
230. Hon. Emma Boona			Present
231. Hon. Biraro Ephraim		Present
232. Hon. Balyejjusa Sulaiman		Present
233. Hon. Sam Engola
234. Hon. Jim Muhwezi
235. Hon. Geoffrey Omara
236. Hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya
237. Hon. Dr Kamanda Bataringaya	Present
238. Hon. Cadet Benjamin		Present
239. Hon. James Mbahimba		Present
240. Hon. Suleiman Madada		Present
241. Hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi	
243. Hon. Obua Denis Hamson		Present

THE CHAIRPERSON: Say your name for the record. Say it on the microphone.

    1. Hon. Badda Fred			Present
    2. Hon. Fred Omach 			Present
    3. Hon Sabila Nelson			Present
    4. Hon. Kyooma Xavier			Present	
    5. Hon. Dr Twa-Twa			Present
    6. Hon. Oleru Huda			Present
    7. Hon. Kabuule Evelyn 			Present
    8. Hon. Simon D’Ujanga			Present 
    9. Hon. Fr Simon Lokodo			Present
    10. Hon. Bahinduka			Present 
    11. Hon. Lubega Godfrey			Present
    12. Hon. Ayena-Odong			Present 
    13. Hon. Mary Tuunde 			Present
    14. Hon. Elijah Okupa			Present

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us proceed.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I had- (Interruption)

MR MURULI MUKASA: Hon. Muruli Mukasa, present. (Laughter)

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we had concluded on clause 7 and we were waiting for the pronouncement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, before we go to clause 8, we have part III in the Bill, which is proposed for amendment as follows: Substitute the cross reference for the following: “Licensing of Midstream Operations.” That is the amendment. The justification is that this part applies only to midstream operations.

Clause 8

MR WERIKHE: Substitute the words “petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words “midstream operations” in the opening statement.

Substitute the words “petroleum activities” in 8(c) with the word “operations”. 

The justification is: for delineation between upstream and midstream. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 9 as follows: 

a) Substitute the headnote with the following: “Midstream operations requiring a licence.” The justification is that the licence envisaged under clause 9 is for midstream operations

b) Substitute sub-clause (1) with the following: 
“(1) A person shall not construct or operate the following without a licence issued by the Minister under this Act-
(a) a facility for refining crude oil; 
(b) a facility for conversion of natural gas; 
(c) a transmission pipeline; 
(d) a midstream storage facility; or 
(e) any other facility for the purpose of midstream operations subject to this Act or any regulations prescribed under this Act.

(2) A person who contravenes sub-section(1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction-
(a) if an individual, to a fine not exceeding 100,000 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding 10 years or both; and
(b) if a body corporate, to a fine not exceeding 200,000 currency points.” 

The justification is: for clarity and to provide for a more deterrent penalty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chair, I announce my presence. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if somebody knows that the penalty is less for an individual, he can decide not to go corporate but go individual. The penalty should be the same for both, whether an individual or corporate. There are individuals who are rich and can commit a crime. I would like to propose that the penalty for the individual should be the same as that for the corporate. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, for a body corporate, I do not know whom you can imprison? If it is an institution or a company, do you imprison all the people in the corporation or the company or a particular individual?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, for a body corporate, there will be individuals who will commit the crime and not the corporate. So, what we have to do here are two things. For an individual, the penalty should be the same as for a corporate. For the corporate, the individuals who are involved in the crime should be held liable by imprisonment or payment of a penalty.

The justification is simple; a company will never commit a crime. Never! It is individuals who commit crimes and they want to hide behind companies. So we would be penalising the owners of the company and yet these are just managers or whoever. So, in such a case, we should hold the people who are involved in the crime responsible, not the company. 

MR OBOTH: I want to seek the wise counsel of the Leader of the Opposition whether by proposing so he is also going to propose an amendment to legislations which govern corporations or companies where there are instances of lifting the veil. Can he do that without amending the Companies Act? It is my humble opinion that it may not be possible because you may have to amend more than one law in this country to execute the very good proposal, which I think would be over-stretching our own intended good legislation. I want to benefit from your wealth of experience in this area. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, as a paralegal, I know very well that a company is a person; it can be sued, it can sue. It is a legal person. So, I would like clarification from him whether we should remove that reference to a legal person and this time, we go for individuals by leaving out the company which is called a legal person. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first and foremost, for a body corporate, they have said they will be fined. Now, here if you look at (a), they are referring to an individual and suppose this individual commits the above crimes, he will also be fined 100,000 currency points. 

One, I want to amend that the currency points for an individual should be the same as that for the body corporate. That is the first amendment I want to move. An individual could be richer than a company so why should an individual pay less when he commits the same crime? (Interjections) Yes, for an individual, the fine not exceeding 100,000 currency points. Give me a chance. I am the one driving the point so I want to explain. 

The first point here is that we should amend the penalty for an individual who commits a crime. It should also be 200,000 currency points for purposes of making sure that nobody commits that crime. If he commits it, whether it is a body corporate or not, he will be held liable.

The other amendment I want to move is about a body corporate. We are saying a body corporate could commit a crime but what about the managers who made the body corporate commit a crime? We are saying that the people who are involved in the crime which caused this artificial person –(Interruption)-

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The information I want to give to the House is that the mind and will of a company is the board of directors. More often than not, we have seen – I will give you an example of Motorcare; the directors of the company were arraigned in court for acts done by the company. So, it is not true that actually, a company is not criminally liable in instances where they are responsible. The mind and will of the company is the board of directors so, whatever they act on and do on behalf of the company makes them liable. It is not that the company goes to the dock and is actually accused of the offence but it is the mind and will of the company, which is the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you saying? There is nothing you are adding.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first, what I am saying is that individuals should be fined not exceeding 200,000 currency points. That one should also be 200,000 currency points, to begin with. They are the same. 

In the second one, the body corporate will be fined not exceeding 200,000 currency points. Part (c) should be that the board of the body corporate should be held liable and fined. Why? They are the ones who must have committed the crime. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, that is a question of evidence. Really, you cannot provide for that; it is a question of evidence.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with you and disagree with the honourable Leader of the Opposition. The company law clearly stipulates that should a company do something wrong, then the DPP decides on who wronged. When dealing with a company, the law is very clear. Like hon. Mwiru has said, there is a board resolution when an act is carried out and so, the people who signed on the board resolution are liable. 

Like you have said, should a crime be committed, then the evidence will be adduced as to who in the company did it. I think we are safer to create laws which will rhyme with the existing laws, and that is the company law in this case. I think the committee is right in recommending, and we leave it, the body corporate as the company.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 10 as follows: 
(a) 	In sub-clause (1), substitute the word “section 9” with the word, “this Act”. The justification is: to use an appropriate all-embracing term since the whole Act affects the licence and, therefore, applications for the licence. 

(b) 	Insert the following new sub clause immediately after sub clause (2): “(3) Any agreements regarding joint operation arrangement shall be in accordance with this Act and subject to approval by the Minister.” 

	The justification is: to ensure that all joint operation agreements comply with the Act and must be approved by the minister.

(c) 	Insert the following new sub clause immediately after sub clause (3): “(4) Where the applicant is a licensee under the Petroleum (Exploration, Development and Production) Act 2012 or the Petroleum Supply Act 2003, the Minister may require the applicant to furnish additional information.”

	The justification is: to ensure that the authorities understand the plan the investor has across the petroleum value chain. This information may also serve a purpose of stipulating conditions and planning for efficient use of both upstream and midstream facilities. 

(d) 	Substitute the current sub clause 4(y) with the following: “(y) a decommissioning plan providing the details of how a facility will be decommissioned and disposed of when the midstream petroleum operations cease.” 

	The justification is: to require a licence to provide a plan in addition to any other information required. 

(e) 	In sub clause (5), delete the words “two or more” appearing immediately after the word “in” and insert the words, “each phase and on” immediately after the word “on” – (Interjections) – Let me read it again: “(5) Where the development is planned in two or more phases, the applicant shall provide information on each phase of the full development of the facility”. 

The justification is: to require the applicant to furnish information to the Authority on each phase and on the full development of the facility where its development is planned in phases.

(f) 	Substitute sub clause (6) with the following:
 “(a) shall require the applicant to execute a performance bond or other form of security necessary for the performance and observance of the conditions to which the licence may be subject;

 (b) shall require the licensee to take the necessary insurance policy to protect against liability that may arise as a result of midstream operations carried out under a licence.”

The justification is: to make it mandatory for the minister to require an applicant to make arrangements for satisfactory security performance bond and to take out necessary insurance policies. The reason for substituting “the licensee” with “applicant” is because at this stage, there is no licensee yet but there is only an applicant to provide for. 

(g) 	Substitute the word “Ninety” in sub clause (7) with the words, “One hundred and eighty”. 

The justification is: to increase the time limit for reviewing the applications. Both pipelines and refineries are complex construction projects with many issues to consider. I beg to move.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under sub clause (1) it states that, “The application licensed under section 9 shall be made to the minister in a manner prescribed by the regulations.” Where are the regulations? Are there regulations already? If we have no regulations, how can we conclude that this is the best way to do it? 

MR WERIKHE: These are details which are prescribed in the regulations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, don’t you think it would be better for us to see the regulations; at least the draft regulations?

MR WERIKHE: For the regulations, I think the minister can respond. 

MS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, regulations are going to be made after we pass the law. In the regulations, you are actually describing how you are going to execute these clauses in the law. So, they are going to be made after the law.

THE CHAIREPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend clause 11 as follows:
a) Substitute the headnote for the following: “Operations not requiring a licence.” The justification is that this provision caters for midstream operations.

b) In sub clause (1): 
(i) delete the words “a pipeline or storage” and insert the words, “used for midstream operations” immediately after the word “facility”. The justification is that the facility referred to in the provision is one for midstream storage. 

(ii) delete paragraph (a). The justification is that the pipelines covered by the provision belong to the upstream petroleum value chain. 

c) Delete sub clause (2). The justification is that the situation regulated under the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003 is not part of the midstream but belongs to the downstream petroleum value chain. 

d) In sub clause (3), substitute the word, “activity” with the word, “operation” wherever it appears and delete the words “and (2)”. The justification is that the appropriate term under the midstream is “operation”; “activity” is applied in the upstream. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in sub clause (1):
i) 	Insert the words, “for a licence” immediately before the words, “cause a notice”. The justification is: to specifically bring out the fact that the application is for a licence. 

ii) 	In sub clause (2) (c), insert the words, “the laws governing intellectual property rights and” immediately before the words, “commercial confidentiality”. The justification is: to protect intellectual property rights and confidentiality of commercial information of the applicant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR WERIKHE: In clause 13, I propose to delete sub clause (2). The justification is that it is covered under clause 10(4) and 13(1). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR WERIKHE: In sub clause (1), insert at the end the words, “within the time specified in the notice of application, being not less than 30 days after the notice.” The justification is: to provide for adequate time of 30 days for the public to view the notice and prepare and submit their objections. 

Delete sub clauses (3), (4), (5) and (6). The justification is that these are procedural details that should be covered under regulations. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I beg to move that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 14, the proposal of the committee is to delete sub clauses (3), (4), (5) and (6). The justification is that this shall be covered under the regulations. However, I would propose that for purposes of certainty and if it does no harm, let this be well spelt out so that it does not fall under the whims of a minister. It could also get lost within the regulations. 

Now that we have the opportunity here and now, it does no harm. I propose that we retain these because anybody, whether in the country or elsewhere, could know the procedure and it does not harm. So, I propose that the chairperson reconsiders this and allows them to stay because they are harmless. 

MS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, the regulations, which will be made, will be laid on the Floor of Parliament. So, these matters are going to be contained in the regulations and will be laid on the Floor of Parliament. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think what the Member is saying is, what is the harm of stating them here?

MS MULONI: Because they are procedural issues which are covered under regulations. They are details of procedural issues which are covered under regulations.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I rise to support hon. Ssekikubo’s proposal. Earlier on, the Leader of the Opposition, I think on clause 9, had talked about the regulations and the minister gave us a commitment that those proposals would be within the mandate of the ministry. I see us giving a lot of powers and I would urge the honourable minister to concede on this. She might not be the minister ten years from now and a technocrat in the ministry might manipulate some of these. If it is a requirement in the law, it will help the ministry perform its duty better.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support the proposal to retain this in the Bill, and I think that follows from the spirit of emphasis and clarity with which we even handled the roles of the minister. We outlined even what we thought was obvious and we put it in the Bill, including presenting draft legislation to Parliament. So, it is also okay if we go on with that same spirit, for emphasis and clarity, to retain the details upon which an application will be objected to. How I wish the minister could support her earlier proposal; it was actually hers.   

MS MULONI: It is okay; they can stay. However, the committee had also proposed to increase the period from what is prescribed here as 14 days to 30 days to give it adequate time. So, maybe only that amendment could be made and we keep them. It is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, move the amendment for the 30 days. 

MS AKOL: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support the position of the committee that these are procedures. If we are going to put procedures in the law and not in regulations, we will have to come back all the time to amend the law in case there are changes in the procedures that may change from time to time. Regulations can be amended from time to time; a procedural matter as part of the law would really be unfair to the House. I thank you.

MR KAKOOZA: I thank you. I would like to support the position of the committee because procedures are regulated but we are making a law that anybody is going to use in the midstream. The moment you say that the procedures are going to be put in the law, I do not think it will be fair for anybody who wants to come and operate to see that the law and the producers are made like how they are. 

The section that we are talking about is the objection to an application and it is stated in (1) and (2). An aggrieved party may lodge with the minister an objection; here there might be a reason for the licence but for the regulations, the minister can regulate them any time he wants. Like in the other law we passed, the minister will be obliged to lay on the Table the regulations each and every time the regulations are changed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are not making the law for the minister but for the people. What is wrong with being certain?

MR TANNA: I think that many of our colleagues do not have copies of the Bill in their hands and we are using the corrections as the report of the committee. Really, if you look at 14, 14 (1) and (2) is the objection to the application. Somebody has applied for a licence and it has been objected and now (3) is saying that the minister shall consider the objection raised under sub section (1) and make a decision within 14 days. The minister has conceded and said that we extend that to 30 days. Why are we fighting to delete that and promote ambiguity in the law? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: First, the sponsor of the Bill has conceded so I do not know whether it is procedurally right to continue debating this. However, also for us who are paralegals, there is what we call, “for avoidance of doubt”. I think it can be included for avoidance of doubt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you can move your amendment for the 30 days.

MR WERIKHE: I think the proposal is taken on except I would pray that we leave sub clause (1) as amended or proposed by the committee - Insert at the end of the words, “within the time specified in the notice of application, being not less than 30 days after the notice.” Sub clauses (2) stays as it is and then (3),(4),(5) and (6) as sub clauses remain part of the clause. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 14 (1) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 (3) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 as originally drafted do remain part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR WERIKHE: We propose to amend clause 15 as follows: 
a) 	Substitute the headnote with the following: “Consideration of an application for a licence.”

b) 	In sub clause (1), substitute the words “in the prescribed manner within sixty days” with the words, “for a licence in a manner prescribed by regulations.” The justification is: to empower the minister to prescribe the manner of determining an application for a licence;

c) 	Delete sub clauses (2) and (3). The justification is that these details are to be covered under regulations.

d) 	In sub clause (4), substitute the word “inform” immediately after the words, “licensee shall” with the words “seek approval of the minister.” The justification is: to require the licensee to seek approval of the minister in case any significant changes are made to the application as submitted or approved, or to the facility or use of the facility. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR WERIKHE: We propose to substitute sub clause (2) with the following: 
“(2) The minister may grant a licence for the construction, placement, operation and use of the following facilities to one or more applicants-
    (a) a facility for refining of crude oil; 
    (b) a facility for the conversion of natural gas;
    (c) a transmission pipeline; 
    (d) a midstream storage facility; or
    (e) any other facility for the purpose of midstream operations subject to this Act or regulations issued under this Act.” 

The justification is: to empower the minister to grant a licence to operate a midstream facility to one or more applicants. I beg to move.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to raise my objection to this proposal. Initially, the old proposal required the minister to get the approval of Cabinet but now the new proposal removes the requirement completely. I thought that we could carry the spirit we had on the upstream Bill where we had embedded the requirement for Cabinet to be involved in the process. 

I need to be reminded by the chairperson of the committee because I think that the issue of granting licences to build facilities for conversion, transmission and all those really cannot be done just by one minister. I thought that it would be important to provide assurance that comes with the participation and approval of Cabinet. So, this substitution worries me. 

MR WERIKHE: When you look at clause 16, the headnote is “Grant of licence.” In granting the licence, there are a number of activities that are looked at. A licence may be affecting the refining of the crude oil, the facility for the conversion of natural gas, a transmission pipeline or even midstream storage facilities. Under the grant of a licence, there are a number of activities as stipulated under sub clause (2). That is what the committee improved on in the proposed drafting.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 17 is proposed to be deleted. The justification is that it is covered under clause 9 under activities authorised by licence. When you look at page 17 in the Bill, that is what is covered under clause 9. It is a redundant clause. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, I put the question that clause 17 be deleted as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18

MR WERIKHE: On clause 18, sub clause (2), we propose to insert the words, “within thirty days after the rejection stating the grounds for the rejection” immediately after the word, “writing”. The justification is: to require the minister to communicate to applicants as soon as an application is rejected, and of course, giving the grounds for the rejection. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 19 as follows: 
1. 	Substitute paragraph (c) with the following: “(c)the access to a facility used for midstream operations by third parties other than licensees, including terms and conditions in contractual arrangements that regulate access, pricing and tariffs.” The justification is: to allow the minister to set as a condition for a licence the use of a facility owned by the licensee by third parties.

2. 	In paragraph (d): 
	(i) Insert the word “commodities” immediately after the word, “petroleum” and delete the word, “processing.”
	(ii) Substitute the words, “crude oil and raw gas” with the words, “petroleum commodities.”

3. 	In paragraph (e), substitute the words “oil and gas” with the word, “petroleum”.

4. 	In paragraph (h), substitute the words “the petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation or storage activities” with the words, “midstream operations”.

5. 	Substitute paragraph (i) with the following: “(i) to the interconnections of the licensee’s facility to the facilities of other licensees.”

6. 	Substitute paragraph (j) with the following: “(j) access by third parties on commercially reasonable terms to uncommitted capacity in a facility, except that on application for the use of a facility, the licensee may elect to give users access to the facility on the basis that the capacity is shared among all users access to the facility on the basis that the capacity is shared among all users in proportion to their needs.” The justification is that it is for clarity.

7. 	In paragraph (k): 
	(i) Insert the word, “transmission” immediately before the word “pipeline” wherever it appears.
	(ii) Insert the word, “midstream” immediately after the word “storage”.

8. 	In paragraph (m), insert the words “necessary under any relevant law or as may be” between the words, “as may be” and the word “prescribed”. The justification is: to empower the minister to stipulate conditions for licensing midstream operations under different circumstances; to enhance the requirement for insurance protection; and to simplify the language of the clause. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, just for my comfort, does the word “midstream” cover all this? Why are you removing them? Are you going to change the title of the Act to the Petroleum Midstream Act?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, the interpretation clause spells out all this. Actually, midstream operations cover refining, gas conversion, gas processing, and even in addition to that, transmission pipes. I think I can read it out so that we are on the same page: “Midstream operations” means planning, preparation, installation and execution of operations related to refining, conversion, transmission and storage of petroleum products including cessation of operations and decommissioning of facilities. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chairperson, I would like the chairperson to explain further paragraph (i), which is No. (5), which has been substituted. I will read it: “to the interconnection of the licensee’s facilities to the facilities of other licensees.” What this entails should come out very clearly. Here, it could involve even the pipes and other facilities. How are –

THE CHAIRPERSON: She is looking at your amendment on page 24. 

MS ANYWAR: I want it clarified because if we leave it as it is it is not clear what other facilities we are talking about. If it involves, for instance, the interconnections of, let us say, the pipeline where we have to monitor and regulate the flow of the product in a specified line, if we allow this to be like that, it can also give way to other issues. They can talk among themselves and have some sort of interconnections underground which cannot be understood. We want it to be clarified so that we get a picture of what interconnection of the facilities we are referring to. It is very important, Madam Chairperson.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, of course, a licensee could be having a pipeline and there could be other licensees who would like to use the same facility because not every licensee can have a major pipeline. So, they may wish to use one major pipeline. Therefore, there will be an arrangement of connecting to this. So, there is that interconnection but the understanding is that there will be one major licensee who may be the one sponsoring this, and then others will also come on board. That is what this is referring to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR WERIKHE: Clause 20, power of minister to require information. In sub clause (2), insert the words, “subject to the Constitution and the Access to Information Act, 2005” at the beginning of the sub clause. The justification is: to subject the confidentiality to the Constitution and the Access to Information Act, 2005.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to substitute clause 21 with the following: 

“Duration of a license for midstream operations 
(1) 	A licence to construct a facility for midstream operations granted under this Act shall be initially valid for five years during which period the licensee shall execute to the satisfaction of the Authority his or her works in accordance with the codes of practice issued by the Minister under section 99, or such further period as the Minister may allow under special circumstances beyond control of the licensee. 

(2) 	On completion of construction works, to the satisfaction of the Authority, a licence shall be granted to operate the facility for twenty years, and thereafter, may be renewed for a period of five years at a time. 

(3) 	On completion of construction or substantial modification of a facility, the Authority may grant the licensee an operation permit allowing the licensee to commence operation of the facility and the operation permit shall not be for duration longer than the licence.

(4) 	The renewal of a licence under this section shall be subject to payment of a fee prescribed by the Minister by regulations.”

The justification is that the proposal to increase the duration for operation to 20 years is to give Government the opportunity to review the integrity of the facility and at the same time give the licensee an opportunity to recover his or her investment. The substitution of “may” for “shall” in sub clause (2) is to ensure that the licensee who has constructed a facility is guaranteed the opportunity to operate it. I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I really agree with most of the provisions under clause 21. However, in clause 21(2) it is provided that on completion of construction works to the satisfaction of the Authority, a licence shall be granted to operate the facility for 20 years. I would really urge the chairperson and members because the 20 years are in addition to the five years which we already have. 

I would propose that we go by the original provision of the Bill because if you add another 15 years to the initial five, that constitutes 20 years. However, owing to the fact that even our oil industry span is expected to be 30 years and already at one go you are giving 25 years, it is only reasonable that we really get the five plus the 15 and have 20 years. 

After all, it is provided that “all such other further period as the minister may allow under special circumstances”. If there are those special circumstances, the duration can be extended. We do not need to really tie our hands and give away in total. 

The issues we have in mind are the petroleum refining, transportation or gas facilities; for this House to grant a blanket of 20 years, then plus the five to make it 25 years, is really to cede away our resource, honourable members. I propose that we go by our initial five years, then we grant 15 years so that it is 20 years. This is most reasonable only if one is speaking from the investors’ point of view because they would want to even have 30 years – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us get information from the minister. Maybe it might clear something.

MR PETER LOKERIS: Madam Speaker, the five years we are talking about is for the construction period. Even in the other Bill, we said five years. First of all, there was a proposal to say 30 years and we said, “No, we must segregate this.” Construction is five years and then because the facility is working in phases and recovery is on investments, 20 years was seen as desirable. If the facility is still moving on and the recovery period is still moving, then you will be giving another five additional years at a time. So, we are not in contradiction with the previous package of the provisions. We are just in tandem. 

Maybe my brother does not remember what we did the other time when we started the Bill. So, this is just adequate; five years construction then we start moving and you produce for the 20 years, then it is reviewed for another five years at a time. I think this is really fair. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Further information for the benefit of members is that we did some benchmarking and looked at other countries that are already operating. In Trinidad and Tobago, the Act provides for 20 years and then they renew it for successive periods not exceeding 10 years for these midstream facilities. The South Wales provides for 21 years and for Ghana, they have not specified in the Act but they put it in the licences that they issue. 

Initially, we had considered 15 years. The committee looked at 30 years and then we did some benchmarking and we came up with 20 years as being a reasonable period. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso, are you still unhappy?

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am actually not convinced. I think the reason is that first and foremost, the Executive has been telling us about the expected lifespan of our oil resources. This proposal left as it is, five years, 15 years, 20 years and five years, is almost like giving a licence for the entire lifetime of the oil resources. 

Secondly, from the earlier proposals and this, if you ignore the provision of the 20 years, if you look at the rest, it is specified that there will be a review. So, if in the view of the minister, after 15 years she or he thinks that this licensee should be given another five years, she has the freedom. However, consider a situation where after 15 years, the minister has found that the facility lacks integrity, or there is environmental destruction, or we are not getting the dividends - maybe what we committed ourselves into in an earlier contract is not what is obtaining now in the world market, so we need to move on, we need to adjust - don’t you think, as a country, we will have tied our hands properly for 20 years? 
Imagine a child that is born now will graduate, get a job in the oil sector - 20 years. 

I would like to implore the minister to go back to 15 years just to allow the persons managing the sector the opportunity to review and for Ugandans to maximise the benefits in case the first contract is no longer yielding the necessary dividends. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, honourable members, it seems we are giving something in perpetuity because if you are going to give 20 years, then for a period of five years at a time, it means you can really even give 40 years. That is what it means and I do not see the right of reversion for the State. 

MS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, if I can give further information for the benefit of members. The way these refineries are constructed is capital intensive. If you are talking of US$ 2 to US$ 3 billion, over what period of time is this investor going to recoup their money? That has to be put into consideration. We are looking at 20 years because we are also looking at the period of operation within our sector for petroleum and we are looking at a period of 25 years to 30 years. 

The other issue I need to also emphasise is that the facilities that we are looking at should be built, own operate because by the time they recoup their money, the facility would have deteriorated. There is no value in our Government acquiring obsolete technology. So, you would rather have the investor build, own and operate until the lifetime of the petroleum industry in Uganda closes. It would be very expensive for the Government of Uganda to take on facilities that have deteriorated to try and revamp them. Madam Chairperson, I thought it was necessary for members to get that information to help them understand.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, this investment we are talking about is not worth just US$ 10 million. Even in Uganda here, I do not think there is a company where cost recovery would take 15 years. If you went to Australia – I got an opportunity when I was studying public-private partnership – construction of such a magnitude takes five to seven years. You can imagine that you have invested such an amount; when do you expect to get the dividends? That would have to be when you start importing. 

In Norway, it is almost a whole division of Makindye where they have such a magnitude of investments. (Interjections) Hold on and let me finish my point, then I will allow you. You see, when you are giving an incentive to somebody to invest more than US$ 100 to US$ 200 million, that person thinks of what time they will take to recover it. Investing money goes with a period of time – the number of years you are going to spend in that business. If you spent seven years constructing and you have started processing, it will take you another five years, and those are about 12 years; so, when do you expect to start cost recovery of the capital you have invested? I find the 20 years for such a magnitude of investment is reasonable.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to urge my honourable colleagues. Twenty years is a very long time in a lifetime but in a span of business, it is a very short time, especially when we are looking at investments in projects like the pipeline. The Government of Uganda, to the best of my knowledge, has signed a contract for this pipeline – I think with Tamoil, if I remember the company well – but up to today, they have failed to put up even a stone. Therefore, I think the law as presented to us by the committee is good. 

You are given five years; if within the five years you have actually put up the investment, then you come. This is the same procedure used when we build our houses; the town council gives you a lease offer for five years and if you complete your house within five years, then you are offered 49 years. That means you have now attained full lease. For commercial properties, we can now go for freehold or 99 years under the new law. 

In this particular law, we are saying that once the company has finished the construction period, they are given a full lease of 20 years. What does that mean? We are not committing to the rate at which they are going to pay us but we are saying that they have the right to use those facilities for their commercial gain for 20 years. The regulation on how the government and people of Uganda shall benefit, the Minister has said she will present it to us here. 

However, if after those 20 years, the Government of Uganda and the investor feel that we still need each other’s services, then we can sit down and negotiate afresh and we can give them another five years. That is normal and that is how our law is being practised now. The simple example is in leasing. If you look at the law on leasing we have currently, I can walk into a leasing company and hire equipment like a bulldozer from DFCU leasing. If you looked at the leasing agreement, it is framed in the same manner. Thank you. 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, this issue was debated by the committee. I remember we had our meeting in Jinja and when the debate was inconclusive, we were guided by our economist from Parliament. He gave us a formula; if you want to determine how many years you are going to accord the licensee to construct the refinery, you look at the volume of crude oil you are likely to process, and then you look at the price and divide by the number of barrels extracted per day - maybe 20 or 60 barrels per day. 

Actually, the committee, using this formula, came up with a proposal of 30 years but in the process of harmonising, we came to realise also that 30 years was very long and that is how we came up with 20 years. However, international practice is such that we should use a certain given formula – the price on the market and you divide it by the number of barrels processed per day. I wanted to give this information to the House. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, when you are determining this period, you do not get this by abstract, especially in petroleum. I happened to be a student of this and there are formulae that we follow. At the same time, we are not trying to reinvent the wheel because we have got friendly countries that have oil like Norway that has been helping us to put this law together. They use the same formulae. Now to come here and say 15 years for somebody who has invested US$3 to US$4 billion - He is not making our usual investments here like Shs 1 trillion which is equivalent to US$ 400 million. Therefore, to me, 20 years for a business of this magnitude is reasonable.

MR MUKITALE: I would like to say that we are legislating while looking at one investment choice, the option of the vehicle of a private licensee; we are not looking at other options. Tomorrow, the Government of Uganda might decide to build a refinery and this particular clause would not be applicable. It is also possible that we could do a bilateral agreement or joint venture with a neighbouring country so this scenario would also not apply. 

What I think we ran away from, right from the upstream Bill, was that this Bill should have been accompanied by draft regulations. We softened on that and gave a leeway to the minister that the regulations would come after. I continue seeing problems because of this. Even a few minutes ago, we were discussing how the government regulates this private company in this period. Some of these details would be explained in the regulations, which we do not have. Just in our interface with the oil and gas industry, we are already finding complaints. The oil companies are saying one of the reasons they cannot implement the local content we put in the previous Bill is because they do not have regulations to date.

So, I would like to request that for the next Public Finance Act, revenue management as it was originally called, these regulations should be brought in advance. They would help us a lot with these problems; all these explanations would have been found in the draft. The perfection of the regulations should be coming after passing the Bill but the draft regulations are very important and we should have put it here in advance. That is when we would know how a state deals with this investor who has taken his Shs 3 billion over the period of 20 or 30 years and what terminal value Government would get at the end of such a long gestation.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I had risen earlier to give information. The initial period of construction is provided for under clause 21(1). That is not to say that the investment can take us eight years and therefore, we shall have only 12 years. That one is separate under 21(1) to the extent that even where that period is not enough, a minister can increase on the period of time.

Two, we are talking about 20 years but I have alluded, honourable colleagues, to the fact that our oil is estimated to last 30 years. Now, under clause 21(2), dear colleagues, and I plead with you, the period is not that we are tying the minister’s hands; should the relationship be good, there is an extension for five years and another five years if the operator is working well and with the interest of this country.

We are not saying that after 15 years the relationship is terminated; no. It is provided for under 21(2) that on completion of the construction works to the satisfaction of the Authority, a licence shall be granted to operate the facility and here they have given 20 years but we say 15 years. Thereafter, it may be renewed for a period of five years at a time, meaning that the holder of this licence, the one who has the facility, can go on for as many five years as the situation warrants. Therefore, we are not saying that at the end of 15 years, there is termination. So, even if you give it 30 years, still there will be a request for renewal. 

So, colleagues, I would request that we do not give up ourselves as if this country is ending tomorrow. We can still have an opportunity to have a renewal of the licence for this facility once the conditions and considerations for the environment and all that we are doing is agreeable. Let us not wholesomely surrender ourselves as if we are ending tomorrow. Look at it that the five years can be another five years as long as there is mutual agreement. If the country and the investor are benefiting, there is no reason why that relationship should be terminated. Honourable colleagues, I propose that you agree that we go by the 15 years. I beg to move.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also support hon. Ssekikubo’s idea but what I want to know from the minister is, in whose interest are we legislating? Is it in the interest of the investor or of Ugandans? It can be both but where do we put most of our attention? It should be Ugandans. You cannot run away from that.

Further, I want to emphasise one point; when you give a longer period to an investor, he will also become lazy when he is doing his work because he has time. I also want to inform the honourable minister that sometimes one man’s meat can be another man’s poison. Today, when you look at what is happening in Ghana, for example, and some of the problems they are facing with their oil, it is as a result of time. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, are you going to concede? Maybe she is going to concede. [Ms Muloni: “No.”]You are not conceding? Okay.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to give an example because some of us know how you can get involved in investing. If you have a house in Buziga, for example, which is worth Shs 300 million as an asset and you are renting it out at Shs 2 million per month, in a year you will get Shs 24 million. To recover Shs 300 million will take you almost 15 years. 

This is an asset of Shs 300 million, but look at a magnitude of US$ 200 million and construction of five years. This is a cost because in five years, you are going to construct and yet the business you are investing in is changing day and night. This is oil, which loses price. There must be an incentive for a person, surety for him, to know that the capital gain he is going to get out and even the years he has invested will be recovered. For a magnitude of US$ 200 million and you give seven to 15 years, when is he going to recover the money? He must be assured and this is one of the incentives. By the way, Umeme, which found structures around, was contracted for 27 years to recover their money. We have it; we passed it here in Parliament.

So, we are saying that due to the magnitude of such an investment, even the Uganda Government cannot invest in such a business because it does not have the money. You have to attract somebody who has the capacity to invest the money and any investment in financing must be coupled with the number of years you are investing your money.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t we stand over this and do something else?

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I hear constant reference to what happened with properties like houses and I get worried. The reason I stand here is that I am supposed to represent Ugandan interest to the maximum and I would like clarification from the minister. When she ties up the hands of the minister for 20 years and something goes wrong, what provision does she have to easily wriggle out of such a contract? (Interjections) I hear people saying you terminate. Do you know how much money this country is right now losing because of bad contracts and the arbitration going on in London as a result of oil? Do you have an idea? Do you have an idea how much we tied our hands with the Umeme contract and we feel the pain on a daily basis but we cannot get out of the Umeme contract because we did this?

I would like to plead that the middle ground – already, the starting point is catered for, the construction point for the facility is covered; five years are given to do what you want. The counting begins for us at the time after the construction. That is the wording here. If I may read it, the proposal says in sub clause (2), “on completion”. So, it is when it has been completed. “On completion of construction works, to the satisfaction of the Authority, a licence shall be granted to operate the facility for 20 years, and thereafter, may be renewed for five years...” and this licence may be renewed again. (Interjections) I am also seeking clarification. Madam Chairperson, you need to protect me from my neighbour - (Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Alaso, to the best of my knowledge, is a member of the committee. She debated this, signed it and she is now debating. Is it procedurally right for her to come now? If she had an issue, then she would have presented a minority report. Is she in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I will not allow people to violate the rules like that.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I thought we are in committee and at this stage, we are allowed to make a submission. Secondly, at the start of this sitting, we saw that these are harmonised positions, so this is no longer the report of the committee. However, I would agree with the guidance if you tell me to sit down and I would, gladly, because I am subject to the Chair. If you allow me to continue, let me continue with this submission. Which way do I go?

THE CHAIRPERSON: In both instances, you are a member of the committee and also a member of the House; you must have been there together harmonising, unless you did not attend.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, you sent actually the whole House to harmonise in Munyonyo. We were all there, so nobody should be debating.

MR WERIKHE: It has been the practice here that the members of the Committee on Natural Resources have not been allowed to debate because even the committee came up with 30 years; it is in our report, and when we were signing this report, hon. Alaso did not raise any objection to this.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I hate to disagree with my chairman publicly but my chairman knows I had a very strong position on this matter from the start. I think that 30 years or 20 years is too much to commit this country, and that the middle ground is reached by having a review and that has been my position. Is he, therefore, in order to come and paint me funny before this whole House when he knows what it is I have been advocating from the committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, unfortunately, you did not file a minority report. That is how we would have known your views but you did not. So, the presumption is that you went with the rest.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, as the sector minister comes in, I wish to agree with the concerns of hon. Alaso. However, I would like to allay her fears. If you look at Bill - clause 31, 52 - there are certain clauses within this Bill where there can be termination of a licence before the 20 years and that should not be our worry at this moment, really.

I think this should not be a question of mathematical trial and error. It should be a scientific way of assessing the interests of our people but also the interests of our people need that we mobilise international resources. If you are trying to mobilise international resources, you must give favourable terms and conditions to your investors. It should be a mathematical way of doing this and I think the minister can address that. Otherwise, the safeguards are already in the Bill and even in the agreements that we shall eventually enter in with these investors. There should be no need for worry.

MR SSEKIKUBO: May I propose, Madam Chairperson and honourable members, that we harmonise on this; the moment we sleep over this, we are not done with it. (Interjections) You are pressing ahead for this but I would imagine that it should be a win-win situation. Once you say “no”, I state that we even do not have quorum to pass this clause. You are insisting we give way yet you know we do not even have the quorum to vote on this clause. Can have all the Members attend the House so that we put our position clearly with full quorum. Can we have quorum to pass this clause 21.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, is it procedurally right for hon. Ssekikubo to allege or insinuate that there is no quorum when quorum has already been assessed and determined. Is hon. Ssekikubo in order to say that when people are seated in this House, they should not actually be excused to go into the bathrooms to ease themselves? Is he procedurally correct? Otherwise, people who sit here cannot, for instance, get a little bit out. Is he saying that we should now recount and people will come in?

MR DU’JANGA: Madam Chair, I thought the rules were clear -
 
7.14
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.14
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum (Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage) Bill, 2012” and passed, with amendments, clauses 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,18,19 and clause 20. The committee deleted clause 17 because it is covered under clause 9. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow this Bill will be the only item on the agenda. Those members who sign and run away, their names will be published. (Laughter) The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.15 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)



