Wednesday, 6 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have nothing to communicate, let us go straight to the Order Paper.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ACCOUNTANTS BILL, 2012

2.31
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, last time, we had stood over clause 27. Does the Chair wish to say anything on clause 27? We stood over clauses 1, 5 and 27. The others were finished. If you are not ready yet, let us go to clause 28, then you will come back and report.

Clause 28

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 28, which is registration as practising accountants, we propose that in sub-clause (1), we insert the word “full” between the words “a” and “member” appearing in the first line.

The justification: You can only practise if you are a full member of the institute.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Honourable members, we have a problem with that clause, inserting of “a full accountant”. Madam Chairperson, there are people who may be qualified, especially those who graduate at university and those working in the Civil Service. Normally, they may not have attained that level, which is envisaged by this amendment.

Most of the civil servants we have, and most of the people who qualify practice accountancy without the necessity of becoming full members of this institute.

In clause 5, membership of the institute, prescribes full members, associate members and retired members; and clause 5(2) states that, “A person shall be eligible for membership of the institute if he/she passes the qualifying examinations conducted by the examinations board and completes a practical training prescribed by the council or is a member of a society or an institute of accountants approved by the council as being a society of institutes with a status equivalent to that of the institute.”

I am raising this objection because many of our people start practicing accountancy without attaining this - passing the examinations set by the board and before undergoing practical training prescribed by the council. So, if you put this “full membership”, that means you preclude people who have not passed the examinations set by the Board, and undergone the practical training to practice accountancy. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, isn’t your proposal at variance with the provision.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Actually, what the minister has submitted is what we are fighting. Why should someone practice as an accountant while he/she has not qualified to practise as such? So, that is the justification. If it was during the era when we did not have enough qualified accountants, then the minister would be justified; but we are in era where we have very many accountants and the motive of this Bill, therefore, is to have all those professionals abide by the law, so that, those who have not sat the qualifying examinations, surely, cannot become members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you give us examples of those accountants who practice without being qualified so that we can understand the rationale?

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, we are aware that we have a number of universities and these students who attain Bachelor of Commerce or Bachelor of Arts or Sciences are interviewed by the Public Service Commission and attached to departments in ministries. Usually, they have not gone through this process of registering as is prescribed here, and they have not attained full membership of the institute. Therefore, to say that those should not practice, would be precluding them from practicing and yet they are the majority of those who are handling the work of accountants in ministries and Government departments.

MR BAHATI: Maybe, to understand it well from the legal profession, it is as if to suggest that any graduate who has finished any law school can attend a High Court as a lawyer without going to LDC, and I think that would be erroneous.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the only people who are exempted from having a practicing certificate are state attorneys; and it is specific for them. No one else can walk into a court to handle cases and to practice law unless you have been enrolled as an advocate and you have a certificate.

MR BAHATI: So, Madam Chairperson, it is the same argument and I would request the minister to abandon it, because it is not sustainable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister is confusing two issues. There are book-keepers and professional accountants. You can only practice Accountancy if you have got a professional qualification in Accountancy. Even the state attorneys that you are talking about, they first finish LDC. The only thing is that they have been given a general practicing certificate; whereas the ones from Makerere University have not finished what we call professional Accountancy.

I would advise the minister that the law he wants to make should not be for hawkers; it should be for professionals.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the committee. This matter is addressed in clause 32 that will be following in this report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are abandoning your objections. I put the question to the amendment in clause 28.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose that in sub-clause (3), we delete the words “of three years” and replace them with the words “as prescribed by council.” 

The justification: The council should have the discretion to determine the relevant past experience benchmark.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, before we go to sub-clause (3), I propose we look at clause 28(2), which ends with “a certificate of practice for a year”. I suggest we just end with “a certificate of practice” simply because when you say “a certificate of practice for a year”, we are confusing two things; licensure and certification. 

It is in that spirit that I believe the committee recommended deleting the entire clause 32 because they saw the difference between certification and licensure.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not want to disagree with my colleague, but to inform the House that certificates of practice in the Accountancy profession are issued on an annual basis, and I believe it is from this background that this clause was provided for; to practise for a year.

MR KWEMARA: It is true, some countries issue certificates of practice annually, but it is a mistake, because a certificate is recognition of a competence. There is no way somebody’s competence can be annual; but what is normally done is that they issue a license because if you have a competence, you have it. However, if you do not go by the code of ethics, then we can withdraw the license and you do not practice.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Kwemara, you know this certificate is also premised upon many things; filing your annual accounts, paying your taxes etcetera.

MR MUSASIZI: The underlying factor of issuing certificates on annual basis; as accountants, we also do continuous professional development (CPDs). If you do not do this, your licence isnot renewed. If we say we open it, that means we will have killed the idea of CPDs, and  yet, our profession revolves and things keep changing.

That is why we are obliged to keep developing through the continuous professional development they give us. So, we cannot remove this because it is a requirement that we must attain a number of awards in order to renew the licence; that is why it is annual.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I hope he is dropping his argument. Otherwise, we insist that it is a certificate of practice not of profession; and also, we cannot forget the lifeline of the institute because annually, you pay some subscription.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we are mixing two things. This is the marginal note; registration as practicing accountant; and then the certificate of practice is No.29. So, I do not know whether you were referring to the same thing?

MR MALLINGA: I am getting confused between a certificate and a licence. I think what you get annually - which is renewed, is a licence to practise. A certificate is a qualification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe the accountants can explain to us; because for lawyers, you enrol as an advocate, but each year, you get a practicing certificate. Can you now rationalise that this registration as a practicing accountant and a certificate. If you look at clauses 28 and 29, they are talking about different things. I do not know whether hon. Odoi can help us. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: The use of the word “licence” to refer to the document you get annually is not fatal, it is actually common usage. As you correctly pointed out, every year, a lawyer must get a practicing certificate, and it does not take away the fact that you were enrolled only once or that you have a diploma from LDC and a degree from whichever university. So, the use of the word “licence” is still appropriate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think I now understand what hon. Kwemara is objecting to. He is differentiating between an annual certificate and registration as an accountant. Because, I think this is enrolling as an accountant; he does not want it every year. He says if you enrolled once, you are an accountant, then you can get a certificate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think under sub-clause (8) – 28(8), “The registrar shall for every financial year publish a list of practicing accountants...” I think there, we shall add “firms” “...in the gazette and at least one newspaper of wide circulation.” The reasoning is that a practicing accountant should have his certificate renewed every year. Because, if you have committed crimes, then you will not be registered. You cannot be declared a practicing accountant. One, you may not have finish the CPDs, and you may have committed crimes. It is automatic, as long as you file.

However, enrolment initially exists; you are enrolled, but if you do not do what is right, they will deregister you. And, if you want to come back, you have to apply afresh.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Registering every year as accountants and also getting a certificate every year. That is what it means.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, what it means here is that every year, you must renew your registration. In fact, it is membership; under normal circumstances, you are supposed to renew membership every year. And to renew membership every year, you have to either pay subscription every year or there are some rules you must follow to become a member every year; and that is why we are saying subscription. So, sub-clause (8) will address what he is raising. Has he talked about it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he has not.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sub-clause (8) will address the issue he is raising so you do not need to worry. As the chairperson brought up it up, it is okay. I think let us bring an amendment to sub-clause (8) and it will answer his case.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed by the committee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there is a problem. Sub-clause (8), did you -

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a new sub-clause? I wish you could really run through all your amendments.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In sub-clause (8), we propose that after the words “practising accountant”, we insert the words “and licensed accounting firms”. 

The justification: For the public to know the firms duly licensed to practise Accountancy.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kwemara, are you okay now? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, under clause 29, I think for a firm to be recognised - this is now a practising certificate - I propose that we insert after sub-clause (2), the following: “For an accounting firm to be recognised to offer accountancy services, all its partners or practitioners must have valid practising certificates.” 

The justification is that if it is a firm, for example, with one partner and he does not have a practicing certificate, then it should not be registered. It should be deregistered immediately, because every headed paper must reflect the partners in the firm who are registered. Supposing they are missing in the firm, then that firm cannot exist. That is the justification I am putting.

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, we gave the example of legal practice. There are many legal people who may be practising law, but they do not appear before courts of law if they do not have a practising certificate. Equally, there may be some accountants in a firm, who may not necessarily be registered as practising accountants, but they are doing work in the offices of accountants. They are not making representation. For example, when they submit books, they are not, but they are in the process of attaining this professional qualification. Now, for you to put it here will be saying that whoever works in that firm must have attained all the qualifications, which means that you are closing out people even to get experience in order for them to qualify for this certification. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you know in the legal practice, we have clerkship where young lawyers go to chambers for a number of months. Obviously, they do not have the certificates, but they are attached there. So, if you say that I cannot bring two small children to work in my chamber because they do not have a certificate - I do not know. Do the accountants do internship?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, what the Leader of the Opposition is trying to say is that there must be someone qualified in the firm for the firm to operate. Where it so happens that there is nobody qualified in the firm, then the firm should not start. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no! What he said is that if there is a firm and one of the members does not have a valid certificate, that firm should be deregistered. That is what he said.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, if I am to understand what the Leader of the Opposition is saying, it is that if there is none in the firm who has a practising certificate, then that firm is null and void. It is not existent; but if there is at least one who has a practising certificate, then the rest can work under that person; but at least, there should be one person with a certificate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to cure - for example, this year, I could be having a firm, and next year, I do not renew my licence. If we leave it like this, the firm can continue; but for a firm’s licence to be renewed, it must have at least one partner in the firm. Okay, when you talk of a partner, that means it is one - at least one member who is qualified and holds a valid practising certificate. That is what we are trying to cure here. That is why I am saying, for an accounting firm to be recognised to offer accountancy services or if they are all partners, the moment you are partners, all of you must have practising certificates. If you are one, then you should have a valid practising certificate. That is what I am trying to cure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I think that is pretty obvious. I mean, unless someone is holding out. So, restate it. A new clause?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, a new clause after sub-clause (2). “For an accounting firm to be recognised to offer Accountancy services, all its partners...” - if all of them are calling themselves partners or practitioners – “...must hold valid practising certificates. (Interjections) Yes, if they are partners. The moment you are a partner, it means you are an accountant and you must have a valid licence. For the people working under them, you can be a qualified accountant, but you are not a partner. You do not even need a practising licence because you do not sign the accounts, because partners sign accounts. That is the reason why they should have valid -[MR MUSASIZI: “It is there.”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it there already? 

MR MUSASIZI: As we go along, we shall get it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are sending me on a fishing expedition. (Laughter) If it is somewhere, then it will be edited out. Isn’t it? Members are saying it is somewhere, but nobody is telling me where. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 31, we propose to substitute clause 31 with the following: “Use of titles of the institute: An accountant under this Act is entitled to use the title ‘Certified Public Accountant of Uganda’ or any other title as may be provided by the council, after his or her name.” 

The justification: The institute has more than one category of membership and, therefore, it is necessary to capture all titles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any objections, minister? I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, clause 32 - “Certificate of practice for accounting firms.” We propose to delete the entire clause and replace it with the following: “Issue of annual licenses to accounting firms - 1) Where the holder of a practising certificate intends to practice as a firm, whether as a sole practitioner or in partnership, he or she shall apply to the council for an annual licence in the prescribed form furnishing the council with such details of the firm as it may require.

2. Where an application is made under sub-section (1), the council shall issue him or her with an annual licence if it is satisfied that the person - (a) Holds a practising certificate, and (b) meets such other requirements as may be prescribed.” And, I think this is what hon. Musasizi was referring to.

The justification: There are practical and legal challenges in granting a practising certificate to a firm. For instance, the partners may not be practising accountants. The institute cannot, therefore, regulate the firm since they are governed under other laws, especially the Partnership Act. Therefore, annual licence would suffice, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, do you want to delete the entire clause? Because I see under sub-clause (5), the right to go to the High Court. Are you also excluding those?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing to delete the entire clause in the Bill and replace it with what I have just read.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But you are taking away the right of someone to go to court when they have refused to give him or her a certificate. Look at 32(5) where the council refuses to grant a certificate of practice to an accountant; you know, this is a right of appeal. Are you taking that away?

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the whole idea of deleting this clause is in effect that practising licenses are given to individual partners in the firm not firms - companies. Sub-section (5) also talks about where the council refuses to grant a certificate of practice to an accounting firm, and this does not apply because practising certificates are given to individual partners in the firm but not to firms.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but in your amendment, you are talking about where one intends to practice as a firm.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think you are right to raise it, but I think here, we cannot delete it. We can only change; not a firm but an accountant; because a person who should go to court here is not a firm; it is a partner or an individual who is not granted a practising certificate. So, that is how we should look at it; because the moment you get a practising certificate, and you have a firm, the firm will be deemed to be a practising accountancy because it has somebody who has a valid licence. Now, the one who has not got a valid licence should be the one to go to court. 

So, I would propose that in addition to what you are raising, that sub-clause (5) stays, but we say, “Where a council refuses to grant a certificate of practice to a professional accountant – “no, even sub-clause (4) - that means we say, “Where the council may refuse to grant a certificate of practice to an accountant...” then the person can go to court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you think about that? (Mr Kasule Sebunya rose_) Yes, Hon. Sebunya.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I think let us start with the title talking about the firm. Let us remove the title of awarding the practising certificate to a firm because practising certificates are not given to firms. Once we collapse the title, then we can go ahead with the amendment.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, I would support the chairman’s submission that we delete the whole thing; because even if the right to go to High Court does not appear here, it has already been catered for under clause 28, where it is stated that, “Where a member has been refused registration, he should be able to go to the courts.” So, I think it is already catered for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it will be superfluous to provide for it. So, we delete all and retain this? What do we do about the marginal note; the title?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, the title will change from “Certificates of practice to accounting firms” to “issue of annual licences to accounting firms”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I thought you said that the licences are given to individuals.

MR KYOOMA: No; Madam Chairperson, licences are given to accounting firms while practising certificates are given to individual partners of the firm.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we stand over it? Let us stand over it because I am not sure whether we are operating under the right title. Let us stand over it and we go to clause 33, while you think through it.

Clause 33

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I request that we also stand over it since we have stood over clause 32.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, we stand over clause 33. Let us go to clause 34.

Clause 34

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chair, under clause 34 - “Inspection and approval of accounting firms” I do propose that we substitute sub-clause (1) of clause 34 with the following: “The council shall inspect and approve accounting firms in accordance with regulations made under this Act.” 

The justification: It is a consequential amendment - It is the same story. I beg that we stand over it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stand over 32, 33 and 34? Okay, we stand over those clauses. 

Clause 35

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 35 do stand part of the Bill.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we replace the words, “subject to this Act” with “considered as practising accountancy under this Act.” 

The justification: The institute currently has more than double the entire membership of the institute’s accountants employed in the Public Service. It would be unfair to exclude them from membership of the institute. I think it rhymes with what the honourable minister was talking about. 

In any case, the Public Service Standing Orders or the Schemes for Service and Competence Manual for Accounts Cadres require all accountants at the level of senior accountant (U3) and above, to be members of the professional body. The amendment, therefore, allows them to be members of the professional body. However, they should not be deemed to be practising accountancy as provided for under the Act because practising accountancy requires annual subscription to the institute for the practising certificates. Secondly, not all members of the institute are required to practice accountancy. For example, associate and retired members, and full members who do not wish to practice. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think clause 35 on practising accountancy is the one we should deal with very well. It is a clause which has been bringing problems of mismanagement of public resources even for people in Government. I have not understood very well what the chairman was saying but I would like to propose that clause 35(1)(a) should change to read as follows: “Offers to perform or perform services including auditing, verification, certifications and compilation of financial statements or related reports.” In doing that, we are trying to bring whoever practices accountancy, including those employed by Government; who are qualified accountants, but are not registered with the institute.

Then, we should also create (b), to read as follows: “All heads of accounting, finance and internal audit in public and private entities, with public interest, shall be members of the institute in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, to just give an example of Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, he is a qualified accountant, but is not a member of the institute. So, he cannot be disciplined yet if he was, he would be disciplined. I also recall that when Mr Chandi Jamwa mismanaged funds for National Social Security Fund, as a qualified accountant, he was deregistered both in ACCA and in Uganda.

This clause aims at ensuring discipline among accountants employed in Government institutions or big institutions, where there is always public interest. In fact, this clause will also help the directors and shareholders of companies. For example, when the auditor makes a report, he says that the responsibility of maintaining records and preparing accounts is supposed to be that of the directors, yet the people who prepare these accounts are those who head the accounting, auditing and other financial institutions. That is why I have proposed this clause. The purpose is to tame some of the individuals who head institutions where the public has an interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In other words, you support the chairman’s amendment. Can you read out your amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 35(1)(a) should read as follows: “Offers to perform or performs services involving auditing, verification, certification and compilation of financial statements or related reports.” 

Then, or - before we get to the existing sub-clause (b),– 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you creating another sub-clause (b)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, because the existing (b) should now be (c) and the inserted new (b) should read as follows: “All heads of accounting, finance and internal auditing in public and private sector entities with public interest shall be members of the institute in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

The justification is: First, to protect public and private organisations from losing billions of shillings due to fake accounting practices or by individuals who cannot be disciplined by the profession; two, to avoid tax losses or revenue through the preparations of fictitious financial statements; and three, to save the image of the accountants profession because it is unfairly brought in dispute by persons who do not belong to it.

You will realise that Mr Kazinda is now referred to as an ACCA member and he has tainted the image of ACCA, but none of the institutions can discipline him because he is not a member.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, maybe, for avoidance of doubt, I request that the Leader of the Opposition reads the amendment and stops at that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, Leader of the Opposition, I am having difficulties in seeing where it fits. I do not know whether we do not have to create another clause because it does not rhyme well with the first, and the one after it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Maybe, let me read through the entire amendment. What I am saying is that sub-clause 35(1)(a) should read as follows: “Offers to perform services involving auditing, verification, certification and compilation of financial statements or related reports.” And, sub-clause (b) should read as follows: “All heads of accounting, finance and internal auditing in public and private sector entities with public interest shall be members of the institute, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.”

And sub-clause 35(2), we would like to propose that it reads as follows: “A public officer or a person who is not referred to in sub-section 1(b) above and is employed by another person to perform or render services that would otherwise amount to practising accountancy, shall not be considered as practising accountancy under this section.”

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think I understand why it does not rhyme very well. I would like to propose that he makes that number two or three. This is because when you read about a public officer - then the accountant – I think it fits well as either number two or three.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the spirit in which the Leader of the Opposition is bringing this clause, but I am also concerned about its constitutionality. Because we seem to be compelling people to belong to an institution without free submission. I do not know whether that does not contradict Article 29 of the Constitution; you know the law provides that someone has a right to associate and disassociate. But in this provision, we are saying that a person in a certain position should be compelled to belong to a certain group. So, I do not know how we are going to reconcile that.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to comment on the amendment as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition, and especially to do with compilation of financial statements or reports. Normally, in firms, like we have allowed in the previous clauses, there are people who come in to train. This is usually the mandatory work these people are given; to compile the financial statements. However, an accountant is required to carry out verification and certification. Compilation should be left to the trainees.

So, when we include it in here, then why are they employing these trainees? What are they coming to do in the firms? I think compilation should be deleted from that amendment before we consider it. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is okay, Madam Chairperson. We can delete it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, but I am still not satisfied about how it fits in with – I do not know whether it cannot stand alone.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, that is why I said – and I think he has conceded – that let sub-clause 35(1) read as follows: “A person shall be deemed to practise accountancy…” and maintain sub-clauses 35(1)(a) and (b); then we go to “a public officer...”; then his amendment as 35(3). So, it will be standing alone, but within the footnote of “practising accountants.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, there are two amendments; one by the Chair and a second by hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We will take a vote on that of the Chair first before we go to hon. Nandala’s.

I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to ask the Leader of the Opposition to make clarification on what he means by “public interest” because it is a broad issue and if you say that everybody who works as an accountant or internal auditor in a small catering firm which has a public interest or in a bank or an insurance company - what do you exactly mean by public interest? I agree with the amendment, but I would like that clarification to be made. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we vote on it first and then he can explain? I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Bahati knows what public interest is. For example, if the accounts are for public consumption like on the stock exchange, that is public interest. The moment you are on the stock exchange, you are for public interest because if you bring false accounts and somebody invests and gets a problem, then the one who made the accounts should be the first person to be liable. 

Also, as you talk about banks, if a bank collapsed tomorrow, they would run to the Bank of Uganda to pay and where does the Bank of Uganda get money from? It is from the people of Uganda. So, public interest is quite known and I am sure you will be comfortable. Even where Government has invested; we passed a law here - the Public Finance and Accountability Act - that where Government has even one percent interest in a company, the Auditor-General must audit; and if the Auditor-General is going to audit, then we must have professional people in those firms and I think that is the public interest that I am trying to put up. I hope you are comfortable now. 

Clause 36

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 36 do stand part of the Bill. 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that under sub-clause 36(1), we delete the phrase “except a person specified in section 35(2).” 

The justification: It is a consequential amendment arising out of the amendment in sub-clause 35(2) as already mentioned, and accountants in the Public Service do not practise accountancy as per amendment to clause 35(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to. 

Clause 38

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 38(1)(c), we propose to insert immediately after the word “public” the following: “one of whom shall be a member of the profession other than accountancy.” 

The justification: Having one of the persons coming out from other disciplines other than accountancy will enrich the experience.

We also propose to insert new sub-clauses (3) and (4) as follows: “the quorum of the disciplinary committee shall be three members.” Then after the bullet where there is “2”, insert “3” and where there is “3”, we shall insert “4”, and “4” should read: “The term of office for a member of the disciplinary committee shall be three years and a member is eligible for reappointment for only one more term.” 

The justification: There is need to provide for quorum of the committee and the term of office needs to be defined. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed by the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, we do propose under clause 40 to insert new sub-clauses immediately after sub-clause (2) as follows, and then renumber accordingly: “(3) The secretary shall, at least 14 days before the date fixed for the inquiry, give notice of the date, time and place fixed for the inquiry to the accountant whose conduct is the subject of investigation.” Then “(4) The notice in sub-clause 3 shall be delivered by hand or sent through the post by registered mail addressed to the accountant’s address, best known to the council.”

Madam Chairperson, we also propose to insert a new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (3) as follows and then renumber accordingly: “(6) Where the accountant fails to appear personally or by his or her representative at the time and place fixed in the notice served on him or her, the inquiry may proceed in his or her absence.” 

The justification: There is need to give timelines to ensure that the reported cases are handled expeditiously. 

MR NANDALA–MAFABI: I am not objecting to what the chairman has said, but when giving notice, at least the place where this person is going must be known -. So, you may say somebody has not appeared and yet they have not been informed. So, I would like to propose that we add that, “the secretary of the council shall give notice of the first date, time and place fixed for the inquiry to the person whose conduct is the subject of investigation.” 

The justification: Somebody must know where he is going, the place must be fixed and the time and the date. 

So, that should be the first and you can then add what you have brought, if you do not mind. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson and also by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 52, I propose that we replace the words “the minister may by statutory instrument on recommendation of council make regulations in respect of all or any of the following” with the following: “1) The minister may, by statutory instrument, on recommendations of council, make regulations for the better carrying into effect the purposes of this Act; 2) Without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section (1), regulations made under this Act shall be in respect of all or any of the following - ”

The justification: The regulations should not be limited to only the highlighted areas. Need may arise to expound in detail on any provision of the Act.

Madam Chairperson, we also propose that under sub-clause 52(h), which is “Regulations regarding penalties”, replace “48” with “480”. 

The justification: Imposition of a fine not exceeding 48 currency points is equivalent – I think that figure has a typing error - we have “969,000” make that nine a zero so that it becomes 960,000 - This may be too little depending on the regulation contravened. Additionally, this section needs to be in line with sub-clause 36(2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 52(b) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 54, as a consequential amendment, insert the phrase “or accountant” immediately after the word “auditor”. 

The justification: The provision is to the effect that for a person to qualify as an auditor under any law in force, such a person should be a member of the institute, hence regulated. It is in the interest of the country and the public to have accountants required by law to work in organisations as regulated. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55, agreed to.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I need your guidance because we are proposing the insertion of a second schedule, which concerns meetings of the institute. At what point do we - ?

THE CHAIRPERSON: When we go to the schedule.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we insert the second schedule as follows: “Second Schedule: Meetings of the Institute – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should first vote on the first schedule, then you can propose the new one. 

I put the question that the first schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

First Schedule agreed to.

Second Schedule 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose to have a second schedule regarding meetings of the institute. And under this schedule we have -

“1) Annual General Meeting: The institute shall hold an annual general meeting, which shall be held once every year at a time, date and place determined by the council. The following business shall be transacted at the annual general meeting -

    (a) Reception and consideration of the annual report of the council;
    (b) Reception and consideration of the accounts of the institute and the auditor’s report;
    (c) Election of the members of the council; 
    (d) Appointment of auditors; and
    (e) Any other business.

    2) Special General meeting –

The council may convene a special general meeting of the institute whenever it considers it necessary and it shall convene a special general meeting within 10 days from the receipt by the secretary of a requisition in writing, stating the object of the proposed meeting and signed by at least 20 members of the institute.

Notice of motion -

    (i) A member wishing to bring a motion not related to the ordinary business of the annual general meeting before the meeting, may give notice to the secretary to reach him or her at least five weeks before the date of the meeting and the agenda for the meeting.
    (ii) The motion must relate to matters of the institute or the Accountancy profession.

3) Notice of meeting -

The secretary shall send to each member of the institute a notice of the meeting not less than 14 days and not more than 21 days before the date of the meeting and the agenda for the meeting. 

In the case of an annual general meeting, the secretary shall send, with the notice -

    (a) a copy of the annual report of the council;
    (b) a copy of the accounts of the institute together with the auditor’s report;
    (c) a list of persons nominated or proposed for election to the council or its auditors; and
    (d) particulars of any motion to be brought before the meeting.

    4) The non-receipt by any member of the institute of a notice of the meeting or any relevant document shall not invalidate the proceedings of the meetings to which they relate.

5) Quorum - 

At the annual general meeting, the quorum shall be 20 members and if after 15 minutes from the time appointed for the meeting the quorum is not met, the meeting shall stand adjourned to that day, a fortnight at the same time and place to be determined by council. On the date to which the meeting is adjourned, the meeting shall proceed to business notwithstanding that there may be less than 20 members.”

The justification: There is need to provide for a framework on how the meetings of the institute should be conducted in the Act. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the second schedule be introduced into the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, another schedule. - Under the current law, we have full members and associate members. The definition that was given at that time was wrong. But we have now got a right definition for associate members, which is under clause 5. 

Associate members under the current law, are those who have been practising accounts, and who were taken over at that time. It would be very dangerous for us to lock them immediately outside this firm because they have clients. I want to propose a schedule – first of all, to name those who are associates, and give them a grace period of about two years. (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We stood over clause 5 and we have not come to what the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting. It is true, because we had not finished the definition – whether we should include associate members or not. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to go to clause 5 first and when we finish it, we come to the Schedule, if it is accepted? This is because, right now, we are not sure whether the membership of associates is agreed upon. So, you are trying to bring a Schedule on associates when we have not agreed whether or not we should include them as members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we stood over clause 5. I think we should go back to it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to explain. Associate member was agreed upon. What was agreed upon as associate member -

THE CHAIRPERSON: But did we take a vote on clause 5?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let me explain. Give me a chance. Associate member is somebody who has qualified as an accountant but has not got the professional experience of three years. The ones I am talking about are now in the institute under the current law and they are called associate members. If we are taking clause 5 as associate members who have qualified, these are not qualified; and I could give you the names.

We have the names here; Naggenda Godfrey, Balunywa, Tim Lwanga –(Laughter)- I am sorry; I apologise, but those are facts.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I have not understood. I do not understand where those names are coming from. Are you legislating for some seven people? You are legislating for some particular people?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the purpose is, if you close them out now, they have clients. You have to give them either a year or two; an interim period. Otherwise, they have clients and that is where my worry is. Even when we were making the other law in the past years, we had to make a provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, why don’t you allow us to go to clause 5 and take a vote on it? Because, now, you are taking us to the Schedule, yet, we have not finished with clause 5. Clause 5 is setting up the membership of the institute and you can create another membership.

We stood over clause 5. Clerk, please, tell us the ones we stood over.

(THE CLERK: Clause 5, sub-clauses (6) and (7). )

THE CHAIRPERSON: For recommittal or stood over? I do not think we took a vote. We stood over clause 5; so, you did not take a vote on it. So, honourable members, we have finished with the Schedules. Can we now go to clause 5 and then clauses 7, 27, 21 - clause 1 should come last; that is the interpretation. I think clause 1 should come last because we need to settle the other parameters first.

Clause 5

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 5 - membership of the institute, I propose to substitute for paragraph (d) of sub-section 5(1) the following: “Any other category of members as may be determined by the council.” 

The justification: These are professionals whose membership should not be a policy issue determined by the minister.

I propose to substitute for sub-clause (5) the following: “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountants Act cap. 266 shall be a full member under this Act.” I think this is where hon. Nandala-Mafabi will come in.

The justification: The profession in Uganda has grown and the contribution of associate members is well known and recognised. Their categorisation as associate members then, under cap. 266 was transitional and it is now time to absorb the current associate members as full members.

Madam Chairperson, I also propose to substitute for sub-clause (6) the following: “A person is eligible for membership as an associate member of the institute if he or she passes the qualifying examinations conducted by the examinations board but does not have practical training prescribed by council.”

The justification: There are persons who pass qualifying examinations, but do not have the required experience for full membership, yet, they are serving the public without being regulated. These people ought to be regulated and they should be regulated by becoming associate members of the institute.

I also propose to substitute for sub-section (7) the following, “A person is eligible for membership as a retired member of the institute if he or she meets the criteria prescribed by the regulations made under this Act and applies to be a retired member.” 

The justification: The current sub-clause provides that a person is eligible for retired membership if he or she ceases to practise accountancy. 

But, Madam Chairperson, this implies that only practising accountants would be eligible for retired membership while members in employment are excluded. Retired membership should be open to all full members. Note that some members may retire due to poor health or lack of income due to unemployment.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: You cannot become a qualified accountant by having been an associate member, using a wrong law at that time. The reason we are amending that law is that it has problems. So, you want to make a person who has not studied accountancy a qualified accountant because he was an associate member. I think that is illegal, and that is why we are proposing that we should have a transitional period for such associate members because we have already created associate members; people who have qualified as professionals, but have not got practical experience. Now, these ones who are not qualified and who have been associate members, should just be given an interim period of say one or two years to clear their workload and become employees of other firms instead of them becoming full members by law.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we were deliberating this issue, the institute had accepted to give these members – because, this law had problems in the beginning; but now that they are few and they know them as their full members, they are practising, the institute had conceded to having them in this new law. That is why the institute proposed amendment in sub-clause 5(5), “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountant Act cap. 266 shall be a full member under this Act.”

So, they had allowed these members because we had problems with this law for a long time and there were even other ICSA members who wanted to become accountants and they even went to court. 

So, the institute has allowed these members, since they know them and they have been their members, the privilege of being part of this new Act. That is from the institute. I thank you.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I am constrained to take the position some of my colleagues are proposing.  Because, in order to qualify as an accountant, you go through very difficult exams. My colleagues who have been there know how difficult these exams are. However, here is a situation where by you want to legislate for some people to become members by law. 

I would like to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s submission that maybe, these people get a transition period so that they can go and face these exams. (Laughter)  Exams take 10 years, but we can give them three to five years or even two, whichever, but the underlying factor is that we should not give membership by legislation.

Madam Chairperson, a full member of ICPA, which is the highest level of goodwill, cannot just be given like that. It will be killing our profession.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, I am not on the same wavelength with you.  Can I understand how these people who you are objecting to come into the profession? How are they going to get ejected, honourable minister? Maybe you can explain. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Chairperson, this section of membership – in the past, at first enrolment, a person who was not legible for full membership, but had practical experience in accountancy or audit, and was practicing accountancy or audit at the time, was enrolled as an associate member. Now, the current associate members are few, but they are still active as they should, and we think they should not be deprived of their livelihood since they have been abiding by the rules of the current Accountants Act. So, that is how the associate members came into being. 

Now, the proposal is that another category of membership should be created for that category and they become registered members. 

Regarding registered members, we are proposing that we rephrase that sub-clause 5(5) to read: “A person who was enrolled and registered as a full member or an associate member of the institute under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 shall be a full member or a registered member respectively under this Act” so that we do not deprive these members of their experience and livelihood. But because they have also been practising for a long time and are recognised as such, and they may not have committed any offences to be disqualified as such.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the minister that the associate members should not be suddenly deprived of their livelihood. 

I would also like to inform the minister that it is important that we appreciate that the principle of automatic promotion greatly undermines quality. It is not fair for – I am a veterinarian by profession, for us now to say that in the veterinary practice a para-veterinarian who has been doing some practice in animal husbandry without causing any problems should automatically be promoted to a veterinary surgeon; that would be diluting the profession.

I would like to agree with the proposal the Leader of the Opposition has made, which actually goes in tandem with what the minister has proposed that we should not deprive these people of their livelihood suddenly. So, we should create a schedule which will give them a grace period of at least two years, so that they continue, but as associate members. 

My brother has already alluded to it. We should not just promote somebody automatically. Moreover, the minister has said that they have been practicing without committing any crime. I am not sure whether you have all your data correct because it could be shocking to you when some revelations, which we do not want to go into start coming up.  So, let us just have a schedule and have those members as associate members for a certain period of time. I beg to propose. 

MS AKOL OKULLU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the position of the committee that hon. Sebunya has been emphasising. Clause 5 as proposed by the committee says, “A person who was a full member or associate member of the institute under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 and who qualifies for membership under this Act shall be a full member or an associate member respectively under this Act.” This section says – in fact, gives them a burden that they must first qualify for membership under this new Act. 

So, I do not see why we are struggling to have another schedule because I am sure when we say “..who qualifies under this Act” actually, should be qualifying as accountants. So, there is again no need of giving schedules to name these people. After all, they are few. And in any case, if the institute feels that they still need to segregate, then they will put it in the regulations. I would think so, Madam Chairperson. 

MR ARINAITWE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Accountancy is a profession; and by creating a law to allow some people to automatically become members is going to create a very big weakness within our law; and we must also not forget that we are making a law that will stand the test of time and that a good law must be universal. So, since we are making this law not for the existing accountants, but even for those who will enrol thereafter, I think we should not create a weakness within the law. These people should be given time to undergo a series of examinations in order for them to qualify to be members. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, must we put that in the Act? Can’t we leave that to the council; when they apply, they tell them to go and do ABCD. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I want to qualify your assertion that let us leave it to the council now to decide;  because it is professional and they have the wisdom to judge who can be a member or not.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we have this clause and who qualifies, it means there are conditions for qualifying. When you apply, the council will say, “You man, I do not think you qualify. Go and do A, B, C, D.”

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, I think I am getting a lot of sense in the submissions and I am in a way ready to concede, because I believe even if you are a witchdoctor and you are using your own ways to treat people and actually these people are treated, you cannot be called a medical doctor. 

What is important is to note that some of the categories we have here became full members by virtue of Cap. 266, but by virtue of the same chapter, some of them were associate members. Much as I am not a lawyer, I know that the law cannot work retrospectively. This means that when we enact this law, those who are full members should remain full members; and those who are associate members should also remain associate members. At least, we agree on that.

Then, we may not need a schedule right now because if you are an associate member, you know the qualifications you must go through so as to become a full member. It remains open. So, Madam Chairperson, if you look at the proposal now, where I am conceding - Sub-clause 5(5), the one I have, states, “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 shall be a full member under this Act.” The concern of Members in this case is that there is automatic promotion of an associate member to a full member, but I think there is no agitation against a full member remaining a full member. And if that is the case, I concede and amend my submission to the effect that it reads, “A person who was a full member or an associate member under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 shall be a full member and an associate member respectively under this Act.” So that in this case, an associate member remains an associate member. If he wants to become a full member, he does the qualifying exams, and he goes through the experience and becomes a full member. In this case, no one is really barred. I thank you.

MS AKOL OKULLU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank our Chairperson for the submissions, but I want to amend his submission to read as follows, “A person who was a full member or an associate member of the institute under the Accountants Act Cap. 266, and who qualifies for membership under this Act...” - you must qualify for membership under this Act - “...shall be a full member or an associate member respectively under this Act.” That is the submission I want to make.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, first and foremost, sub-clause (5) as it states, where there is “an associate” we should first delete it. What it would be is that “A person who was enrolled and registered as a full member of the institute under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 will qualify for membership under this Act.”

The second point we are coming up with is that internationally, an associate member is somebody who has qualified as an accountant, but is lacking professional experience. This professional experience is always prescribed for three years. The moment he completes the three years, he is recommended by professional accountants whom he has been working under to become a full member. 

The moment you say these who were associates, who are supposed to take three years and become full members and yet, they do not have any qualification, how will you certify them after three years to become full members? That is why we are making a provision for a transitional period for them - we do not want them to die. Those who have been associates - because the definition of “associates” in East Africa is a member who has qualified. In IFAC, it is a member who has qualified; for every professional body. Why do we want to change it in Uganda so that it means those who have been practising when they are not qualified accountants? 

It is in that light that we want to give them a transitional period and say that those who were associate members under Cap. 266 should have a transitional period of two years. If they study, they become full members. If they do not study, they go out because it is very dangerous if we make the law like this. It is like Parliament is now conferring degrees on people who have completed Senior 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala, can you now go back to your proposal for a schedule? Suppose we leave this as it is, can you come back to the proposal you had made of a new schedule? Maybe it will help us. It may solve this problem. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if we are going for that, first and foremost, we shall define “associate”. What we had wanted is that under sub-clause 5(1): (a) full members; (b) associate members/retired members; and then we shall define under interpretation what an associate member means. 

Now, under clause 5, we can have sub-clauses (a) then (b) and say associate members under Cap. 266 - or under the third schedule, those we are going to name, because we must name them. Otherwise, many can be listed – we will have a transitional period of two years -(Interjections)– okay, we can give them three years. There is no problem. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, if we are to add sub-clause (d) as associate members under Cap. 266 as another category -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, we are saying, first of all, “(a) a person who was enrolled and registered as a full member of the institute under the Accountants Act Cap. 266 and who qualifies for membership under this Act shall be a full member under this Act.”

Then “(d) a person who was an associate member under Cap. 266 will remain an associate member for a period of three years and the list of these is under the third schedule, which we are going to put in the schedule. We need to put them in the schedule to avoid people coming up tomorrow and claiming they are part of the associates.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Hon. Akol.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson, I believe there could be a schedule that is here, but really, to be on the safe side, we may not all have these people with us in that schedule. I am proposing that whatever the Leader of the Opposition is proposing is right, but as you guided earlier, let it be the institute. They are the professionals; they know the timeframe they can give these people. We cannot legislate on timeframe for the associate members whom they know qualify to be full members. So, I am proposing we leave it for the professionals, that is the council, to determine this. So, let it go to the regulations. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: The Members have tried to reach a compromise, but as the hon. Akol has said, we would have left this because in section (d) we have “any other category of members as may be approved by…” we remove the minister and say “by the council.” just like universities awarded degrees to Dr Obote, Dr Museveni - as they deemed fit. [HON. NANDALA-MAFABI: “They are called honorary.”] Yes, they are honorary, but these are also, in our understanding as the committee – sub-clause 5(5) was some kind of exclusion for those people who have stayed with the council for some time and who are eligible in the previous Act. So, maybe, we leave it, as hon. Akol has said, to the council in their wisdom. But also, if you propose a schedule, then there is no need to mention the names because Cap. 266 has some specific people it gave leeway. So, we do not need to mention them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know whether they renew your membership every year. If it is being renewed every year, it means the council must determine where you fall. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to create a remedy for these people and it is wrong to assume that people on the council do not practise accountancy. These people who have existed, and who are very few - they are actually 11 - have made a name; they have a clientele. Never know even people within council may not allow them to proceed and work, yet we are looking at an exit for these people. I think it is important that we take care of them other than saying we leave that to council.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to associate myself with the submission of the Leader of the Opposition that these people whom we are saying we are providing an exit for, let us list them in the schedule so that we know it is all about these people; we give them a particular period of time; either two or three years as hon. Akol was suggesting so that in this period of time these people exit the profession and the Act takes effect, without considering those who had existed before the coming into force of this Act. Going by hon. Sebunya’s suggestion for us to it is as if we are legislating to leave them out of the profession completely without giving them a chance.  

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the submissions are very good, but I want to see the practicability of what is being proposed. The purpose of having a schedule, normally, is also to give powers either to a body, in this case, the council or the sector minister to amend that schedule. That is the flexibility of having something in the schedule; and that is the residual power we always grant here when we are making enactments. 

Since, in the first place, there is that flexibility that we would have also to give that residual power under delegated legislation, why then specify anything at this moment in the schedule? Let us give this power, for instance, as in sub-clause 5(2)(b) where the council is prescribing practical training exercises, also to prescribe or to specify what should be included in this schedule we are talking about. To me, that would take us very far; but if we mean it, we have to actually adjourn this session, begin looking at the categories we want to specify in the schedule, when in fact, we are talking about something that eventually will have to be under delegated legislation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are you proposing? (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think I was being very specific that we do not need to put anything in the schedule. We gave the power to the council to specify at a later stage, the types of associate members whom the Leader of the Opposition is referring to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you saying that the powers under the proposed sub-clause 5(d) are okay; because sub-clause 5(d) says, “Any other category of members as may be approved by the minister or the recommendation of the council;” because sub-clause 5(d) gives the minister and the council authority to approve.

MR RUHINDI: No, I think the Leader of the Opposition wants to amend clause 5 as it is now by excluding an associate member. If I may recoup what you are saying, I thought the Leader of the Opposition in sub-clause 5(5), “A person who has enrolled and registered as a full member or as an associate member of the institute under the Accountants Act..,” I thought your submission was to delete “or as an associate member of the institute.” Okay?

So, in your Bill – what I am proposing - because what you are proposing is that we provide for an associate member - a person who was an associate member, okay, as specified in the schedule. I am saying, instead of saying “as specified in the schedule,” you say, “as may be specified by the council in the regulations.” 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to ask the Attorney-General, do you agree, first of all with (a) so that we can go to (d)? Do you agree with (a)? [HON. RUHINDI: “Yes.”] Fine.  If you have agreed with (a), then in (b), they say, “A person who was an associate member under Cap. 266 of the Accountants Act shall remain an associate member for a period not exceeding three years.” We are saying this because they have clientele so that they can exist; because under 5(1)(b), we have associate members. Associate members are people who have qualified as accountants but they do not have practical, professional experience, not these who have been practising but are not qualified as professional accountants. 

Now, what is the problem with us specifying them in the schedule, because they were already in the other Schedule; they have reduced from 30 something; now they are 11 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which schedule were they in? Under Cap. 266? Were they named? 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Under Cap. 266; they were named. We are trying to reduce them from the 35, because since they are dying out, they are not being registered again or returned. This is a sure thing whether you like it or not. It is a sure thing so that we give them a timeframe during which to exit. Otherwise, short of that, we shall have a problem in defining an associate member because there will be two conflicting categories of people.

THE CHAIRPERSON: If they were named in the old law, what is wrong with naming those remaining in the new law? If they were there already, then, why don’t we just name them in the new law?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chairperson, maybe we can rely on your legal wisdom to advise us because if I have been an associate member by a certain law, how possible is it that you will tell me, “Please, make sure that you will do exams within three years so that you qualify to be an associate.” I am an associate by the Accountants Act Cap. 266; however, you are telling me that for me to retain it - my status – you are giving me a time limit that failure to do that, you will take away the status, which status was granted to me by law. Can’t this person really sue – we need your guidance, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it will be unconstitutional. Yes, you cannot strip somebody of the status they already have by law. They were given that status by law; how do you take it away? 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, I think what is happening – we need to read this clause in totality because under (5), the footnote states, “Membership of the institute;” We have (1) that describes a category of members. We have (2), “A person shall be eligible for full membership of the institute if she or he...” and the provisions are given there. The fourth one is, “A person whom sub-clause (2) refers to.” Under sub-clause (5) there is another category of members.” So, there are different categories even within full membership or associate membership. There are many categories of members and how they become members is described in the different sub-clauses within clause 5). 

So, sub-clause (5) particularly refers to those who were in existence by Cap. 266. So, they are alive and well, and are working. Therefore, a new law cannot just kill them or give them a lease of life of two years or you die. 

I want the Leader of the Opposition to take it in good faith that it is only catering for a small group of people. They were 35, they are dying, and are now remaining around seven. So, in this old age nearing retirement, when I am 52, if you asked me to read before I get to 55, and I collapse, I would not even have read for those difficult exams. So, please, let us allow the provision for these few created by Cap. 266.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, honourable members, if I had the protection of the law, I even enter into a contract, maybe 15 years ahead; now you tell me that, “Within two years, if you do not, you are finished.” What do I do with my obligations? You are creating problems for me. I may have a long-term contract because I had the law on my side. I had Cap. 266 protecting me, so, I said, “Fine, you fellows, I will do your work for 10 years.” 

MR KYEWALABYE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In addition to what you have been saying, if we say that in this new law, these people will no longer be qualified as associate members, couldn’t it be possible that even the accounts - the financial statements they have prepared previously for companies, somebody could bring them to doubt and say, “These financial statements are not admissible because they were prepared by people who are not recognised or who are not members of the institute.” I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to convince you to leave these – either men or women. Just leave them and we –(Laughter)– else we are going to impoverish them, and we are going to create obligations. 

DR EPETIAT: Madam Chair, I think, first of all, we are in agreement with the amendment of 5(1)(a) for full members.

Under 1(b) for the Associate Member, we could say that those who were associate members under Cap. 266 and mentioned in Schedule 3 - we shall restate the names in Schedule 3 – “...shall remain as associate members...” without specifying a timeframe. The fear is really about the timeframe; but we also do not want them to be summarily thrown out and disappear in oblivion. So, we can still keep them in the schedule, after all, it had happened in the old law and they are even few. They used to be 35, but now they are only 11; we should not create the timeframe. I think would be a compromised position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I not sure whether we are allowed to make legislation that is discriminatory against certain sections of society. Let us have hon. Ssebagala and then the minister will have the final word and we move. 

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you. I think my colleague has really said what I wanted to say because I was looking at a situation where we can create a clause saving the other 11. Can’t we create a clause where the other 11 are being saved?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is what clause 5 is stating. The present clause 5 was protecting those in clause 11. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, can you please -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, having listened and having known that it is very dangerous to close the livelihood of people and yet we need our people to survive, we can have clause 5(d) to define associates without time limit, but we list them under Schedule 3, so that when they retire or die, it means they go with –

THE CHAIRPERSON: They go with their schedule?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They go with their schedules. (Laughter) I will ask my brother, hon. Epetait to read the names under Schedule 3. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 5 as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stood over that. Honourable Chair?

MR KYOOMA: I thank you. Under clause 7 in the Bill, we propose that what is contained in the Bill becomes sub-clause (1), and because of the amendments in clause 8 where we have (13), it was agreed that it becomes (11). So, it is a consequential amendment.

I also propose that we insert a new sub-clause under clause 7 - the other one becomes (1) and this one becomes (2) which reads, “The Council shall be headed by a President and Vice-President.” We had also catered for those ones in clause 8, but we had not put them under clause 7.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have already reached clause 7.

MR KYOOMA: Yes. The “President deputised by a Vice-President.” But the qualifications of the President and the like had already been catered for. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that clause 7 as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 27, honourable Chair.

MR KYOOMA: Under clause 27, we did not have a lot of haggling over it. I had proposed the following amendments - “Disqualification for the enrollment” - that we add the words, “and membership,” in the head note; and then insert a new paragraph (d) as follows: “..has been struck off the Roll of Accountants under sub-section 42(f)”; and then the one that is indicated as (d) is (e) - “has not renewed his or her membership for two consecutive years without reasonable cause communicated to council.” 

The justification: An accountant who has been struck off the Roll of Accountants for disciplinary reasons or failure to pay annual subscription should be disqualified from membership.

Madam Chair, we did not have any contention over that. Where the contention was, was in the Bill - (b) “is un discharged, bankrupt” and the question was, supposing someone is a Ugandan who has been working in the UK or any other country, and according to the laws of that country where this Ugandan is, declares them bankrupt, should that person be allowed to come and practice as an accountant in Uganda? That was the question that actually caused the standing over on this matter.  

Madam Chairperson, I will need your guidance on that, and I consulted a few members of the committee and we were of the view that (b) becomes “undischarged, bankrupt under the laws of Uganda.” But you could advise; that was the only contention under that clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I principally agree with the amendments moved. When you say, “is undischarged, bankrupt” it certainly means under the laws of Uganda, and so we do not have to add it on.

But I also had an amendment proposed by the chairperson to the effect - “if one has not renewed his or her practicing certificate for more than two years without reasonable cause communicated to the council” - you are now making it a little bit problematic as you are leaving the burden to decide what amounts to “reasonable cause” and then you communicate it to the council. Just leave it; in drafting you say, “Who has not renewed his or her practicing certificate for more than two years without reasonable or justifiable cause.” And not necessarily, having communicated it to council to make it a bit subjective. Just leave it and the council will have to decide whether it is reasonable or not reasonable.

MR NANADALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I am not commenting on what the Attorney-General is saying, but on “undischarged, bankrupt”. The moment we allow only Ugandan laws to apply, somebody will go to Bangladesh and steal, and be declared bankrupt, then come to Uganda to hide. 

So, what we have to do here is that a person who is “undischarged, bankrupt” anywhere in this world should not be registered  - in any law, because it is very dangerous for us to have - people may run from UK and they come here and yet they have been declared bankrupt there. It is for purposes of safeguarding countries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, sometimes when you are filling the visa forms, they ask you, have you ever been convicted for a criminal offence – and you are going to America – but they want to know whether you were convicted here. So, I think it is universal. For instance – anyway, I don’t want to talk about the judge who is being chased from London with all those things he did there. 

MR RUHINDI: There is no contradiction. When you talk about Laws of Uganda, even when you look at the law we passed here, it caters for all types of bankruptcy, either those who come here –(Interjection)- under many circumstances, and of course, with all due respect, I don’t want to talk about a matter which is already under investigation, but the Ugandan laws are applicable to all those. 

The way it is, I agree with you, Madam Chairperson, it is broad enough and we could leave it at that. But knowing that when you talk about the Laws of Uganda, they are all encompassing; the Laws of Uganda do not protect criminals who come to operate here from other jurisdictions. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, I think we don’t need to add the words, “under the laws of Uganda”. If you are bankrupt, you are bankrupt; whether it is in Singapore or Tasmania.

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, I still have a problem with that. We need to be specific. I had looked at it from the perspective of sub-section (c) where it is stated, “somebody is convicted of a serious criminal offence or an offence involving fraud or dishonesty.” I was suggesting that we need to say, “by a competent court in Uganda or elsewhere”. 

The justification is that we need to avoid a scenario like we had one time when somebody was convicted and said, yes, I stole, but that was in the US and not in Uganda. But still, that is compromising your integrity whether in the US, Uganda or wherever you have stolen. I think we need to be clear on that. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Chair, I support what my colleague has said. If we don’t address it, when someone goes to court he will have a leeway because that scenario has ever happened. Someone was convicted somewhere else on various charges, but when it came here, the person who wanted to stop him from contesting went to court, but the court ruled that he was not convicted in Uganda, but abroad. So, if someone has been convicted abroad, I don’t think it applies here, unless it is very clear. (Interjection) There was someone here in Kampala. (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kwemara thinks we should say, “Competent court in Uganda.” 

MR RUHINDI: I think we need to speak from the provisions of our Constitution. Article 80: Disqualifications and qualifications of Members of Parliament. When you look at clause 2, it states: “A person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of a fine.” 

So, Madam Chairperson, you can include the expression, “By a competent court” wherever it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how about the LC Court? No? (Laughter) Yes hon. Kabajo. (Interjection) Why don’t we finish clause 27 first. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Chair, there is a part which he was talking about - if you spent two years without renewing your membership. That is the one I want to comment on. It is still under this clause 27.

My discomfort with that is, suppose somebody left Uganda and went to practice abroad and maybe neglected to renew his or her membership and comes back after 10 years; by then he or she will have been struck off the register. Is there a provision for this person to be re-enrolled? I have no problem with the provision of saying he or she will be struck off after two years, but as long as there is a provision that allows that when he or she returns, he or she can re-apply and get re-enrolled. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we proposing that if you don’t renew a certificate for two years, you are struck off?

MR KABAJO: That is what I heard the Chairperson saying in the amendment. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, we belong to professional bodies. If you don’t pay your membership fee, you are immediately removed from the register. If you are removed from the register, you cannot practice Accountancy. Even if you have left Uganda and you go to Kenya, if you belong to ICPA of Uganda, for you to continue practicing, Kenya will recognise you if you are a registered member in Uganda. In fact, two years are even too many. Because, you should pay membership to be able to practice. To avoid problems, the moment you don’t renew your membership – because people are always put in the gazette every year. We put in the gazette those who are members and the firms. I think that two years is too much. You are struck off membership because you have not paid membership. When you come back, you pay the penalty and pay your membership of that year ans you are re-instated. Otherwise, if you have not paid membership, you cannot be granted it.

MR SEBUNYA: This will discourage ghost accountants; that I leave my accounting firm and go for kyeyo, but remain masquerading as if I am in the country. So, for you to have a valid practicing certificate, you must be around. If you are not around for two years you are off the list.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed by the chairperson and hon. Kwemara.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Under clause 32, I beg your indulgence and the indulgence of the Members; there were some typing errors and because of that, we propose to delete sub-clauses (1) and (2) of the Bill, and the heading should also change from “certificate of practice to accounting firms” to read: “Issue of annual licenses to accounting firms.” We are also proposing to delete sub-clauses (1) and (2) to replace them with the following: Sub-clause (1) becomes: “Where the order of a practicing certificate intends to practice as a firm, whether as a sole practitioner or in partnership, he/she shall apply to the council for an annual licence in the prescribed form, furnishing the council with such details of the firm as it may require. And, sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “Where an application is made under sub-section (1), the council shall issue him or her with an annual license if is it satisfied that the person - a) holds a practicing certificate; and (b) meets such other requirements as may be prescribed.”

The justification: There are practical and legal challenges in granting a practicing certificate to a firm. For instance, the partners may not be practicing accountants. In that case the institute cannot regulate the firm since the partners will be governed under other laws as I had already said, like the Partnership Act. The annual license would, therefore, suffice.

With that amendment, I would like to beg that I move that wherever there is “certificate” we replace it with “licence” in all the subsequent sub-sections from 3 to 9. Madam Chair, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I don’t have any objections to that, but under clause 29, we defined an accounting firm as a firm offering accountancy services, and its partners should have valid licenses. In this one, we are talking about a firm. But I could be in a firm with a practicing certificate, but the institute may not allow me to practice under that firm. That is why I don’t necessarily object to what you are proposing, but insist that there must be a process of appeal. So, are you saying we should leave clause 35 –(Interjections)– so, we are leaving all those? Okay, that is fine with me.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 33

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Because of the amendment under clause 32, the committee proposes the deletion of Clause 33. The justification is that it is just a consequential amendment arising from clause 32.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we delete clause 33?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, because we have allowed the issuance of a license to a firm, I think clause 33 should stay. What we can do is to change the renewal of the licence for practice for an accounting firm. Since the other one is about issuance and with this one it is on renewal, they are in tandem. We should leave it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, this prescribes how you can do it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How you can renew it? The first one is about issuance and this one is about renewal. Okay, then we can leave it there. So, I now put the question that clause 33 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, agreed to.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chair, there was an amendment where the word “certificate” was replaced with the word “licence.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 33 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes to amend clause 34 to the effect that we replace the word “certificate” with the word “licence."

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chair, under clause 1, which is the interpretation; and under the definition of the phrase “accounting firm,” the committee proposes that we replace the words “registered under this Act” with the words “of qualified practicing accountant and licensed under this Act.”

Justification: The provision creates practical and legal implications in registering and granting practicing certificates to firms whose members may not have practicing certificates, but are already registered under the Partnership Act. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed by the chairperson of the committee – yes, hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, are we amending only that or can we add more definitions before we amend.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that the only one?

MR KYOOMA: Madam Chair that is what I have, unless hon. Nandala-Mafabi has something to add.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would like to propose two other definitions. One is that of an “associate member” and it should read as follows: “An associate member is a person who has qualified or who has passed professional exams and has not attained professional practical experience.”

The justification is to separate or to mean that they are at the stage of becoming full members, but they still have to go for practical training. These are named under clause 5.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection?

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I have a problem with that definition because under clause 5 we already said that those associate members are listed under the Accountants Act, Cap. 266. So, when we take on the definition that the Leader of the Opposition is proposing, does it include these? If it doesn’t, then I am wondering whether it would be good to include them too.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You know it is also standing alone – the full member and other members are not defined in the interpretation section. Are they?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair that is why we created clause 5 (d); it was to cater for those who are under Cap. 266 and now we just want to define who an associate member is. We are doing this because these ones are going; they have a transitional period and after sometime, they will now move. But associate members are defined the world over. These are people who have qualified as accountants, but have not yet got practical experience. That is why we are separating the two. A full member in this case will be that person who has qualified as an accountant, but also has the practical experience.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any harm in defining that?

MR KYOOMA: Maybe, Madam Chair, we need to be guided because when you look at the amendments in sub-clause 5(6), it appears to me as if this definition is catered for already. Because, this is about eligibility, but I think that at the same time, it appears to be defining who an associate member is. A person is eligible for membership as an associate member of the institute if he or she passes a qualifying examination conducted by the examinations board, but does not have practical training prescribed by council. That is one category of the associate members. 

The other category is the one as contained in Accountants Act Cap. 266. I need to be guided; but I seem to see the definition here. 

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: We have sub-clause 5(6); “The council shall, with the approval of members of the institute, determine the qualification for eligibility for associate membership under this Act. So, I think – 

MR TANNA: I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi needs to make further clarification. I think we are confusing two issues. Initially, the standards of accounting globally were such that one had to be a chartered accountant. Under chartered accountancy, one had to practise and complete articleship under a certified Chartered Accountant. The norms today have changed. The norms and practises today in the modern world of accounting are that if you have completed your CPA or your ACCA, you are allowed to practice. However, you are not allowed to audit official accounts such as Government accounts or NGO accounts until you are certified as a member of the accountants association in Uganda. But that does not mean that to be a certified member of that body, you must have practiced accountancy. The two are different.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Tanna is right, but he is just getting slightly confused. Once you study, you become an accountant. We are now trying to talk about membership. After you become a charted accountant or a certified accountant, you go to the stage of membership. For the other period of three years, you are going to attain what we call experience. That period is called “associate” and that is what we are trying to define. What we are trying to say is that an associate will be somebody who has qualified or done professional exams and become an accountant, but he does not have practical experience, and that is why under sub-clause 5(2), you will see that after one has completed practical training prescribed by the council. That is why in Uganda even if you have finished CPA Uganda, you cannot become a member. We are saying you should have a period of practice to become a member. 

In sub-clause 5(6), he means qualifications which will determine membership of someone. For example, CPA Kenya, CPA Tanzania, ACCA, Chartered Accountants of India or whatever the case is. That is what sub-clause 5(6) means. So, in that regard, that is why we must define an associate member because we have already defined the associate who existed in the old law, and we have given him or her time to exist. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, if there is no harm, why don’t we finish and do other work?

MR BAHATI: I just wanted clarification from you, because in the Bill under sub-clause 5(6) we have described what an associate member is; do we have to put this definition in the interpretation clause for emphasis? If that is okay, then there is no harm, but – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think let us put it there for clarity. I put the question that the interpretation section be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, two more definitions and I call it off. The last one is about accountants technicians. Right now we have accounting technicians like the veterinary technicians. So, we want to put a definition for accounting technicians. This means a person who has obtained an accounting technician certificate from the institute or any other accounting technician qualification from any recognised institute by council. 

The justification: To take care of even those who are practicing or who have left Makerere University so that they can also become accounting technicians, and this should be under the supervision of the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any other, hon. Attorney General?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I just want to be guided because I have not properly internalised this Bill, whether the Leader of the Opposition is aware of any provision where that expression is used in the context of the Bill so that it requires definition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have they been mentioned in the body of the Bill?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, one of the functions of the institute is to award certificates to accounting technicians.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that in the law? Have we passed it in this law? Have we given them that function?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: If it is not there then at an appropriate time, I am going to ask for a recommittal because they are given examinations and we have examinations for qualified accountants. If it is not there, I will ask for a recommittal.

Schedule 3

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, having passed the amendment on clause 5(1)(b), we agreed that we would then insert Schedule 3, which specifies the list of associate members as at 30th January 2013. The following are the associate members:

    1. Nagenda Godfrey, Reg. No.003 from Kampala; 
    2. Buliruno Francis Robert, Reg. No.006 from Kampala;
    3. Lwanga Timothy N.K.M, Reg. No.008 from Kampala;
    4. Kiiza Deogratious Tibaggwa, Reg. No.011 from Kampala; 
    5. Mukasa Anthony, Reg. No.012 from Kampala; 
    6. Bangirana Henry, Reg. No.013 from Kampala; 
    7. Ochola John J. Charles, Reg. No.015 from kampala;
    8. Ojungu Alfred E. Otile, Reg. No.016; Kampala;
    9. Mayambala Charles, Reg. No.018 from Kampala; 
    10. Iga Isdore W. Salongo, Reg. No.019 from Kampala; 
    11. Kangezeku Ben Mukhooli, Reg. No.022 from Kampala. 

In total, they are 11; saved from Cap. 266 –(Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Aware that these people were mentioned in the Accountants Act, Cap. 266, and I imagine that is a long a time ago. I want clarification whether all these are still alive, and if they are not, do we still need to mention them in this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think they said they were 35 in the old law, and now the remaining alive ones are 11; except that I do not know whether the pronunciation of the names was right - but anyway that is not my business. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, I beg to lay the list of the associate members as at 30 January 2013. I beg to lay on Table. I hope my pronunciations were correct. (Laughter)

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, hon. Bahati asked hon. Nandala-Mafabi to define “public interest”, which he clearly did. I would like to propose that we define it in the law since we used it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I think hon. Musasizi is right. But I have also looked through the law on the functions of the council, and discovered that under (c) - “to provide for registration of students of the institute and the qualifications for registration”. And the institute has two types of qualification: CPA and Accounting Technician course, and that is the reason why we should be able to file. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we are going into the day-to-day administration of this. Really? So, I put the question that a new schedule be inserted as proposed by hon. Epetait. (Interjection) Public interest? You know public interest is fluid; it is defined in many ways. 

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with you that it may not be possible because what hon. Nandala did was actually giving examples; he did not define public interest. So, I think that will be subject to research. I do not think it can be defined in the Bill as it is. 

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title, agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Accountants Bill, 2011” with three schedules, and passed them with amendments. I beg to report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to re-commit clause 13 to include accounting technicians. The justification is that if we leave it out, then we may have to make another law for accounting technicians and that will make them very many laws. And in this Accountants Bill, the council should have the mandate to supervise the accounting technicians because they are the ones who train them as they try to train qualified accountants. So, I would want to say that one of the functions of the council is to supervise the accounting technicians.

THE SPEAKER:  But honourable members, are you suggesting that the profession will never change and there will never be other people joining with different nomenclatures; why are you closing it? Maybe 20 years ago there were no accounting technicians, but now they are there. Why do you want to close it?

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, while I appreciate the concern of hon. Nandala-Mafabi, my view, just like yours, is that there are many names that are given by the Public Service Commission and under its laws, we have finance officers who do some of this work, which is now done by accountants. We have accounts assistants and accounts clerks; so are we going to define all those in this law? 

So, I request hon. Nandala-Mafabai realises that – and pray for your indulgence - that we cannot include every aspect of this profession in the law, especially when the Public Service Commission and other organisations have the option to name some of these functions, including that one of accounting technicians. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I beg to disagree with the Minister. Like we have just witnessed here, he cannot even pronounce the words “accounting technician” properly. I do not want us to go into the proficiencies of the accounting profession. But I happen to be exposed to the accounting profession and CAT is a professional accountants’ course. If at all you fail to get entry at the chartered accountancy level, the only other level of entry into the accountancy profession is the CAT, which is the Chartered Accountant Technician, and it is a certified course. It is like saying that if you fail to get enrolled for a degree course, you can start with the diploma course and later access the degree. Those are the only two ways of getting into the profession. Historically, for nearly 100 years of the documented accounting profession, there are only two ways; either you get in through the chartered or technical way.

MR SEBUNYA: I am going to be forced to support the Leader of the Opposition because now that we have expanded the opportunities for people to be qualified both in Public Service and in private practice, at least we would give the council the opportunity to conduct exams; I think, then, one would qualify to be an accounting technician once they complete a degree course despite not having done a professional course; the council would then consider if I qualify to be an accounting technician; and that would be the beginning of my joining either the Public Service or any other organisation. 

So, I would like to ask the minister to allow us to include that – we debated it a bit in the committee, but it never materialised into a report. But I would support the inclusion of the accounting technicians because they do those exams; and this would be the first platform to allow us to -(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under clause 5 – “membership of the institute” has got part (1)(d) which allows the institute - it states that, “any other category of members as may be approved by the minister on recommendation of the Council.”

I would assume that under this, the council can recommend to the minister for a category of members known as accounting technicians and under clause 13 - Functions of the Council, the Council also approves courses of study. So, the Council would be able to recommend that we have a category called the accounting technicians to the minister and that category would be admitted once it is approved by the minister.

Under clause 13, they would also be able to approve what courses of study these people would undergo and so forth.

Madam Speaker, you mentioned that the world changes. In future, apart from accounting technicians, we may have other categories. So, I think the Bill is flexible enough to allow for other categories to be proposed and admitted. Therefore, personally, I would oppose the recommittal in order to include accounting technicians. Thank you.

5.11
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, in legislation we include any technical word in a definition clause if such a word or phrase was used in the main Bill. That is my understanding. As of now, “accounting technician” is not mentioned. You never know the nomenclature may even change. 

First of all, we don’t legislate in anticipation; we don’t know what the Council may decide to call that category of technocrats. So, I find it a little bit difficult for us to define something that is not mentioned in the main Bill. Let us wait for the Council to decide the categories of other accounting officials that they will come up with before we can include it here. I beg that we stay that recommittal and do not go for it.

5.12
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you. I just want to support the honourable member who has just spoken about the nature of the accounting profession that is growing. We need to leave space for it to grow. Today, we have accounting technicians; maybe tomorrow we could have accounting engineers or something else. Actually, if you look at the principle of the Bill, it was specifically looking at professional accountants; people who read and get qualifications in Accounting. So, I want to request my elder brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to save us some time, and we pass the Bill and move on.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, first and foremost, I have discovered that the Minister of Finance has an institutional memory problem, and I will help you. 

There is an association of chartered technicians of Uganda, which was funded by the Ministry of Finance. It was given seed money and the same Ministry of Finance assigned the role of supervision to the Council. That is where I have a problem with you ministers, but having said that, Madam Speaker, I have withdrawn; but I have told you there is a problem. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi for allowing the profession to grow.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ACCOUNTANTS’ BILL, 2011

5.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Accountants’ Bill, 2011” be read for the Third Time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ACCOUNTANTS’ ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: So, after several months, the Accountants’ Bill has finally been passed. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, before we go to the next item, yesterday we were receiving some trophies, but I wanted to announce that hon. Kiiza has received a trophy this morning. She had a baby boy today; so, we congratulate her. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS BILL, 2008

5.16
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008” be read for the Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded by the Minister of Finance.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the Uganda Law Reform Commission carried out a study between the period 2000 and 2001, to review the needs assessment of a law to regulate and offer protection to marks or indications of source of origin. Based on the recommendations of the study, the Bill before you was prepared.

The Commission is of the view that the Bill is timely and very necessary to foster economic development and quality control of products or goods in Uganda. This effort has been supplemented by a very well researched report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and I want to thank them so much for a job well done.

There are of course questions that may come in our minds. When we talk of a Geographical Indications Bill, particularly coming from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Members have been asking, what are these geographical indications; but the definition of geographical indication is provided in the Bill. A geographical indication is a branch of law of intellectual property that is aimed at offering protection to products that can have marks or indications that they originate from a particular area.

Geographical indications can be viewed as a sub-set of trademarks. Geographical indications serve the same functions as trademarks, but I will come to the distinction a little bit later for purposes of clarification. So, they serve the same functions as trademarks because like trademarks, they are source identifiers, they guarantee quality, and they ensure value business interest.

A geographical indication legally identifies and formally recognises a good or goods as originating in a delimited territory or region where a noted quality, reputation or other characteristic of the good is essentially attributable to its geographical origin and/or the human or natural factors of that place of origin.

I can see Members saying, but what is this man reading about? I am trying to summarise the memorandum to the Bill. If you have already read the memorandum, I am trying to capture that gist within my explanation. Geographical indications can prove to be a valuable asset for organic products and marketers because geographical indications can complement in alignment with the precepts of organic agriculture, they can foster market-based support for local traditions and cultures. 

Now, I am making reference to a study which was carried out for purposes of clarification –(Interjection)- hon. Amuriat, please bear with me.

The use of geographical indications is not limited to agricultural products. They may also highlight specific qualities –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I didn’t intend to disrupt the submission of the minister. But I do not know whether it is procedurally right when a minister whose Bill is before the House, a minister who should have explained himself or herself to the committee whether he or she would be right to come and labour explaining to this House what he should have done at the level when the committee interacted with the owner of this Bill. I thought it was common practice here that upon second reading, the committee chairperson comes and reads the report, explains what the minister is trying to explain to us and then debate ensues. I would like your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is the owner of the Bill, and at the second reading he must justify why he is bringing that law before the chair reports. He must justify why he is bringing this new law or why he is amending it as the case may be. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. By making this explanation, I have read the committee report and I have thanked the members. What I am making reference to has not been captured in the committee report. I am more or less pre-empting the questions that may arise. 

Before I was interrupted –(Laughter)- I was making this submission; that the use of geographical indications is not limited to agricultural products. They may also highlight specific qualities of a product, which are due to human factors that can be found in the place of origin of the products such as specific manufacturing skills and traditions. That place of origin may be a village or town, a region or a country. An example for the latter is Switzerland or Swiss, which is perceived to be a geographical indication in many countries for products that are made in Switzerland and in particular for watches. 

I want to give you a few examples of such protected products in Uganda; the Nile Perch, Uganda Waragi, Rwenzori Mineral Water, Elgon Coffee, the yellow sweet potato from Teso. I hear somebody behind me saying Kasese; yes, the Kasese Gin is such one product; malewa grown on the slopes of Mountain Elgon et cetera. 

I think the good difference that I may point at between trademarks - because that may be an issue too - and geographical indications, is that trademarks point consumers to the proprietor or enterprise that offers the product or services. But in the case of geographical indications, these point consumers to the geographical area of the products origin or features of the product attributable to the origin. 

Secondly, trademarks function to distinguish a specific product from similar products in the market place or to indicate a products trade origin. But in the case of geographical indications, the geographical indications essentially function as an indication of the geographical origin of the product. And ordinary trademarks may be transferred and owned by several different proprietors without external restriction or regulation. But a geographical indication cannot be transferred because, for instance, you cannot actually transfer Kasese Gin because that is a description of an area. A geographical indication cannot be transferred by one proprietor in, for example, the Uganda -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you have gone beyond justification.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Laughter)

5.26
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Steven Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, The Geographical Indications Bill is one of the last Bills in the amendment of the commercial laws that the committee has been undertaking. And before I read the report, briefly, I would like to thank you for the support that you have accorded the committee to tackle and study this new area of our jurisprudence. 

In the same manner, I would like to thank the Uganda Law Reform Commission, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Justice Law and Order Sector for the support they accorded us in tackling this important area which is new in our laws. 

Introduction

The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 17 June 2008 in the Eighth Parliament and re-introduced by a resolution of Parliament in the Ninth Parliament on the 31 October 2011. It was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. Madam Speaker, in analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure. 

Background

A geographical indication in the Bill is defined as any indication which identifies goods as originating in a particular country, region or locality where a given quality, reputation or other characteristic of the goods is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.  In common terms, this is a Bill for a law that seeks to protect products that are reputable as a result of the area from where they originate. It is common to hear people refer to Irish Potatoes from Kabale as being better than Irish Potatoes from another part of the country. In the same way, the passion fruits from Kasese or the oranges from Teso sub-region are said to have an advantage in the market over similar fruits from other parts of the country. This law will, therefore, express this advantage to protect the quality of these products and provide for marketing of these products on both local and foreign markets.  

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: the Ministry of Justice; the Uganda Law Reform Commission; Uganda Law Society; the Law Development Centre; Uganda Registration Services Bureau; the Private Sector Foundation; Association of Microfinance Institutions in Uganda.

The committee also sent a delegation to Nairobi, Kenya; Maputo, Mozambique; and Port Louis, Mauritius to conduct study tours and benchmark the Bill. The committee would like to acknowledge and appreciate the above institutions for all the support, information and help given to the committee during the consideration of this Bill. The committee, in a special way, appreciates the Justice, Law and Order Sector for availing funds to the committee to conduct the study tour in Kenya and Mozambique.

The object of the Bill is to provide for the regulation and registration of geographical indications, duration of protection of geographical indications and remedies for infringement or prohibited use of geographical indications and for related purposes. 

The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

The committee observed that:

    1. The Bill is necessary since Uganda currently does not have any legislation governing geographical indications.

    2. The Bill is very important and is long overdue given that Uganda signed the World Trade Organisation TRIPS that is, the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Agreements, and is bound to domesticate it into law by this legislation.

    3. The Bill defines geographical indications and provides for their administration and protection.

    4. The Bill invalidates the registration of a trademark which consists of a misleading indication and facilitates the prevention of any use, which constitutes unfair competition.

    5. It protects persons against a geographical indication, which is literally true but misleading. 

    6. The Bill provides guidelines for additional protection of the geographical indications for Ugandan products. 

    7. The countries visited by the committee informed the committee that they were using the law to protect products specific to their countries as follows: in Kenya it protects the Kenyan tea leaves; in Mozambique it protects prawns and goats from that country; and in Mauritius it protects pineapples, onions and pepper from certain parts of Mauritius.

Recommendations 

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chair and your committee. The report has been signed by the minimum number of signatories. You are free to debate, three minutes each.

5.33
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good job done. Like the minister indicated, upon hearing the title “Geographical Indications”, I wondered what this Bill was doing in the Ministry of Justice. And when I looked at the definition, the definition clause was mainly touching on issues of trade, and it gave me the impression that probably this Bill would have been best placed in the Ministry of Trade.

That said, this law was required yesterday. It is very disheartening to find that certain products are being marketed in the name of other locations when they actually originate from other areas. In 2003, I had the opportunity to go with other Members, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and hon. Rainer Kafire to Pakistan. We travelled by road from Karachi to Islamabad. We took two days because we were visiting a number of industries. We went through a number of cities - I will not go into detail. But what did we see? In the textile industries, for example, we would find clothes being printed on “Made in Uganda” and they were destined for Uganda. When we inquired what was happening they said that was a special order by Vitafoam. But they were being printed in Pakistan. When we visited a leather industry, they were making shoes and belts, but the label there was “Made in Italy” and the destination was Morocco and Tunisia. Their argument was it was a special order from those countries because the products from Italy sell at a higher rate than those that are locally manufactured in those countries. I got shocked.

It reminded me of what is happening even with us locally here. You find trucks moving from Tororo to Karamoja to pick limestone. I think, Mr Minister, you have used this Sironko-Namalu Route. It is a nightmare. They pick the raw materials from Karamoja, package them in Tororo and call it Tororo Cement, and they call it a product of Tororo, yet it is coming from another location. Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this. I would like to raise a point of order. Is my honourable colleague in order to insinuate that Tororo Cement industry is not using raw materials from Tororo? Limestone, phosphates and several other ingredients from Tororo? Maybe, if at all a component is brought from somewhere else it would be okay. But really to insinuate that the whole cement component is not manufactured in Tororo, is he in order, Madam Speaker? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the Floor of this House, there have been complaints from the Members of Parliament from Karamoja that limestone is being ferried from their area without acknowledgement that it comes from Karamoja - to Tororo. Yes, I think that is the genesis of this. (Laughter)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, to my colleague hon. Tanna, it is not that I am saying everything is not from Tororo, but you should also recognise that some things are from Karamoja and they are destined for Tororo. And the road network now between Sironko and Nakapiripirit is a nightmare. So, what I am saying is that if a product is from a particular location, let us recognise that this is from that area and that is why I am saying that we needed this law yesterday.

Finally, I have read in the Bill and at the appropriate time I will convince the minister and the committee that we need to give a lot of authority to the registrar. I have seen it mentioned in clause 6 that some powers of the registrar are being usurped by the minister. And I think that will not be very correct. At an appropriate time when we get to committee stage I will bring an amendment because we really need this law to be fully operational in order to save Ugandans from counterfeits. Counterfeits have found their way here because of lack of such laws. Somebody brings a counterfeit saying it “made in location X” yet it is made in Katwe. I thank you Madam Speaker.

5.39
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. I think this law is necessary and I would like to say that I am going to support it 100 percent. However, I would like some clarifications by either the committee chairman or the minister. 

On page 2 of the report, under “Background”, the committee says, “In common terms, this is a Bill for a law that seeks to protect products that are reputed as a result of the area from which they originate. Now, my problem is, how can you distinguish by just seeing, a product from one part of the country from a product from the other part of the country?

I would like to give an example of the renown Mubende goat. You know goat meat coming from Mubende is reputed to be very delicious. You go to a butchery, and you see meat from a goat. What do they call it doctor? Mutton? How would you know that this goat meat is coming from Mubende and not Karamoja, Teso or Arua? How would you tell between an orange coming from Teso and that one coming from Bugisu? I need an explanation for that.

You also observed that the Bill intends to protect the quality of products. I do not know whether you have harmonised between what the Bill states here and what is going to become law when we want our researchers to do - because today, our researchers are busy in the laboratories doing research to improve on quality, and to improve on yields; how do you marry the two? So, I might take a bit of what is found in a Teso orange and a bit of what is found in the Hoima orange, put them together and produce a hybrid. I do not know whether you have harmonised this. This, in my view, does not amount to patenting. I think, as a country, we need to try and help our producers to patent their products.

Finally, on page 4 under (vi), you have observed that countries have jealously protected their products like Kenya; the Kenyan tea leaves are internationally renowned. I do not know whether instead of us beginning with our little regions within the country, we could think in terms of protecting what is ours nationally before we think about the little divisions within the country. Madam Speaker, I thank you for this chance. 

5.42
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for a job well done.  Like the previous speakers, I rise to support this law and reiterate that we needed this ages ago. However, I am seeking clarification either from the chair or from the minister regarding clause 17 on pages 13 and 14, “Prohibition of registration of an exclusive geographical name”. The head note of clause 17 is amended by adding the word, “as a trade mark,” after the word “name.” Basically, it is saying I cannot manufacture a product and call it Tororo. 

So, I would like to understand, how would this law apply, say for example, to Tororo Cement or Rwenzori Mineral Water which we know is processed in Kampala, but is named there; or Highlands which is processed in Kawempe and several other products? What would happen because these are registered trademarks? How would this affect the existing anomalies on the market?

Secondly, the report of the committee and the elucidations by the minister before the presentation of the report did not clarify the bodies which shall be empowered to apply this law. Who are we empowering because we are going to have a problem like the national ID Project where Ministry of Internal Affairs says it is theirs; the IT ministry says it is theirs; and now Defence is saying it is theirs. So, with this one we are going to have a problem where Trade is going to say it is theirs; and Justice is going to say it is theirs; and you are going to have squabbles and failure in the goodwill of the law. 

Therefore, I would like us to further debate who we are empowering as the appliers - the keepers - the agency; because they are saying the Registrar of Trade Marks is not empowered. Therefore, then who, because the Registrar of Trade Marks is under the Ministry of Justice, and whereas most of these functions would ideally have gone to the Ministry of Trade like my honourable colleague said. So, I see those as loopholes and I would like to seek clarification on the issue of the names which have already been picked and are being used.

5.45
MRS KABAHENDA FLAVIA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for the report. This Bill has come to me at a time when I was struggling to understand why some water was named Rwenzori Mineral Water when actually, it does not come from anywhere on the Rwenzori Mountains and neither do the proprietors of the said company which sells it come from any part of the Rwenzori region. So, will the minister, therefore, clarify to me whether this situation will be addressed by this Bill because I was about to raise questions for oral answer for the Minister of Trade. I thank you. 

5.46
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the pleasure to thank the committee for the good report, and I join the rest of the Members to assert that actually, we needed it yesterday. 

I think out of this law, we shall benefit as a country as well as regions because Madam Speaker, I want to inform you and the honourable colleagues that we have been losing out because of the absence of such a law. When you go to countries like Japan or China, you will find that our Tilapia from Uganda is on the market there and it is really preferred to other types of fish, but it is called Suzuki. It is not indicated anywhere for one to know that this Tilapia comes from Uganda. 

When you go to Dubai, you will find bananas which are exported by Uganda, but there is no indication and you cannot tell that these bananas are from Uganda. When you go to China again, you will find that most of the tea leaves on the market are from Uganda; but what happens after exportation, there is repackaging and because of that, the packages bear other trademarks and names, and there is no indication that they are from Uganda. Because of that, I think this law has been long overdue and we thank the committee for that. 

On a regional and a constituency basis, we shall also benefit only that I want to be assured of how practically it will be possible to indicate that this maize, the beans, sorghum et cetera are from, for example, Ibanda North. I am very sure that my constituency is among the leading producers of grain, but you can hardly tell such on the market, and I think this will be a basis for bargaining for some services because you will hear, “We are allocating silos, warehouses and whatever to the grain producers,” but you will find that your constituency, which is really deemed as one of the leading producers does not have anything. With this, and because it is practically possible to easily identify what comes from each region, I think it will also form a basis for bargaining for such products.

So, Madam Speaker, I thank you and I thank the committee for  the report. 

5.50
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): I thank you, Madam Speaker and the chair of the committee for the report. I stand to support the Bill. 

Just on the face when you read, “The Geographical Indications Bill,” you may get lost until you read further; I hope that somebody proposes that it is titled, “The Geographical Indications Products Bill” – somebody may consider that. However, that is not the reason as to why I am standing to support this Bill. I have three reasons:

The law will help us control people the adulteration of products so that even if traders try move products from one area to another, the quality will remain intact. 

Secondly, different regions have different cultures and the culture is associated with the products that come from that area and in most cases, they have a unique product which a law like this will help us to protect. For example, when you go to the North in Agago, we have a very unique variety of simsim which in the local language we call lamola; it is a delicious product that is very good and people like it. A law like this will help to protect such a product. Besides that,  there is common food that people eat called malakwang. It is rarely found in any other area; even akobokobo – these are unique products that needed a law of this nature to protect them.

Lastly, we grow sunflower and this sunflower is turned into vegetable cooking oil as a product. There is common talk and it sounds like an allegation, but it is common in the community, that there are some companies that are dealing in processing vegetable cooking oil and instead of that vegetable cooking oil being consumed in a country like this, they export it. After exporting, they import animal fat or animal oil and then repackage it and label it as vegetable cooking oil from sunflower and yet such a product has lot of cholesterol and things that are not right and are not good for the human body. A law of this kind, I think, will help us; and I stand to support the Bill.

5.53
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): I thank you very much. I support the Bill, but with some query - that we also have some of the products coming from some regions already with some geographical indications like the Tororo Cement. Do we have some law in place to make us have those? That has been on my mind; that do we really have some laws in place so that we only bring this law to reinforce what has been existing? 

So, how is it going to be different from maybe the law governing trademarks? It kept on lingering in my mind; otherwise, it is very important like, for example, we have in our Acholi sub-region where we have this Shea butter oil which is very unique and I think it is not in any other region of Uganda, but only in Acholi sub-region -[HON. MEMBER: “Also Teso.”]- also, in Teso, and I think that it is a delicacy - so that those who have, can benefit from producing it. That is really my question about that. Otherwise, I support and thank the committee for the work well done.

5.54
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On page 2, the background of this Bill, the chairman stressed that geographical indication in the Bill is defined as, “Any indication that identifies goods as originating from a particular country, region or locality where a given quality, reputation or other characteristics of the goods is essentially attributable to its geographical origin.”

So, there is a concern of even the international origin of the goods that we may bring in here and we have already been given an example of someone who found textiles in Pakistan being labeled as being manufactured from Italy. Probably there are shoes from India or China being labeled as manufactured in Spain and so forth.

I am, therefore, wondering about the ability of this law under some circumstances. While we may apply it here locally and effectively, I am wondering how we can effectively use this law in case of infringement of international geographical locations. 

If somebody imported watches from China and they are labeled as Swiss watches, in that case, who has the right to lodge proceedings against this? Who is going to do that? I am, therefore, wondering how we are going to apply this law to make sure that it is enforceable in as far as importation of goods, which have false geographical indications are concerned. That is the clarification that I want to get from the honourable minister. I thank you.

5.56
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative Butambala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the committee for the report. 

My concerns also are to do with how you are going to quantify and also to determine quality under this Bill, because as hon. Lubogo has said, I know of traders here who go out with labels of original products to Thailand and they ask those manufacturers to manufacture the real product and put that very label and those goods are brought here. So, do we have mechanisms to determine which is the original or duplicate?

Secondly, when I was looking at the civil action – I have a case and I have been actually grambling over this issue. You know that we have the gorillas in Uganda, but right now the marketing on most of the flights show that those gorillas are in Rwanda, and so many of the tourists go to Rwanda and because of the fair roads they travel on to Bwindi, they come to Bwindi and see the gorillas and they think that they have seen the gorillas in Rwanda; and these people are making a lot of profit from these gorillas. So, how are we going to recover that income under this Act?   

Then I hope that when we pass this law, people do not tie themselves on the products and sometimes they even deny Ugandans to access them. I am looking at the oil of Bunyoro. You may find that the Banyoro will say that this is our product and nobody should even come close to it. I hope this is not what the law is intending to do. Like we know that matooke originates from Buganda, but it is now marketed in the Ankole region. So, I hope that we do not go to that extent.

I, therefore, think that we need this law, but the modifications are important and how we will apply it across the board so that people do not own up these products and say, this is ours and you are not supposed to come near it; it comes from Buganda or Bunyoro - like I hear the Karimojong are looking for those long-horned cows that have crossed to Ankole. So, Madam Speaker, those are my fears. I thank you.

5.59
MRS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support this law, but I equally have some fears to express. 

The one thing that I notice is that this law cannot work in isolation. We must emphasise quality assurance in Uganda. Like the previous speaker says, we have a lot of bicupuli in Uganda, and we have become experts at that. But also when you look at the Chinese economy, I think their growth came from imitation. They begin with imitation before they come to high quality products. 

Originally, we used to have electronics from Panasonic, but then the Chinese came with Pansonic. If you are not very keen and you are looking for Panasonic and you probably don’t know how to read properly, you are going to buy the Pansonic. At the end of the day we have seen the Chinese economy grow to the level it has grown. 

I am wondering whether this is not going to inhibit or prevent our people from innovation. You know, you learn; you don’t know how to call it, but because you know this is a good product – for example, you have Nivea as a cream, but there is another one called Novea or Nive. If you are an addict of Nivea, you will go for Nive thinking it is maybe a sister cream or something like that. 

I don’t know how we are going to work around that, but that is the feeling I got that many of our growing industries might learn from this. Not really duplicating, but trying to market what they are producing and also grow into industrial level. 

I am also looking at No.8 on page 4. The committee says that the law has faced numerous challenges of implementation in countries where it has been implemented, including in Mauritius. I don’t know whether the committee bothered to find out why it faced those challenges; and if you are sure that in Uganda the same challenges that applied in those countries do not exist; and if they do, what are the remedies for us to make sure this law is going to be implemented. I thank you.

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I think most of the issues will be adequately covered when we come to Committee Stage because some of them are an integral part of the recommendations made by the committee in the amendments. 

I want to assure colleagues that the body which will be responsible for implementing this legislation is the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. We gave it autonomy in this Parliament and they have been adequately empowered not only to handle this subject, but also many others - companies’ registration, trademarks, patents, name it. That is the body that is going to be responsible for this job. 

But of course all quasi autonomous bodies have got supervisory institutions, and the supervisory body for Uganda Registration Services Bureau is the Ministry of Justice. They are the ones who speak for it in Cabinet and in Parliament. So, there is no problem about heads springing against each other - trade, justice and so forth. There is a centralised body, which is going to handle these matters. 

Yes, there is quite a challenge because when you talk about how you will enforce this law at the international level, I am afraid. Yes, we are members of TRIPS - the Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. We all know those agreements of WTO, the TRIPS, TRIMS and Uganda is a member of those agreements. However, enforceability means that you have got to take action here. If they plagiarise our Nile Perch in China, what are you going to do to the people in China who do it. That is a tall order. 

I think what this law is doing is to ensure that if, for instance, Nile Perch is registered and protected in Uganda, if you plagiarise it elsewhere, you will not be able to import it into Uganda. That is the position in the Bill. 

The question of quality: How do you ensure quality as far as this Bill is concerned? The problem sometimes is impatience. I was going into details to explain all these matters to you and you cut me short. 

Essentially, this is evolutionary. It may be due to climate – because a product may be tasty not out of cost production elements, but because of, for instance, the soils of the place. So, you are not going to say I want to – yes, you can improve quality by applying fertilisers and doing a, b, c, d but principally, it is the natural elements in a place that give rise to a particular product, and that is how quality evolves, and that is how it is protected.

When you register your product, it does not stop other people; otherwise why would you be protecting it. You protect it as far as its marketability is concerned, but you don’t stop operators from selling your products. And your products will be sold everywhere. That is the purpose of it. But the product will have been protected. If you, for instance, registered Kasese Gin, no other group will go to the registrar of companies to register Kasese Gin.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I think the quality concerns and the preservation of quality thereof is arising because of our inability to remain consistent. Take for example the production of oranges. It might be as a result of the structure of the soil, that you are able to produce a certain variety that tastes a certain way different from what is produced elsewhere. Now, whether a geographical region can consistently produce the same quality of orange is something that is in question. 

What I would like to ask is, who is going to be available to the local farmer because, by the way, production is not at commercial level, to ensure that the Teso orange today, in the year 2013, tastes the same in December 2020, or at a minimum, in December 2015. Suppose the quality changes, what happens. 

MR TASHOBYA: First of all, as the minister pointed out, a geographical indication relates to the special characteristics of a product from a particular area. Of course that also changes overtime and that is why registration is for a period of time; 10 years. After 10 years, you re-apply to renew your registration.

Secondly, it is also a subject of scientific proof. Institutions such as NARO and Uganda Bureau of Standards would be useful in proving those special characteristics. They have to be proved scientifically. I don’t think those are issues that would come in the subject of this Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabahenda.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yes, we may not stop our products that are produced from a specific geographical area from being sold in other areas. Let me take the example of what I see in Fort Portal where you enter a shop or teh markate and you have three types of cow ghee, but the shopkeeper will tell you there is Kyaka, Ntoroko and Rwamwanja types of ghee with the Kyaka Ghee being sold most expensively of the three.

So, I am wondering whether the business people are not going to use this to cheat the buyers, for example, by labelling some ghee as Kyaka when actually it does not come from Kyaka. That ghee could all be coming from Ntoroko.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. For example, we have matooke, which is predominantly grown in Buganda –(Interjections)– okay, and in Western Uganda. But you realise that people in other sub-regions have also started growing it. In Gulu, for example, there are people who grow matooke and it is doing very well. In the circumstances, if we are to register, how do we register it? Do we register it as Gulu or Buganda or what?

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification from the honourable colleague. Hon. Kabahenda raised the example of ghee and now hon. Betty Aol has brought the one of matooke. But in my initial clarification, I asked which agency would now take the lead in implementing this law. Yes, we have been told by the honourable minister that it will be the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. But under the circumstances, that agency is not empowered to do that. We do not see its capability to investigate all the parameters hereby prescribed, for example, the clarification that the chair gave.

I have been involved in the Apiary Industry and I will tell you that honey has a unique character. The Chinese, for example, manufacture honey in the laboratory, and actually most of the honey on the market in the Western world is chemically manufactured in the laboratories in China. Whereas in Uganda, we have honey naturally formed by the bees. And to add to that the Apiary Industry in Uganda has not classified this honey. For example, honey that is collected from bee hives that are in tea farms has a taste of tea when you eat it. Why? Because during pollination it is the tea plants into which the bees hang. If the hives are around an orchard, that honey will have a tinge of an orange. But the biggest challenge we have in Uganda today, is that we don’t have the expertise - with the exception of the use of the human nose and the tongue - to classify this honey by separating, for example, the flavours of honey with, for example, tea from that with coffee flavour.

So, Madam Speaker, if I may go back to my original question; the framers of this law had extreme good faith, but the mechanism of implementation is going to create more room for fraud and manipulation of products on the local market. In the circumstances, I would like to ask the honourable minister and the chairperson on how they intend to manage the classification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please clarify. Okay, information from hon. Wilfred Niwagaba.

MR NIWAGABA: I think I am friendly to you today, Mr Minister. (Laughter) Thank you, honourable minister. Okay, colleagues, I think we may have to realise that we are making a law that will actually help our industries to grow and develop. So, because it is a Geographical Indications Bill, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau will not implement it in isolation of other existing bodies, particularly bodies to do with scientific examination.

Secondly, the Bill has a lengthy procedure on how one applies to be registered and how one may be denied the right to register. It also has a lengthy procedure on how the public may come in to oppose one’s registration on specific grounds. One of these grounds may include a mischief – your intention to reduce a geographical indication will be misleading to the public or if it fell short of a scientific examination.

So, as we proceed to consider the Bill clause by clause, we will appreciate the fact that there are necessary mechanisms within the Bill to protect, not only those applying for the registration, but also the consumers of the final product.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, please conclude because I think Members will understand this Bill better when we are at Committee Stage. 

MR RUHINDI: I thank you so much, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba for that explanation because certainly the Uganda Registration Services Bureau has the principal function of registration although it plays the other main role of coordination with other stakeholders in the field to ensure that the law is implemented.

Finally, before the chairperson of the committee comes in to address the other issues, let me say something about the complaint on the Rwenzori/Tororo issue – you know, for the time being, unless the Rwenzori Company does something from the Rwenzori area, what is registered now with the Uganda Registrations Services Bureau is a trademark and they are entitled to that. The same applies to Tororo Cement Ltd. So, if they want to transform that into a geographical indication, they may have to prove the place of origin, for example, that actually Rwenzori originates from the Rwenzori area and that they are registering it as such. Otherwise, that is not the position now because it is registered as a trademark. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, do you have any responses before we go to the second reading?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the gist of the questions – first of all, I would like to thank Members for the interest they have shown in this Bill and the quick grasp of the issues in the Bill that seem to be quite intricate.

I think the thrust of the questions that were put forward revolved around the difference between a trademark and the geographical indication, which the Attorney-General has very handled well. As for which institution to implement the law, the minister has also ably handled that. 

Hon. Kyooma asked how we will be sure that, for example, the sorghum from Ibanda has certain characteristics. We have explained that this will be subject to research at the institutional level. There are institutions that have the capacity to do this kind of work. That also applies to malakwang, which one colleague also alluded to.

Hon. Kenneth Lubogo asked whether this law will address issues of fake products, that are on the market. Yes, but in a limited way, because a person who is not satisfied that, for example, a product imported carries a genuine geographical indication, may apply, and actually apply for seizure of the goods on arrival in the country. 

Hon. Mariam Nalubega talked about the gorillas in Rwanda and Uganda. I don’t think this law applies to those animals because I think they are not products in the definition of the Bill. 

I, therefore, want to thank Members for the quick and broad understanding of the Bill, but the bulk of the questions will be understood better as we consider the specific clauses in the next stage of the Bill. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE GEOGRAPHICALAL INDICATIONS BILL, 2008

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend clause 2 by deleting the entire provision.

The justification: The provision is redundant as the law will apply to every person. The word “person” is defined in the Interpretation Act Cap. 3, which covers all kinds of description of persons included in the provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be deleted as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 2, deleted.)

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 3 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes to amend clause 5 by replacing the word “quantity” in the last sentence of the provision with “quality”. 
The justification”: To correct a typographical error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to insert a clause after clause 5; “Exclusion from protection”. Clause 6(1): The following shall not be protected as geographical indications:
 
    a) An indication that does not comply with the definition of geographical indications under section 2;

    b) An indication that is contrary to public order or morality;

    c) An indication, which is contrary to public interest in particular national security, nutrition, health, environment conservation or the development of other vital sectors of the national economy;

    d) An indication which ceases to be protected within its country of origin; 
    e) An indication which misleads or deceives the public as to the characteristic nature, quality, place of origin, process of production of the product or its use;

    f) A name which conflicts with a name of a plant variety or an animal breed and as a result is likely to mislead the consumer as the origin of the product;


    g) A name, where in the light of a trademark’s reputation and renown; and the length of the time it has been used, registration is liable to mislead the consumer about the true identity of the product; and

    h) A name that has become generic.

(2) For the purposes of sub-section 6(1)(h) -

i) A name that has become generic means the name of a product which although it rates the place of origin where the product was originally produced or marketed has become the common name of the product in Uganda; 

(3) A name wholly or partially homonymous with that of a name already registered under this Act may be registered with due regard for awkward traditional usage and the actual risk of confusion; 

(4) For purposes of this section, a homonymous name means a name for a different region or locality that is spelt or pronounced in the same way as a name already registered as a geographical location;

(5) (a) Notwithstanding sub-section 3, a homonymous name which misleads the consumer into believing that products come from another region or  locality shall not be registered even if the name is accurate as far as the actual place of origin of the product is concerned. 

(b) The use of a registered homonymous name shall be subject to there being a sufficient distinction in practice between the homo name registered subsequently as the name already on the register, having regard to the need to treat the producers concerned in an equitable manner and not to mislead the consumer. 

The justification: To provide for names that should not be registered as geographical indications; and to prohibit registering geographical indications which are already well-known trademarks; marks that are renown and long used so that registered geographical indication would mislead the consumer; and to prohibit registering geographical indications which have become generic; also, to permit registration of homonymous names, that is, different names but having the same spelling or pronunciation, for example, in Uganda we have different places, but whose names are spelt or pronounced similarly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause 6 be introduced as proposed by the chairperson and do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.


THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clauses 5, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 6 by substituting the provision with the following: 

6) Registrar of Geographical Indications and other officers - 

    i. The Registrar-General appointed under the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act Cap. 210 shall be the Registrar of Geographical Indications for purposes of the Act.

    ii. The board of directors of Uganda Registration Services Bureau shall appoint such a number of officers as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of the duties and functions of the Registrar of Geographical Indications under this Act.


    iii. The officers appointed under sub-section 2 shall perform such duties and functions and exercise such powers as the Registrar may lawfully perform or exercise under this Act.

    iv. The registrar may delegate to any officer appointed under sub-section (2) the exercise of any performance of any of the functions or duties conferred to him or her under this Act.

    v. The registrar shall have a seal which he or she shall affix to all certificates issued by him or her and all such other documents that he may deem fit still under this Act.


    vi. When the seal is lawfully affixed to a document and the same is duly authenticated by the registrar, it shall be judiciary and officially noticed. 

The justification: To harmonise the positions of the Act with the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Act, since the Act shall be implemented by the Uganda Registration Services Bureau. 

Secondly, it is to provide for appointment of other officers other than the registrar of geographical indications.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the chairperson -(Interjections)- for the record? Yes, hon. Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Chair. During the second reading, I proposed that I was going to come up with fundamental amendments to clause 6, but I am very pleased with the committee’s amendments. The original drafting of the law was vague because they were talking of, “In the absence of a seal, then they can use a stamp that the minister may design; and that the minister may direct any other person other than the registrar…” I am pleased with the committee’s amendment.

MR KABAJO: What I want to find out from the chairperson is, are we discarding the provisions in the original Bill and replacing them with these ones? [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay, that is the clarification I was seeking. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes amending clause 8 by inserting new sub-clauses (iii) to (v), after sub-clause 8(2), which in effect will be the following: 

(iii) “The following shall have the right to file an application to register a geographic indication - 

 (a) A legal entity carrying on an activity as producers, farmers, artisans or whatever the case may be in the geographic area specified in the application with respect to the product specified in the application; 

(b) A group of representatives of producers; or 

(c) In respect to an indication with national character, any competent authority as provided for under the regulations. 

(iv)An application for registration of a geographic indication may be filed by an agent.

(v) Where an applicant’s ordinary residence or principal place of business is outside Uganda, he shall be represented by an agent.

The justification: To provide for who can apply for registration or a geographical indication and to enable non-residents to apply for registration or a geographical indication through an agent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that additional clauses be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

MR OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am seeking clarification under part (c) which reads: “any competent authority as provided for under the regulations.” If he could help me understand how a competent authority can be defined so that we are at par.

MR KABAJO: Mine is also seeking a clarification; in part (iii)(a) of the amendments, it states: “A legal entity carrying on an activity as producers, farmers etc.” I would like the chairman to clarify whether producers include manufacturers. Am I right to say that a manufacturer is included in the word “producers” or is there need for us to add the word “manufacturers” as a separate entity?

MR TASHOBYA: I would like to respond to the second question about manufacturers. We are talking about products with special characteristics to a geographical indication - to a locality. In that case, I do not think it includes manufacturers.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we had something like “Bududa Orange” processed and bottled in Bududa?

MR NIWAGABA: Additionally, Madam Chair, I believe the “producer” referred to herein includes a manufacturer – one who processes that particular product.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Provided it is from that locality? 

MR NIWAGABA: Exactly. So I think the word “producer” is enough.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I would like to seek clarification on the statements “Legal entity” and “they are named”. What other “whatever case may be” do you envisage? Is that in relation to the farmers, artisans, producers? Can’t we just be clearer so that we do not sound generous by saying “whatever the case”; that sounds very lazy and hanging. What do you want to cure by putting “whatever the case may be”? On page 8 it states: “The following shall have the right to file an application to register a geographical indication - (a) A legal entity carrying on an activity as producers, farmers, artisans or whatever the case may be.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing you are a malwa group and you are making your ajono? (Interjection) No, can’t I make my malwa – do I have to be a legal entity to make malwa? (Interjections) Yes, malwalogy. (Laughter)

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I think the intention of this particular amendment – we envisaged a situation where, let us say, Irish potato growers in a particular region like Kabale come together as a group. But how do they apply for registration of a geographical indication as a mere group. That is why we are insisting that at least farmers can form themselves into a legal entity by registration, maybe of a company or something of that nature.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But when you say “whatever the case may be” you did not intend to close out those who are not legally registered. So, if I am making malwa in Kapchorwa, I should be allowed to indicate that this is Kapchorwa malwa even if I do not have a company – me and my drinking mates.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, my only fear was that as we are making the law, we should be able to identify, exclusively, the applicants; we should have those who would be the applicants. If we are thinking of groups or an association, we should be able to state them. But if it is convenient for us now to determine “whatever the case may be” so be it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not want to lock out the potato growers.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, I am still following up on the honourable member’s argument; why not say “producers, farmers, artisans, groups or associations” because the people we are envisaging can form themselves into groups or associations. I also agree with you that when we state “whatever the case may be” in the law, it sounds a little bit amorphous. Thank you. 

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I think “Whatever the case may be” opens it up to innovations. As Kasule, I may think of a stone that I can craft and name “Matugga something” without organising a group or association. So, I think in this one, let us innovate in as many forms as possible to allow us to get the benefit of the geographical indication.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, then why do we make the law if we are saying “whatever the case may be”? Then why don’t we just say, “the following shall have a right to file an application to register: (a) whatever the case may be.”

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I think my learned friend is reading the words “whatever the case may be” restrictively. It is “whatever the case may be” in the geographical area specified in the application. So, that would mean that either the producers or the farmers or all those other legal entities in that geographical area, can file an application for a geographical indication.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the committee is labouring for nothing. What they seek to define are activities - producers, farmers, whatever the case may be. In my view and to address the concerns of my brother, hon. Oboth Oboth, if we avoided stating the activities - just delete from “as producers” all the way to “whatever the case may be” and just leave it as an activity in the geographical area. So, whatever is really going on in a geographical area is captured by the word “activity” after all, production, farming or what is done by artisans and “whatever the case may be” are all activities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are not making the law for the lawyers or for the people in Kampala. I don’t know whether you are aware that in the 2011 elections, certain parts of Karamoja could not hold elections because there was no justice of the peace to administer oaths in that part of the country. This happened  a few years ago. So, if you want everybody to have a legal entity, I think - you know, we are making the law for the people of Uganda. Let us not be restrictive; this is real. Some places could not hold elections; no magistrate, no justice of the peace.

MR ODOI: Madam Chair, West Budama South has now been convinced by your explanation. This is what I can read from his reaction, but I was explaining further. The law as it is presented here is meant to be permissive and to capture every interest, the only restriction being that they come from a particular geographical location. So, once a geographical indication is defined, we don’t have to define any other interest. They should all have a right to register a geographical indication, but he has indicated to me that he is convinced and he has dropped his argument. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Well for the sake of making progress and not embarrassing my brother from West Budama North that I had not, I concede and we can proceed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Thank you, honourable members. I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes amendments to clause 9 by substituting the provision in sub-clause (1) with the following: “(1) The registrar shall cause the examination of the application referred to in section 8 in accordance with regulations made under this Act and where the conditions for registration referred to in section 8 are made, shall accept the application.”

The justification: To provide for further procedure before registration of a geographical indication.

(b) Sub-clause (3) is proposed to be amended by substituting the provision with the following: “(3) Where an application for registration of a geographical indication has been accepted absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, the registrar shall, as soon as possible, cause the application to be published in the prescribed manner for 60 days and the publication shall set forth all conditions and limitations subject to which the application is accepted.”

The justification: To provide for publication of the application before registration.

(c) Clause 9 is further amended by inserting new sub-clauses 4 - 6 as follows: 

“(4) Where an application for registration has been accepted and either, (a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition has expired or the application has been opposed and the opposed application has been decided in favour of the applicant, the registrar shall enter the geographical indication on the registrar and issue a certificate of registration. 

(5) Where an application for registration has been rejected, the registrar shall give reason for rejection. 

(6) A person whose application has been rejected shall have a right to re-apply.”

The justification: To oblige the registrar to give reasons for rejecting an application to register a geographical indication and secondly, to provide for a right to re-apply.

Madam Chair, the committee further proposes insertion of a new sub-clause: “Objection to registration of a geographical indication”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that also under clause 9?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR TASHOBYA: The Bill is amended by introducing a new provision on objection to registration of a geographical indication to be inserted after clause 9.

THE CHAIRPERSON: A new clause after Clause 9? So, why don’t we deal with clause 9 first and then the insertion? 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPRSON: I put the question that a new Clause be introduced.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment by introducing a new provision on objection to registration of a geographical indication to be inserted after clause 9 as follows:

“(1) 	A person may, within the prescribed time from the date of publication of an application, give notice of objection to the registration of a geographical indication to the registrar. 

(2) 	The notice shall be given in writing in the prescribed manner and shall include a statement on the grounds of objection. 

(3) 	The registrar shall send a copy of the notice to the applicant and within the prescribed time after receipt, the applicant shall send to the registrar in the prescribed manner, a counter statement of the grounds on which he or she relies for his or her application, and if he or she does not do so, he or she shall be taken to have abandoned his or her application. 

(4) 	If the applicant sends a counter statement, the registrar shall furnish a copy of the counter statement to the person giving the statement of objection and shall, after hearing the parties, if so required and considering the evidence, decide whether and subject to what conditions or limitations registration is to be permitted. 

(5) 	A person aggrieved by the decision of the registrar may appeal to court.

(6)	An appeal under this section shall be made in a prescribed form.

(7) 	On appeal, the court shall, if required, hear the parties and shall make an order determining whether and subject to what conditions or limitations registration is to be permitted. 

(8) 	On hearing of an appeal under this section, any party may either in the manner prescribed or by special leave of court bring forward further material for the consolidation of the court.

(9) 	On appeal under this section, no further grounds of objection to the registration of a geographical indication shall be allowed to be taken by the person objecting or the registrar other than those stated by the person objecting except by leave of court. 

(10) 	Where any further grounds of objection are taken, the applicant shall be entitled to withdraw his or her application without payment of the costs to the person objecting on giving notice as prescribed.  

(11) 	On hearing the appeal, the court may permit the geographical indication proposed to be registered and modified in a manner not substantially affecting the identity, and the modified geographical indication shall be published in the prescribed form before being registered. 

(12) 	Where a person who gives notice of an objection or an applicant who sends a counter statement after receipt of a copy of a notice or an appellant does not reside or carry on business in the East African Community, the court or the registrar may require him or her to give security for costs or for proceedings before the court or the registrar relating to the objection or to the appeal as the case may be and if the security is not given, may treat the objection or application or the  appeal as abandoned. 

The justification for this proposed amendment: To provide for procedure for objection to registration of a geographical indication. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I just need to get some more clarification. Here in the new clause which the chairperson is proposing to be inserted, he is talking about objection to registration of a geographical indication. In the previous clause which we have just approved, under sub-clause (4), there is where it states, “Where an application for registration has been accepted and either the application has not been opposed and the time for notice of opposition has expired or the application has been opposed and the opposed application has been decided in favour of the applicant… ” 

Why I am seeking clarification is that in the previous clause, he is talking about an application being opposed, but here, he is giving the procedure for objection to registration of a geographical indication. 

So, I am imagining that we should be using the same language. If in clause 9, we were using the language of “an application has been opposed” why is it that we are using “objection to registration of a geographical indication” in this new clause to be inserted? Why don’t we have similar language? Why are we talking about “opposition to an application” in the other one and here “a procedure for objection?” That is the clarification I am seeking. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I don’t know about this law very well, and so, I don’t know what we are trying to cure. But Madam Chair, why is the chairperson saying, “Prescribed time?” Why don’t we give a definite time? 

Secondly, you are saying, “on receipt,” how do you know what is to be received? I might get something and keep quiet. There must be a mechanism maybe through a registered post so that we assume that within 45 days you have received it because it was a registered post and you have not responded, and we need to deal with that. 

Then the other one is the court; there is a local council court; there is a court martial; there is a grade III court; which court are you talking about? Which court do I go to? We need to specify the court we are going to. [HON.MEMBER: “High Court.”] Then we should state “”High Court”.
 
MR NIWAGABA: Let me just give you some information. Court is defined under clause 3. 

Secondly, you are talking of prescribed time. This particular law envisages many regulations to be made by the minister and I believe we amended that clause that registration will be laid before Parliament. So, we do not have to prescribe the time because there are very many incidences where time is required in different aspects. 

MR TASHOBYA:  I think we shall concede to what the honourable member is proposing. We can take “opposition.”

MR OBOTH: I am wondering why the chairperson is finding it very comfortable to concede to a proposal which I thought is self-defeating. “Opposition” and “objection”, how would that be different? How you have used it in this latter clause is so proper and fitting so that it is retained in the same way.
 
MR ODOI: Madam Chair, I just want to state that an “opposition” as law is actually called an objection; the legal word for opposing a process is “objecting,” and, therefore, we should maintain “objection.” Opposition only applies in this House. (Laughter) 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, first of all, it has always been our practice to deal with the interpretation clause at the end, after considering most parts of the Bill, but today it seems there was an oversight and passed the interpretation clause before we completed the Bill.
 
That said, the issue of the prescribed time on page 11(1), “A person may within the prescribed time …” would it be injurious if we specified the time and said, “within 30 days from the date of publication of an application give notice of objection” and then in (3), we go by the same timeframe, “The registrar shall send a copy of the notice to the applicant and within 30 days after receipt, the applicant shall send the registrar…” so that we give definite timeframes instead of just leaving it open. Madam Chair, I think it would be smarter to proceed that way. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I find the proposal quite accurate and I believe that the chairman of the committee would have no problem stating 30 days as proposed by both the Leader of the Opposition and hon. Epetait. I think it would be proper that it is stipulated.
 
MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, my learned friend. You only rose a little faster -(Laughter)- but I was about to concede for the 30 days as proposed.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I also have another issue. Given this, there is no appeal apart from one court. When you go to the Court of Appeal, it looks like their decision is final. Now, supposing the judge makes a mistake -(Interjections)- Why? No, no, no! They are saying, “may appeal to court” and you have already defined court as “High Court”. What I would propose -(Interjections)- no; on appeals you are right. Where do you go? I do not see it here because you have already defined the court which has not been our procedure. Madam Chair, I want the chairperson to guide me; where do I go after the High Court? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, I think the only area where one is not allowed to go is in consent judgement. You cannot appeal against a consent judgement anywhere. Also, I think in the election petitions, there are some regulations on petitions. The rest are open. 

MR RUHINDI: The right of appeal is a right to an aggrieved party, except where it is specifically provided that an appeal will stop here. For instance, our electoral petitions stop in the Court of Appeal, but presidential petitions can only be filed in the Supreme Court, and that is the law. But you may wish to look at Article 42 of our Constitution; it gives flexibility and this is a right to a just and fair treatment in administrative decisions and the right to access any competent court at any level is embedded therein.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable Chair, are you inserting a new clause or are you not?

MR TASHOBYA: No.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us proceed to the next one then.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill - we finished clause 9. There was going to be a new clause 10, which he has abandoned; he says he has abandoned the issue. 

MR TASHOBYA: No, Madam Chair, what we have just passed would be a consequential amendment on adoption, but we also have a proposed amendment to clause 10 in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The new one is abandoned. Have you inserted the new one?

MR TASHOBYA: No, it is not abandoned, Madam Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 10 by substituting the provision with the following: 

10) “An applicant whose application is rejected by the registrar my appeal through the courts in the manner prescribed by the regulations under this Act.” 

The justification: To do away with cross-referencing the Trademarks Act. Cross-referencing the provisions makes the law clumsy and not user-friendly since other laws have to be consulted and applied with modifications having to be made in the process.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 12, “Procedure for invalidation of a geographical indication.” 

Clause 12 of the Bill is amended by substituting sub-clause (2) with the following: “The procedure for invalidation of a geographical indication shall be in a manner prescribed by the regulations under this Act.”

The justification: Cross-referencing the provisions makes the statute clumsy and not user-friendly since other laws have to be consulted, just as in the previous proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 13

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 13 by redrafting clause 13(1) to read, “Any interested party may institute proceedings in court to prevent the unlawful use of a geographical indication.” 

The justification: To provide for the right to institute proceedings. The right to institute proceedings should not be limited to the owner of a geographical indication.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Clause 17; “Prohibition of registration of an exclusive geographical name”. 

The committee proposes that the head note of clause 17 is amended by adding the words “as a trademark” after the word “name.” 

The justification: For clarity. The provision is prohibiting the Registrar of Trademarks from registering trademarks that exclusively consist of a geographical name unless it is distinctive.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed by the chairperson

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, “civil action; supposing somebody has done a criminal act, why are we looking at only civil action? We should also put criminality here. Somebody maybe gets the geographical trademarks of a certain person and uses them on fake goods. It is no longer civil. This is a criminal act. They may be inferior or poor goods. So, why are we talking of only civil action? I would propose, Madam Chair, that we should state civil action and criminal action.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I think he is reading ahead because that one is provided for under the subsequent clause 21, which has matters to do with criminal aspects in respect of offences under this particular Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair we propose to introduce a new sub-clause, prohibiting the importation and exportation of goods, infringing a geographical indication after clause 22, which would be clause 23: “Prohibition of importation and exportation of goods infringing geographical indication” –

    (1) A person shall not import into Uganda or export from Uganda any goods to which has been applied a false geographical indication or any geographical indication contrary to this Act.

    (2) A person who contravenes this section commits an offense and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency units or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both, and the goods to which the offence relates may be delivered or forfeited by order of the court under section 22(3).”

The justification: To prohibit importation and exportation of goods that infringe upon a geographic indication.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable chair, are you adding a new clause 23 so that 23 now becomes 24? 

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chair, if you get Shs 48 X 20,000, that is Shs 960,000; and if somebody is charged with a criminal act of $2 million, he will pay. For us to be able to deal with this offense, we must make the punishment harsh. I suggest here that he will be liable to a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points because that is about Shs 20 million. That is even so small. For commercial people who are trading in importation and exportation, it is very lean; maybe about 10,000 currency points -(Interjection)- yes, because you want to protect people. For example, if you are caught evading taxes, they tripple it so that you fear to do it next time. So, I suggest we put 10,000 currency points or imprisonment of not less than 15 years. 

MR KYEWALABYE: Madam Chair, the issue I wanted to comment on - as the ICT Committee, when we were working on the Communications Bill, we were informed by the legal people from Parliament that the currency points are related to the number of years of imprisonment. So, if you put 10,000 currency points, you cannot have two years imprisonment. Even the 15 years you are proposing looked as if it is just off-cuff. I think the committee had a good reason for proposing two years. 

Personally, I think that if hon. Nandala-Mafabi feels that 48 currency points are inadequate, then we should make the imprisonment mandatory so that even though the currency points are few, the punishment is more in the imprisonment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what is the average fine for infringing on a trademark? 

DR EPETAIT: Surely, if we are attempting to cure any mischief, we should make certain projects detestable. We should make them repugnant to those who have the appetite to go for such projects. Really, an offence which results into harming individuals – if somebody makes a counterfeit because it is specified here in (c)(i) – “where an offence has resulted into harm of an individual” and you are just talking about two years or 48 currency points, the fellow will cause that harm, pay the 48 currency points and move on with his head high. I think honourable minister, we need to revise this upwards. It may not be 20,000 currency points. It could be, maybe for a first-time offender, we can have 2,000 currency points. For a repeat offender, 5,000 currency points and then for the jail term; it should not be two years because some of those products can actually result into death. How can somebody cause death and then he is in jail for only two years? I think we need to review this and tighten it up. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am flexible to any proposal to make the fine deterrent. But I want to remind colleagues that as much as you move with your Constitutions and Rules of Procedure, when we are making these enactments, move with some other basic legislation because in 2008, we passed a law here, the Law Revision (Fines and Other Financial Amounts in Criminal Matters) Act, and this is a guiding law when you are prescribing fines and penalties. 

Without prejudice to any increase that may be proposed, you should also note that there is the other leg, and they are all options. If I am a magistrate or judge and I see that this fine is ridiculous, I will put you in prison because it is also provided for. We can even do both. So, what is the problem, but I am flexible to any reasonable amount of increase in the fine.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, before Members come up with some of the values, I recall when we were making the Auditor-General’s Act, we put some of the issues mandatory that if we get an auditor colluding in fraud, he will be imprisoned for 12 years. We put the jail term at 12 years and removed currency points because with currency points, he could have stolen more before and could pay.

So, in this case, this is between death and life. People are bringing in wrong – I think you have not been culprits. You buy a cell, go and put in your torch and immediately, it is gone. It can even explode in your house.

I want to propose that for us to avoid this problem, we must make this law really stringent and make sure that whoever does it knows that either he will go to prison or will pay big money. So, I want to propose before my colleague comes that if we made it 5,000 currency points, that is Shs 10,000,000. That could be for a first-time offender. Supposing you got the first time offender for the first time, but he has been doing it. I think we should put 10,000 currency points with imprisonment of between two years and 20 years so that if he does it, he knows he will go with all and he will not try because we must stop this monster. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. Whereas I agree with the proposal from the Leader of the Opposition as guided by the Attorney-General, we have some precedent and I believe that in the recent legislation on oil, we had several proposals for fines and penalties. Also, we have to get to know that it is not a lecture but there is no direct evidence or proof that the more punitive the punishment, the lesser the commission of the crime. But if we want to send a message, we should be able to be flexible and raise it higher, but not into the region of 5,000 because there is an option of both. That is why some of us have alternative names, “Oboth” -(Laughter)- magistrates would like to have the opportunity to exercise their discretion. 

So, whereas hon. Nandala-Mafabi had proposed 5,000, I was proposing about 1,000. That would be about Shs 20 million and then the other one is five years. In any case, this is saying “… on conviction to a fine not exceeding…” just providing the maximum, but it can be less than that. It can be Shs 10,000. 

So, even the “Imprisonment not exceeding two years” that is the maximum in any case –(Interjections)- yes, 1,000 currency points because we also have to protect and also be attractive to investors. They come and –[HON. MEMBERS: “They are smugglers.”]- no, no; get me right; those who are coming to trade with Uganda would need protection and protection here is against the criminals who would infringe against their geographical indication rights and I think five years or Shs 20 million for a businessman is more than even going to the names and the reputation of the business. So, that is my modest proposal, but it is open to debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, you know that the goods we are dealing with are not really homogenous. We could be dealing with someone who is a Karimojong selling fake beads to make a living, but not harming anybody; then we are probably dealing with somebody who is contaminating Bududa juice. I think we should not put it too stiff. You will catch an ordinary person like hon. Taaka’s people. I do not know whether she agrees that they smuggle at the border.

MS TAAKA: No. [HON. MEMBER: “They do.”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: But they are – you know – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Not that they are talking of import and exports.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are also importing at Busia. (Laughter)

MS TAAKA: Cross-border trade.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Cross-border trade.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Chair, I think that it is time for us to propose and I am saying, “not exceeding five years” and then somebody also proposes the currency points, and then we conclude this.
 
MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much. I suppose that considering the issues that have been raised and what Members are proposing, a compromise position of “a term not exceeding five years and currency points not exceeding 1,000.” I think that will be a reasonable compromise. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: 1,000 is how much in shillings?

MR TASHOBYA: Shs 20 million. Not exceeding - 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, considering the gravity of the problem, we are now unanimous that we review these penalties. For “(a) For commercial use.” You know, Madam Chair, we really want to give a stronger justification. These people who come labelling products as originating from say Germany and yet they are from possibly India or Katwe are responsible for even the over congestion we have in hospitals. 

People are dying because they are consuming junk to the extent that I wanted to propose that for (a), that for commercial, a fine not exceeding 2,000 currency points - these are commercial people. And then for (b), the repeated offenders, it should be not less than 5,000 currency points; and for the imprisonment term in (c), not exceeding 10 years. The judges will use their discretion to determine, but we should set a limit that makes those with such tendencies to think twice before they do it. 

Really, this is all intended to improve on the kind or standard of life we have in Uganda today. Why should somebody be interested in a consumer’s money more than the consumer’s welfare? So, I think that let us go by that. The judges in court will determine the gravity of the problem and fine them accordingly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General. 

MR RUHINDI: I feel, given the nature of the subject matter we are discussing and the level of participation in the activities that we have described in this Bill, I will go with the proposal by the chairperson; not exceeding currency points equivalent to Shs 20 million; and punishment or imprisonment not exceeding five years, or both.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay are you still – you still want 10 years?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My worry is that why is the minister trying to defend offenders? (Laughter) Yes, because we are saying “not exceeding...” what hon. Epetait has said “...2,000 currency points”.

MR RUHINDI: Order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Point of Order.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not see why the Leader of the Opposition should impute that I am interested in – first of all, coming with this Bill alone is good indication that I want to fight these malpractices. I do not really see why he would begin throwing such innuendos. Is he in order? (Laughter) 

DR EPETAIT: To annoy you.

MR RUHINDI: Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the minister as far back as 2008 indicated his desire to curb illegal practices and, therefore, he cannot be the same person promoting corruption. So, you are out of order. (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Madam Chair. What we are trying to do is to make sure that we deal with this bad practice, and for somebody who will know the law and say that, “If I am caught, these are the penalties,” he will think twice before he engages in these practices. The purpose - we are saying, “between” – if it is a Karimojong who, for example, has been caught with 10 kilogrammes of beans, what is the value of the beans? That is maybe Shs 30,000. So, how can they go for 5,000 because you do not have it? But if somebody is involved in a trade of $1 million which is Shs 2.5 billion, and you give him a penalty of Shs 5 million, that is peanuts because by that profit of 10 percent, it is Shs 250 million.

Madam Chair, this business of - 

MR NIWAGABA: Can I give information? Actually, to support your position on stiffer penalties, this particular clause that we are talking about deals specifically with importation and exportation, and so, I would not see a local person like a Mukiga peasant from Kabale dealing in exportation. We are talking of big businesses, and so, I believe that we should give them heavier punishments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, my Karimojong are not part of this?

HON. MEMBERS: No.  
 
MS NALUBEGA: I want to support the law because I was giving my colleague an example that some old woman purchased a counterfeit Chinese phone and it burst her ear. So, how are we going to deal with that because that is really harmful? So, I think that the punishment should not be a minimum one, but a maximum one to deter such activities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you proposing “not exceeding 2,000 currency points and not exceeding 10 years” They can find their level somewhere depending on the gravity? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the new clause be amended as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24 do stand part of the Bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question –

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I am sorry that although I am a member of the committee, I think we forgot about clause 25 by oversight. 

Most of the provisions provide for regulation and so it would not be discretionary for the minister to make regulations. Actually, the minister should make the regulations prescribed under. 

Secondly, we should also provide for the minister laying on Table the regulations so made for us to determine their compliance with the law we have made. (Interjection)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should finish the new clause 25 because that was the old 24 on fees. 

I put the question that clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On the new 26; hon. Niwagaba.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, I propose that we make it mandatory for the minister to make regulations; we also provide a timeframe within which they should be made and laid on Table. Why I am saying so - and I would actually be also moving that we recommit clause 1 - we have passed very many laws giving the minister powers to either make statutory instruments for commencement and even statutory instruments to provide regulations and they are not being made.

MR TASHOBYA: With due respect to my friend and learned brother, hon. Niwagaba, has been extremely instrumental and helpful in considering this Bill and finally coming out with the final report to which he appended his signature. He definitely had sufficient time – we have had it for three years. Madam Chair, we have had enough time to consider this Bill in detail. My friend has had extensive input in reaching this Bill. 

Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Niwagaba, at this point, to come up with substantive amendments when he had all the time - all the three years, to propose those amendments? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, whereas the intentions may be good, if I now allow a minority report by smuggling, I think I would not be fair to this House. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, following that argument, I beg to move that we make an amendment under clause 25 to read as follows: 

In 25(1), we delete “may” and substitute it with “shall”. So, “The minister shall make regulations…” And then we insert immediately after (1) that “The minister shall lay such regulations on Table within 30 days – the 30 days are adequate - of coming into force of this Act.” -(Interjection)- you don’t want to work; we are just giving you timeframes. I think we should make it mandatory for the minister to lay regulations because many times, we make legislation here and they are not enforced. What happens after we have passed the law? Parliament is not informed. We want to help the minister to fight these counterfeits and we are really glad that you are moving in the right direction. That is why we want to see that we move together in this regard. I beg to propose.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the proposals are not bad. But time immemorial, in this House, we have made legislations and I don’t know where we have actually legislated to the extent that the minister “shall” make regulations. Not only in the drafting style, but it should be in the discretion of the Executive because they are the authors of these laws. And, it is actually up to them to see whether it is appropriate to make regulations or not. 

There is this myth, “Parliament makes laws”. I think the right expression should be that “Parliament is the ultimate authority in the legislative process”. Not all legislation comes from the Executive. Let’s bear that in mind. This law-making process is actually – we borrowed this from the United Kingdom. 
 
DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, aware that for a long time now, we have grappled with the problem of counterfeits arising from overzealous traders – business persons; and considering that such illicit trading has caused a lot of suffering to the people of Uganda, including death; and the minister, fully aware that such counterfeits are a problem, thus prompting him to come up with this Bill, which we have taken in good faith and helped him to improve, is he now in order to state that the minister may make regulations or not and yet we really think that by coming up with such regulations, we would have helped to operationalise and enforce this very law. Is he in order to downplay the effort that we are making by saying that the minister may decide not to make regulations. Is he in order to downplay our efforts?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I believe that the minister appreciates the gravity of the issues, but I think his point was what precedents have we been setting on the issue of regulations. Have we been saying the minister “shall” make or “may” do this? That is what he is asking.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, there is a minister who was supposed to discipline board members. But the law says the minister “may” discipline, and the board members were making mistakes. He said the law said “may” and yet these people were stealing. So, if the law had said the minister “shall”, they would have been disciplined.

We are not forcing you to make regulations if they are not necessary, but if they are necessary we are saying you shall do them. If you do not want to make them, let us give them to another body to handle. But here we are saying the minister “shall”, if it is necessary anyway.

Secondly, we are saying you should bring them to Parliament because regulations are part of the laws so they should be brought to Parliament. 

Madam Chair, if we have been saying “may”, we must now change the tone to “shall” such that it compels them to do the right thing; otherwise, they might go to sleep, as usual, and not work.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you summarised my concerns and I still stand by that position I put forward. (Interjection) I don’t have any problem with laying. Laying is laying. And by the way, I need to remind the House that I have constantly objected to this. 

Unless the gravity of the subject matter – like when we were passing the oil legislation – when you say, the minister makes regulations for the approval of the House; that is okay. But there are certain legislations where, for instance, if you subjected every statutory instrument to scrutiny by this House, you will certainly do nothing. We will reach an impasse. So, if it is a question of just laying – maybe if there is a Member who wishes to see whether that subsidiary legislation complies with the law, that is okay. But this expression, “may” is really a provision we have constantly used, because this Bill originates from the Executive. For instance, did you command the Executive to come with this Bill? 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, maybe we could say, “The minister may” but with a provision to lay on Table. He seems to be upset to be commanded, but let us say, “he may make regulations and then lay on Table for Parliament’s approval”.

MS AOL: Madam Chair, I think when a Bill is brought in this House, it is for improvement; and if Members of Parliament are proposing improvement, why should you get annoyed that it originates from the Cabinet, and it should just remain as the Cabinet has proposed.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, this House has made many laws, but what hurts some of us is to make laws that are not operationalised. A week ago, I asked the honourable Attorney-General why the Insolvency Bill, which we passed in 2011, has never come into force; simply because of two things; one, we made a mistake and allowed the operation of the law to come into force at the minister’s instinct of making a statutory instrument for its commencement. The students at LDC are still learning the old law yet we made the law that should be operationalised.

Two, the regulations are not yet in place, and yet when these ministers bring the Bills to the House, we believe everything has been prepared, not only the Bill itself, but also the regulations. So, I feel we should make laws that come into force and are applied.. These laws we are making are of a commercial nature; why should we frustrate commerce because we do not want to complete the next stage.

So, honourable Attorney-General, concede in good faith and then we move.

MR RUHINDI: I am on the Floor –(Interjections)– I will take information later. Madam Chairperson, by the way, I am not annoyed, I am amazed. Let me tell you; there are so many oversight organs of this House to ensure that institutions comply with the requirements of the law.

Ministry of Justice, for instance, reports to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee of this House. When we report, members of the committee ask us what we have done. That is better enforcement than commands of the law which are not even justiciable.

The Bill is a ministry’s Bill; tell me, even if you put “shall”, one year, two years pass; you will still question that minister in a relevant committee of the House.
The only thing is that with this Bill, we have seen some areas where regulations are glaringly needed, but there are even others where there is no mention of where regulations are needed, but the minister would still be required by a statutory instrument for the better implementation of that Act. The minister will have to judge, whether the Bill, without any specific regulations require them; then you put “shall” and he does not see any that he may make.

So, I think the standard practice that we have is enough and it can be enforced through the existing institutions that we have in this Parliament.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I remember in the Seventh Parliament, when we were passing the Financial Institutions Bill, you were the one in the chair. Initially, they had brought this Bill without the regulations, and I recall that you directed that regulations are very important to us before we can move; and indeed you had to ask the Ministry of Finance to bring regulations.

I think we have been making the mistake of passing laws here without the attachment of the initial regulations because these people can do them or they can make them contrary to the law. 

I recall the few laws that I can talk about - even the PPDA, it had to come with regulations. There are laws which Government would be interested in; and there are laws which the Government makes for the public, and they will never act on them.

You have heard hon. Niwagaba talking of the Insolvency Bill, now an Act. You know about the Money Laundering Bill. The Government has been one of those frustrating efforts of the Money Laundering Bill. That is why at an appropriate time, I believe we should recommit clause 1 of this Bill we are working on, so that we fix the period that this law becomes operational - in a specified period.

Madam Chair, in that regard, since we do not have the regulations now, if we are going to allow the minister to go, who has become angry, and I have never seen him angry to that extent; we should say “Shall”. If he had brought them maybe on amendment - he may amend - but we have nothing and we need regulations immediately.

For example, clause 24 talks about such fees as may be prescribed by the minister by a statutory instrument. He may or he may not and we need things done. So, I would propose that word “shall” to be inserted and the date of laying should be in our law. Let this be the beginning. There is always a beginning point.

MR OBOTH: I have understood with difficulty and pain the reservations of the Attorney-General, but just further clarification, Attorney-General. May you be pleased to just share with us your experience? This being a law that is targeting commercial transactions, what is your experience in legislation that we could borrow from, whether there are some laws, including the PPDA Act - it has thick regulations – whether it would be possible to have a law of this nature without regulations and you want to regulate commercial transactions or you are protecting commerce or trade; and if there are no such laws in this country without regulations, and they are regulating commercial transactions, why would you fear or be amazed by a proposal to merely insert the word “shall” to replace “may”. We understand that it is a lot of work; but I thought that you were there to do this. But may you throw more light on this? –(Interruption)

MS OSSEGE: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I just feel that the minister does not want to be accountable to the House. I would really want the honourable minister  to take these proposals in good faith. Tomorrow it might not be you, but we are making this law for posterity. You might be a good man today, who will do your work on time. I might be lazy next time. So, we have to protect that. I do not know why it is hurting to feel like you are accountable to the House and it feels bad for the minister to kind of insinuate that Parliament should not do its work. We will not strip you of any coat or any good feeling, but we just want to do our work right, and we also want to help you to do yours the right way. Tomorrow, we will not be there. The people who will come next, what will they do? Honourable minister, please.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Chairperson, I have known hon. Ruhindi as a -please concede.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, for the sake of making progress on this matter. First, I was trying to preserve a precedent that has worked for many years. If you want to depart from this precedent, the authority is yours. I cannot take over your job. That is number one. 

Two, I will be more comfortable if this does not become – because, there may be cases where the sector minister may have to weigh whether there is need for regulations or not, but for every legislation that we make, that provision is always there; that the minister may make regulations for the better carrying into effect of this Act. 

Let us not set a precedent that we have to run through everything, but since we know, like hon. Oboth has said that for this legislation, we have noticed that there is a requirement for regulations, I, therefore, concede for this particular legislation –(Interjections)- yes! so that we do not create a precedent that runs through every legislation. But for this one, since we have identified that there is need for regulations, we can use the expression, “shall”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, clause 26, says, “The minister may with the approval of Parliament”. The minister might decide not to go with the approval of Cabinet. Let us say, “The minister shall with the approval of Cabinet” because he should not sit there alone and say he has done it. The best thing is to have it at a second level of thinking.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I think you may now really tie the hands of the minister. You know if he is in the queue of the Cabinet list and he is right at the bottom, he will never get that thing done until the Cabinet has handled it. You know it might really tie his hands and he is waiting in the queue - they may not like his face and do not give him an opportunity.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 26 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.53
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.54
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.54
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS BILL, 2008

7.55
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Geographical Indications Bill, 2008” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Geographical Indications Bill, 2008 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to congratulate the minister, who today changed his face, but we enjoy his company. I want to thank the committee, the Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of Government Business for the work we have done today. I think we are making progress on the backlog.

7.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Once again, I would like to pass our appreciation to you, Madam Speaker and the Clerk, for the big support that you gave us in having this work done. It took a long time because even at the beginning, it was very difficult for the committee to actually internalise, and you know what the Bill was about. 

We would like to thank the institutions we have mentioned, the Ministry of Justice, our support staff and my members of the committee that you know participated in having this report done. We thank you very much, Madam Speaker. [MR OKUPA: “And all of us.”] And you, honourable members, for passing this Bill. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated three items, but we spent so much time on the Accountants’ Bill that it ate into the time of the other one. I may now be encroaching on the mothers’ time with their children. So, I think we adjourn to tomorrow. It will be the first business.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this report has been hanging around for long. Can we assume it will be the first item after your communication?

THE SPEAKER: Yes. That is why I put it as the next one. Do not worry; it is there and it is guaranteed. Okay, now honourable members, the House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. Thank you very much and good evening.

(The House rose at 7.57 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
