

Tuesday, 2 February 2021

Parliament met at 12.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting, which has been convened to pay tribute to two of our colleagues, who died when we were in the recess. 

The first colleague that we are going to pay tribute to is the Rt Hon. Al Hajji Ali Muwabe Kirunda Kivejinja. Present are members of his family. I do not know whether they are here. We have –

    1. Mr Abbey Muwabe
    2. Ms Betty Nakisenda
    3. Mr Asaba Biragwa
    4. Ms Rehema Namutangula
    5. Mr Aze Dada Naigaga
    6. Mr Ibrahim Mukasa

You are all welcome.

The second colleague we shall pay tribute to is hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo, the former Woman Member of Parliament for Kyotera. Her family is also here. We have –

    1. Ms Fortunate Nantongo, who, by the way, is the incoming Member of Parliament for Kyotera. (Applause) You are welcome.
    2. Ms Judith Nampeera
    3. Mr Aloysius Musiitwa
    4. Dr Elizabeth Nagawa
    5. Mrs Najjumba Innocent
    6. Dr Faith Nakubulwa, who was her doctor; and
    7. Ms Nabyoto Daphine.

They are here to observe the proceedings. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE RT HON. ALI KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA, SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO

12.10
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, former Member of Parliament, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without Portfolio for his dedicated service to the Republic of Uganda. It is moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the demise of the Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, the Second Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda and the Minister without Portfolio, which occurred on Saturday, 19 December 2020;

AWARE THAT Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja had a distinguished career, spanning over 35 years, from participating in the pre-independence struggle, post-independence politics of Uganda to being a strong advocate of the democratic governance and contributing to the development of multi-party politics in Uganda;

RECOGNISING THAT the Rt Hon. Kivejinja served Uganda meticulously in several key responsibilities, which include the following:

(a) 	Political mobiliser, Uganda People’s Congress in the 1960’s;
(b) 	Minister of Relief and Social Rehabilitation in 1986;
(c)	Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Internal Affairs in 2006;
(d)	Senior Presidential Advisor for Internal Affairs in 2012;
(e)	Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs from 2016;
(f)	Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without Portfolio from 2019 until his demise;

APPRECIATING that the Rt Hon. Kivejinja was a diligent leader, who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen of this country.

2. 	That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja has rendered to the people of Uganda.

3. 	That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja’s soul eternal rest.”

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: The motion has been seconded by all Members present in the House. Thank you.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: The justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja:

Madam Speaker, we are here to remember and pay tribute to a great Ugandan who dedicated his life to serving this country for many years and he did so with distinction. That man was our friend and elder, the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, who passed away on Saturday, 19 December 2020. 

Madam Speaker, Mzee Kivejinja was a distinguished all round leader, who has left an impeccable legacy for all of us to emulate. Records indicate that the Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja was born in an aristocratic family that traces its origin from the ancient Kingdom of Bunyoro-Kitara. He was born at the pinnacle of the British colonial rule of Uganda around 1935. 

The late Al Hajji Ali Kirunda Kivejinja studied at Kibuli Junior School, Busoga College Mwiri and thereafter, took a pre-university course at Madrasa Islamic College. He then pursued a Bachelor of Science Degree in Geology at Delhi University, on a Government of India’s scholarship.

The experiences that the Rt Hon. Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja went through in his several undertakings inspired him to change his life career path; from geology to a political calling. This resulted from the influence of Jawaharlal Nehru, India’s founding Prime Minister, who encouraged him to fight for his country’s independence. 

Madam Speaker, for the benefit of all of us, it is important to highlight some of the key milestones in the life and times of Mzee Kirunda Kivejinja. 

During his formative years, the Rt Hon. Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja formed a comradeship with John Kakonge, Wadada Musani, Kintu Musoke, and Bidandi Ssali, who infused their energies to establish a party linked to the Indian National Congress, as a vehicle for independence aspirations in Uganda.

In 1957, the Uganda National Congress, the first nationalist party in Uganda led by Ignatius Kangave Musaazi was under clampdown from the British Government, with its leaders in jail and was fractured into factions. The colonial government had organised elections of the Uganda Legislative Council (LEGCO) but ensured that no person linked to the congress party got elected into Parliament.

In 1961, when the Uganda People’s Congress was formed with Milton Obote as the President, John Kakonge as Secretary General and Wadada Musani as the publicity secretary, hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja was tasked to learn the organisational capacities of the Indian National Congress; its recruitment and how they organise party primary elections. He also represented the UPC in the international fora. 

In the election organised in 1961, which the Kabaka Yekka-UPC alliance won, Kivejinja was named as the head of the UPC Research and Information Bureau. With contradictions in the UPC party, he was expelled in 1965 with his colleagues because they advocated for a welfare state and retreated to an underground life, at Sapoba Printers.

With the fall of Idi Amin, Kirunda Kivejinja re-engaged in active politics as a member of the National Consultative Council and actively participated in the formation of the Uganda Patriotic Movement (UPM), which fronted Gen Yoweri Museveni as its presidential candidate, to contest in the 1980 elections.

Madam Speaker, when UPC came to power again in 1980, the late Kirunda Kivejinja followed Gen. Yoweri Museveni to the bush in 1981 and he was active in the organisation of the armed movement; as a member of the Resistance Council in the Luweero Triangle and Kampala, with others like Eriya Kategaya, Moses Kigongo and Bakulumpagi Wamala. 

Later, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja fled to Nairobi and joined the external wing of the NRM, as editor of the resistance’s news. This was a newsletter of the National Resistance Movement that articulated the theoretical justifications of the armed struggle in Uganda. 

Al Hajji Kirunda Kivejinja was forced out of Nairobi by agents of the UPC Government and took refuge in Vienna, Austria, on invitation of Erwin Lance, then Foreign Minister in the Socialist Government of Bruno Kerensky. In Vienna, he was instrumental in the publicity of the NRM struggle in Europe, with Ben Matogo.

In 1984, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was crucial in recruiting William Pike, then a freelance journalist in London. He smuggled Pike into Luweero from where he interviewed the rebel leader then, Yoweri Museveni, for the first time since 1981. Pike’s breakout story on organisation of the National Resistance Army made the case of the armed resistance against the UPC in the Western Media. 

At the death of the founding chairman of the NRM, Prof Yusuf Lule in January 1985, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja organised the final consultative meetings of the NRM executive that confirmed Yoweri Museveni as the new chairman of the NRM, in Vienna, Austria. 

Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja returned to Nairobi after the fall of the UPC Government in the 1985 coup and he was a member of the NRM delegation at the Nairobi Peace Talks of 1985, with the Okello Junta. He re-joined the NRA forces in Muchwa, Kabarole, in August 1985 as the Commissioner for Finance in the NRM Interim Administration set-up, in Western Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, upon capture of state power in 1986, Mzee Kivejinja served both in Government and the Movement Secretariat emphasising the ideological foundation of the NRM. He was a religious man and lived his life as a Muslim intellectual.

The Rt Hon. Ali K. Kivejinja served with diligence under the NRM Government in several capacities as the Constituent Assembly Delegate for Bugweri from 1994 to 1996; a Member of Parliament for Bugweri from 1996 to 2001; Minister of Relief and Social Rehabilitation, Works and Transport, Minister of Foreign Affairs and; Minister without Portfolio. He then became Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Minister for Information; Minister for the Presidency and Deputy National Political Commissar; Third Deputy Prime Minister and; Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community.

From the above chronology, we can all see how accomplished Mzee Kivejinja was. However, with all these, he remained a very humble man, approachable and a man of high integrity. He was very candid and a man of his word. He spoke his mind without fear or favour. We will miss his wise counsel.

The Rt Hon. Al-haji Kivejinja succumbed to the Coronavirus that continues to pose a serious threat to our ways of life.  With COVID-19, now in our midst and spreading rapidly in the community, we all must remain vigilant, observing the SOPs to fight it.

We send out deep condolences and sympathies to the family, the Islamic faith in Uganda, the people of Busoga and the country at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

This is on behalf of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Ruhakana Rugunda. - (Interjections) - Of course, I am Moses Ali, just in case you want to know. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition?

12.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Opposition fraternity and the people of Gulu, I rise to second the motion of the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without Portfolio, a veteran Ugandan politician, patriot, skillful servant, mentor, advisor, intellectual and leader, the late Rt hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja who passed on, on 19 December 2020.

The cruel hand of death is on us yet again. At the ripe age of 85 years, hon. Kirunda Kivejinja is no more. It is with great sorrow that he joins our colleagues who have succumbed to COVID-19.

To the family, especially the widows and the children, kindly accept my sincere condolences. As you mourn, we mourn with you. We also mourn with The NRM fraternity.

The Rt Hon. Kivejinja served this country in various capacities by serving in several positions in Government. He served as Minister of Relief and Social Rehabilitation, Minister of Internal Affairs and as Third Deputy Prime Minister and Senior Presidential Advisor for Internal Affairs. He was also the author of the book entitled “The Crisis of Confidence”; a book about Uganda’s political history.

Today, we salute the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja for the great service as a dedicated servant. The minister changed his life career path from human medicine to a political calling, due to the love to fight for his country’s independence.

He will be greatly remembered for taking part in the unity of members from the Legislative Council to form the Uganda People’s Congress. His contribution to the Uganda People’s Congress cannot go unnoticed.

Hon. Kivejinja later parted ways with the Uganda People’s Congress but did not give up. He later re-engaged in active politics as a member of the National Consultative Council and actively participated in the formation of the Uganda Patriotic Movement.

I still call upon the Government of Uganda to do free COVID-19 testing all over the country, or, reduce the cost of testing so that services are accessible to everyone because the virus is such a terrible one that needs special attention. I also call upon the public to guard against the deadly virus and also observe the standard operating procedures.

Today, we celebrate your life, Rt Hon. Ali Kivejinja. Your time on earth has been fruitful and your legacy is glaringly visible.

Let me also observe that in Gulu, he had a son he cared for and he even married for that son though he later passed on. However, he took great responsibility during the burial of that son. Therefore, a man who could go beyond his region must have been a very kind-hearted man. The works of your hands have shown.

Inha lilahi wa inna lilehi rajuun. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: For the Independents, hon. Baryayanga is not around. Let us have one Independent, hon. Mukitale.

12.35
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bugungu-Buliisa and the Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus, I bring condolences on the demise of my Muzzukulu, whom I fondly called “senior muzzukulu” and he called me Jajja.

The Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, as has been said by the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition, was a patriot and he has left a legacy. He served in positions, which you can say could have been served by 12 people. I think his national character is one area we, as citizens, must emulate, more so at this point in time when the country is struggling with national integration, co-existence and tolerance. 

As an advocate of national dialogue, I think he would have been very instrumental in guiding the country. This is because he was an encyclopaedia in the history of this country right from the fight for independence. 

Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, as you have observed, even for the years I have been in Parliament, exhibited national aspirations in the form of a national character. He always looked at the bigger picture. There is a point when age means wisdom and he is an example of age that exhibited wisdom. 

The people of Bunyoro mourn with the people of Busoga. Like I have already said, he was more of a national leader; therefore, we have a lot to learn from him. 

Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja died during the time of the general elections. As we try to cope with democratisation and making sure that we have unity and diversity in the country, I think it is a very big issue. As the Jajjas like Kivejinja pass on, what do we have to bequeath to the bazzukulu who have been the biggest voters? In my opinion, that is the biggest challenge. 

The biggest message I would like to emphasise, on behalf of independents and as an advocate of national dialogue, is my wish to only anchor one message of national dialogue, tolerance and coexistence as a country. We have just concluded an election and one does not need to emphasise the need to have national dialogue beyond the elected leaders and those who were contesting for different positions. 

As we speak, the country has really had challenges. Of course, having been taken by COVID-19, it brings out the challenges we have promised to address as Parliament - what challenges have we found out concerning COVID-19? The issue of the regional functionality of regional referral hospitals was raised here in Parliament. 

The loss of hon. Kivejinja and those we have lost during this period should also help us reflect on where we are moving as a country. As an advocate of national dialogue, I am aware that hon. Kirunda Kivejinja fought from the time of independence. This country is a project of 16 regions. Article 178 of the Constitution was well amended in the Seventh Parliament but it has not been operationalised. It provided for regional governments. 

We are aware that there are regions, including Bunyoro, Busoga and others, which are already deemed to have formed regional governments. The date was given as 1 July 2007. However, to date, we are operating unconstitutionally without regional governments. We are increasingly seeing inequality in this country. Some areas are attaining middle-income status as others are embedded in chronic poverty, yet Article 178A provides for equality and regional balance. 

I would like to appeal, now that the NRM Government saw it wise to have cities – they were supposed to be headquarters of regional governments. Can we start looking at the delivery mechanisms of development using regional governments? As someone who believes in unity in diversity, I think every region has something to offer. 

As I mourn my senior muzzukulu, I would like to appeal to this Parliament and the next one to consider the unimplemented Article 178 of the Constitution as a way of making sure that we do not lose the consensus and the agreement of 1962 when the 16 regions came together and formed Uganda as a project. Whoever is trying to run Uganda without reference to that project is doing so unconstitutionally and we must, in the spirit of national dialogue, go back.
 
I am also aware that the many districts we have formed have not delivered services as we expected because decentralisation has had challenges. If you look at a regional government, it actually offers remedies to all the challenges we have; even in engineering, education or all these areas, you can join hands as a region and work together. 

Recently, there was a problem of energy in West Nile but until they looked at it as a region - We had not looked at West Nile as an area that must have power but using the regional efforts – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not want to stop you but you have moved away from the tribute.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for bringing this motion but I had to emphasise the point of national dialogue and regional governments as I mourn my muzzukulu. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have another tribute, so I will let only five more people contribute for three minutes each - can we use two minutes instead? 

12.43
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda and Busoga, Ali Kirunda Kivejinja Muwabe. 

The late Kivejinja was my uncle and he played a big role in our family, especially when my Jajja was still alive. He was a unifying factor. You would find both Christians and Muslims at his home. Mama Deborah is a staunch born-again Christian as opposed to the Rt Hon. Kivejinja who was also a devoted and staunch Muslim. I would like to pay high tribute to him for uniting the two religions in his family. 

The Rt Hon. Kivejinja played a very big role in reviving the only school that was then called, Nkuutu Memorial Secondary School, which played a big role in mentoring me. The school had no laboratory but he lobbied Government to set up two wonderful laboratories in that school. The glory of the school was revived by the Rt Hon –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just conclude. 

MR NTENDE: You realise that most of the districts are named after their town councils but the Rt Hon. Ali Kivejinja played a very big role in lobbying for the district of Bugweri. He insisted that we should not at any one time lose the Bagweri name and indeed, we salute him for that. The new district, small as it is with its small population, was granted district status and it is now Bugweri District, preserving the name of Bagweri and the Baise Menha. We pray to the Almighty God, the one he loved, to preserve him in eternal peace. I thank you.

12.46
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in paying tribute to the late Al Hajj Kirunda Kivejinja. Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was many things in this country. In terms of political tolerance, I have not seen a politician who is as tolerant as he was. So many times, in my home, he has been the chief guest at my functions even those that are political despite the fact that he belonged to the NRM and I am JEEMA.

Madam Speaker, he has lived a very modest and simple life. Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was not materialistic; he has no arcade in this town and no mansion anywhere in this country because he lived a simple and modest life. 

He inspired many Muslim families to take their children to school because he was the first Muslim graduate in this country. Many of our parents and grandparents were inspired to take their children to school and our fathers to take us to school because of the legacy of hon. Kirunda Kivejinja.

Finally, I attended the burial of hon. Kivejinja. I would like to express my disappointment at what we saw and what transpired. At that burial, the tents were provided by hon. Abdu Katuntu. If he had not bought tents for his constituency, perhaps we would not have had tents at that function.

Secondly, there was no food at the burial. Even the water that was provided came very late. Thirdly, we had one of the worst public address systems at the burial.

Madam Speaker, if President Museveni and the NRM Government cannot give hon. Kirunda Kivejinja a befitting send-off, who will they do it for? He has known Gen. Museveni and the NRM for the last 40 to 50 years. It was an embarrassment and a disappointment. 

I hope that the Prime Minister finds time to brief the President and perhaps the President can meet the family because they have a lot to say about what transpired. It was a very big disappointment; you cannot believe what we saw at that time.

Therefore, I do not know whether money was given and somebody swindled it or Government deliberately did not appreciate the contribution of hon. Kivejinja. As we celebrate and remember the life of hon. Kivejinja, we should not feel shy to mention some of the things that this Government did not do that it should have done. Tomorrow it will also happen to them. 

The Muslim community is asking, why did it happen to Kivejinja? The Basoga are asking, why did it happen to Kivejinja? The Bagweri are asking as well. This should not be happening. Therefore, I hope that Government will be able to explain what actually happened; why the Rt Hon. Kivejinja was not given a befitting send off. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Members, maybe for the record, the burial of the Rt hon. Kirunda Kivejinja was entirely a state funeral. As such, it was entirely in the hands of the Central Government.

12.50
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion. It is a pity, listening to what hon. Basalirwa has just stated, if that can happen to an idol of NRM strategy. Listening to hon. Moses Ali who read the profile of the late Kivejinja and what transpired during his final days, it is disturbing.

Madam Speaker, I hope the Government will take this seriously and take care of the family. We do not want a situation where we are going to see his children and widows suffering. You have stated what the late has done for this country, not just for his region but for his country. Can we see the Government take care of the family? Maybe you could salvage what happened on that day.

Madam Speaker, at one point I went to visit the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja in his office; I was with hon. Odonga Otto. He gave us copies of his book and he believed that elders and others must learn to document their experiences because if he had not put that in that book - I would like to encourage Ugandans to read that book because it gives a lot. 

How I wish - because I know hon. Moses Ali has a very rich history about this country - he could also put something in writing such that when we are long gone, others should be able to know what happened; what caused their movement from one party to another. Some of us have already joined that journey. 

Madam Speaker, I know during this time we lost very senior colleagues but of course even if you are not a senior colleague, it is a great loss to this country. To me, it was like losing a grandfather or a father in a family; you know how the children would feel. We lost the Rt Hon. Paul Etiang - I hope the Government will bring a motion to pay tribute to him. It was a great loss; I attended his burial in Tororo.

Madam Speaker, we hope the Government does something befitting for our fallen colleague and elder. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two tributes and as we are aware, we started late because Members were late. 

12.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA) (Mr Moses Kizige): Madam Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to my uncle, I should say. I knew the Rt Hon. Kivejinja for as long as my memory takes me back. He was a very good friend of my father; they were involved in the independence struggle together and in the formation of UPC and until my father died, he used to visit him every month and they would spend the whole day together.

However, I would like to make a few corrections. I represented Government at the Dua on Wednesday last week in Buwabe. It is true the Rt Hon Kirunda Kivejinja died on a Saturday late afternoon and was buried on Sunday. Given how Government works, organising logistics could not be done overnight in such situations and being a Muslim, he was supposed to be buried the following day. However, H.E the President is arranging a meeting with the family and thereafter, he will call on the family in Buwabe. 

If I am to talk about hon. Kirunda Kivejinja, we would talk until the cows come back home. However, I just want to talk about the education sector. He took 636 Ugandans to universities in Europe and the Middle East for graduate studies with the help of Government scholarships from the different universities. He was also at the forefront of the formulation of the Islamic University in Uganda and many Ugandans have graduated from that university.

From his own Nawantumbi Parish Basic Education Scheme, he set up Nalinaibi Primary School, Namulikya Primary School, Buwagi Primary School and Nawantumbi Primary School. Many of these Schools are Church of Uganda founded. From the schools, he has produced 12 PhDs, 29 Masters’ degrees, 79 Bachelor’s degrees, 84 diplomas and 20 certificates and all these are in one parish within Nawanyago Sub County, Bugweri District. 

We are celebrating a full life. When he died, there were tributes on all Busoga fora and we agreed that no other Musoga has made such a contribution to this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

12.56
MS VERONICA BICHETERO (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to a great son of Uganda and in particular, a very great son of Busoga. 

I first met hon. Kivejinja in Nairobi when we were all in the aftermath of UPM, in particular, when struggling for the liberation of Uganda under the NRM liberation struggle. I particularly remember him for his support towards education. It has been very ably explained here; the many scholarships he helped young Ugandans to attain. 

I also vividly remember him for his support towards the improvement of the health sector of Uganda. I visited a health centre that he had built on Kamuli Road for the people of Busoga among many other things. I respect and support the good things that the people that spoke before me said about him. 

I also would like to remember him for one good thing that he did for me. One day, at the airport in Nairobi, my son wandered about in the lounge and went to a book store. Hon. Kivejinja was there and we all joined hands to look for my son. Hon. Kivejinja found my son at the book store. He found my son and made life easy for me. 

I ask the almighty God to rest his soul in eternal peace. 

12.59
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to pay tribute to one of the sons of this nation: a Pan-Africanist, a very loving person who passed on, the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. 

I met him when I was a student at Makerere University. By then, I was contesting for President of the Students of Uganda (UNSA). We were in Busitema University conducting elections and I lost. I was shedding tears. When hon. Kivejinja came, he patted my hand and told me that my journey was just starting. 

I kept in touch until I heard that he had passed on. I was very perturbed because while in Makerere University, he used to be one of our guests when I would host the Pan-African students clubs at Kamwokya. We will greatly miss him. I will keep his words and the book that he wrote and gave me. 

He was such a loving person. In fact, when I was contesting for the Pan-African Parliament, he said that I had everything, as a young person. I would be mixing up with the elderly and would harmonise the Pan-African agenda.

We will dearly miss him. He remains an icon even though he is dead. He has done a lot for Uganda that we stand to appreciate as young people. 

Having served in different capacities in this country –(Member timed out.)

1.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR MINERALS (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to pay tribute to one of the gallant sons of this country. It is very unfortunate that we lost the Rt Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja at such a time when we were moving into elections. 

We also lost, for the information of this House, a former Member of Parliament and minister, the late Henry Obbo who died in November.

The late Kirunda Kivejinja was a friend despite the age difference. He was very humble and extremely knowledgeable. He had a lot of information and if he got up to speak, if you did not stop him, he would speak forever. 

He was humble to the point that in 2017, he invited me to be guest of honour at a health facility that had been constructed by his Austrian friends at Minani. That was Minani Health Centre II, which we, as the Ministry of Health took up and named Minani Health Centre III.

He cared for his community. The one thing I remember telling him was that how could he, at his level as Second Deputy Prime Minister, invite me, a state minister. He told me that that was his decision. I went and officiated. 

He gave me a book. He invited me to his office in October and told me about how to fight poverty. Of course, he was concerned about the NRM primaries but later, veered into lecturing me about how to fight poverty and he gave me his thoughts and a book. He said that if the NRM could pick that idea from him, then poverty would be history. He also passed on these skills of writing to one of his daughters, Asha Birabwa. She has written this book, The Seasons of African Holistic Development.

We will certainly miss him. We have great things to learn from him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

1.05
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Koboko, I convey my sincere condolences on the demise of our beloved great son, Al-Hajji Ali Kirunda Kivejinja. 

The late was one of the best educated Muslims at that time in Uganda. He was a devoted Muslim who followed the rituals of Muslims; no wonder he died a Muslim.

Ali Kivejinja was a seasoned politician. He did not join politics for money or business but as a calling. He joined politics in the early years of his life and devoted his life to Africa and Uganda. He shaped the vision of the National Resistance Movement (NRM). When we talk about the four pillars of the NRM - democracy, pan-Africanism, patriotism and social transformation – we cannot forget to mention his contribution to that in a great deal. We shall live to remember him for that. 

He was a peacemaker. I remember one time –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. One time the Uganda Revenue Authority enforcement team killed one of our boda boda riders in Koboko. This resulted into tension and chaos in the area. It was the late who was sent to talk to the people and indeed, he calmed them down. He talked to the family of the deceased and the issue was solved amicably through compensation.

He was a friendly person. He liked me so much. Each time he passed me, he would tease me by asking, “Who am I?” At times I would reply correctly and say, “KK” because he called himself that, and I would say, “I am Kakwa Koboko - KK.” This would make him very happy. Sometimes when I mistook and mentioned another name, he would say, “Oh! My girlfriend has got another boyfriend.” It was fun. 

He liked everybody. We shall miss him. My condolences to the family. We pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you very much.

1.08
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us the opportunity to reflect on the life of our dear friend, Al-hajji Kirunda Kivejinja. 

It does not matter how you feel about Uganda People’s Congress (UPC); one thing that some of us who were mentored by UPC will always live to remember is that in its character and in the way it did its politics, UPC inculcated the spirit of comradeship and national unity. You could not place Kirunda Kivejinja; maybe very few people knew he was a Musoga but he identified himself with almost all tribes in Uganda. 

I was shocked when one time he sent to me his son, who had studied agriculture at Makerere University. The young man had been walking around the streets for two years without a job. He sent his son to me with a note saying, “Try and ask your Auntie Cecilia to get you a job.” When this young man came to me, I said, “I am a member of the Opposition, I have no contacts.” But the young man said, “Here is a note from my Dad.” I was happy that I was able to get this young man a job through some friendly connections with the World Food Programme. That is the kind of character that Uganda is lacking at the moment - people that look beyond tribe and the political affiliations that we hold. 

Whether you like it or not, the late Kivejinja inculcated that spirit in Busoga. The quality of people like John Kirunda and Sam Tewungwa are very rare in Busoga these days. These were proud strong personalities, drivers in the politics of this country who are lacking today. People are timid in the country today. They do not want to stand out and speak the truth about politics. This is what we will miss in the late Kirunda.

I remember when we lost our Papa, the Vice-President of Uganda People’s Congress, the late Paulo Muwanga, the Sapoba team came and tried to block the political activities around the funeral. However, at the end of the day when we also played a bit of our politics, knowing that Ndugu Rugunda and the late Cosmas Adyebo were one of us, we over powered them and took over the activities. I can assure you the spirit of the congress came up and Paulo Muwanga was buried with that spirit of comradeship. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the people of Uganda to look beyond their political affiliations, tribes and not allow the culture, which the UPC left with us, to die. May God bless you all!

1.11
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale Municipality to convey our sincere condolences to the family of the late Kirunda Kivejinja. 

To the people of Busoga and all those Basoga who live in Mbale, what great loss! All of us are politicians and some of us started our political life while still in school as prefects and the names Kirunda Kivejinja, Wadada Musani, Kintu Musoke and others were known all over the entire country.

I got to know the late Kirunda Kivejinja when he came to the River Rhine in Cologne, Germany, where I had travelled with the late Paulo Muwanga as a protocol officer to arrange meetings in Germany. The late Kirunda Kivejinja travelled from Austria and I arranged meetings for him and the Paulo Muwanga. Whatever took place is what you see now. 

The late Kirunda Kivejinja was a great man. He was a very simple person. Later on, when things changed, he became my minister in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Whenever his friends from Austria visited his home, he would pick me from the ministry to attend functions at his house. We were great friends. He always talked to me and he would say, “You know, we mentored you; why don’t you come and work with us?” I would tell him that I was a civil servant and I was working for everybody in this country.

We will miss this great, simple, friendly person. He never bothered about where you came from. He always took you as a close friend. We have lost a great person. The COVID-19 pandemic came and - (Member timed out.)

The SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

The SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the Hansard and pass it on to the late’s family. Can we now go to the second motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ROBINAH SSENTONGO NAKASIRYE, DISTRICT WOMAN MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR KYOTERA

1.14
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Robinah Ssentongo Nakasirye, the former Woman Member of Parliament for Kyotera District, for her diligent service to the Republic of Uganda, moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament:

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received, with grief, the sudden news of the untimely demise of hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo, which occurred on 18 December 2020 at Mulago National Referral Hospital;

AWARE that hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo has been the Woman Representative, Kyotera District in this Parliament and served on various committees of Parliament, including being a member of the parliamentary taskforce against COVID-19;

NOTING that prior to joining Parliament in 2016, hon. Ssentongo served as a nurse counsellor at Kitovu Hospital from 1983 to 1984, at Rubaga Hospital from 1984 to 1988 and later a coordinator of orphans and family support at Kitovu Mobile AIDS Organisation from 1990 to 1994, and later as the Chief Executive Officer of Kitovu Mobile AIDS Organisation, a faith-based medical and community empowerment organisation that provides innovative mobile health services to persons affected by HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, cancer and other emerging life-threatening chronic illnesses;

FURTHER NOTING that during her time as a Chief Executive Officer of Kitovu Mobile AIDS Organisation, hon. Ssentongo introduced various programmes offering support to HIV/AIDS orphans, vulnerable children and their caregivers in the nine districts under Masaka Catholic Diocese and is credited for having pioneered a home-based care model in the treatment of HIV/AIDS;

APPRECIATING that hon. Ssentongo was a staunch member of the Democratic Party and advocate for the rights of persons affected by HIV/AIDS and provision of palliative care to persons affected by HIV/AIDS, and a dedicated and hardworking legislator who was passionate about her work and ably represented the people of Kyotera District and her country Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:

    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Kyotera District and the entire country for the loss of a distinguished daughter of Uganda;

    2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the distinguished service rendered and contribution made by hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo to the people of Kyotera District and Uganda as a whole;

    3. That we pray to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo’s soul eternal peace.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by all the members present. Justification?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on Monday, 21 December 2020, we received the sad news of the death of hon. Robinah Ssentongo, the woman representative of Kyotera District, who succumbed to COVID-19. After two weeks, we were again informed of the death of her husband, Mr Joseph Ssentongo, who succumbed to COVID-19.

Hon. Robinah was born in 1961 in Buwenda village in Bukomansimbi - Masaka to Mzee Erika Mukasa and Mary Nanziri, both deceased. She started her education in Kimanya Primary School in 1976. Thereafter, she joined St Charles Lwanga Girls’ Training Centre, Kalungu. She then joined St Francis Hospital, Nsambya Training School, where she acquired a midwifery certificate.

After working for a while, she then went to Kimmage Manor in Dublin in Ireland, where she was awarded a Diploma in Development Studies. Hon. Robinah kept on upgrading and pursuing several qualifications. She again acquired a Diploma in Social Behaviour in Mbarara University of Science and Technology. 

She was awarded a Bachelor in Human and Social Studies from the University of South Africa and also a Master’s of Science in Health Services Management.

Madam Speaker, hon. Robinah Ssentongo joined Parliament in 2016 as a Woman Representative for Kyotera District. Before joining Parliament, hon. Robinah Ssentongo was so committed to serving the less privileged people of Masaka and Uganda as a whole: as a nurse counsellor of Kitovu Hospital in 1983 to 1984 and in Rubaga Hospital in 1990 to 1994. In 1995, hon. Robinah Ssentongo returned to Kitovu Mobile AIDS Organisation to lead an AIDS care programme, which was dedicated to the people in Masaka.

In 2005, she was appointed as Chief Executive Officer of the same programme, following her outstanding contribution and commitment she exhibited in her desire to continuously better the less privileged people in her community. 

Hon. Robinah Ssentongo was a very active and dedicated member of the Democratic Party (DP) and she has contributed enormously to the aspirations and values of the party. The late hon. Ssentongo was key in overseeing the implementation of Government programmes in Kyotera District. 

The late is survived by five children and one of them, Ms Fortunate Nantongo, was duly elected as the Woman Representative of Kyotera District on the DP ticket, in the Eleventh Parliament. 

We sincerely extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, the people of Kyotera and the country at large. May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I invite the Leader of the Opposition. I think to complete the record, in addition to the husband, the sister also died a few days after both of them had died. The family has indeed suffered a lot of tragedies. 

1.27
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Gulu District and the Opposition fraternity, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Robinah Ssentongo. She was a personality that always made me proud to associate with.

Hon. Ssentongo was a mother and leader that was dependable. She was a legislator who loved her country and party. She was consistent, principled, God fearing, extremely hardworking and she used her position to help others. 

Not long ago, we were here eulogising the District Woman Member of Parliament for Pallisa District, hon. Faith Alupo, who passed on, on 15 September 2020. We later came back and paid tribute to the Member of Parliament representing Kamuli Municipality, hon. Rehema Watongola. It is indeed with great sorrow that hon. Robinah Ssentongo becomes the third Member of Parliament to succumb to COVID-19.

Hon. Ssentongo was a social worker. On the Floor of Parliament, she advocated for ease of transport between Kasensero Landing Site and Nangoma Island. She was also the voice of the victims of the September 2016 earthquake in areas that had not received building materials to reconstruct their damaged houses.  Therefore, I join the multitude of Ugandans grieving the departure of our colleague. 

To the family of the Democratic Party, the ObwaKabaka bwa Buganda and the people of Kyotera that knew and associated with hon. Ssentongo, kindly accept my condolences. 

Madam Speaker, besides politics, hon. Ssentongo was vocal on issues about Buganda Kingdom and the Catholic Church. It is always excruciating when one of us departs. It is, however, too painful, when one of us departs so soon especially hon. Robinah Ssentongo, who was with us here in the House, before we departed for our campaigns.

We have a lost a giant who stood by her words and loved helping the needy. Many youths and elders gained from her contribution. She was also a strong pillar in the fight against HIV/AIDS, since the early 1980s.

Madam Speaker, I call upon the Government of Uganda not only to reduce but give free COVID-19 test so that services are accessible to every Ugandan. I also call upon the public to up their guard against the deadly virus and observe Standard Operating Procedures. 

Hon. Robinah Ssentongo, your curtain has fallen and your life has ended. You have fought a good fight. Your legacy will shine especially to those who value humility, integrity, rule of law and good governance. Fare thee well, hon. Ssentongo. May her soul rest in peace. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I think hon. Atiku can represent the Independents and then I will invite hon. Ssenyonga. Are the members of the Committee on Health here? She served on that committee. 

1.32
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in supporting the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Robinah Ssentongo. On behalf of the Independents fraternity and the people of Arua City, I condole with the family upon this great loss. 

It is heart breaking and wrecking to hear that COVID-19 has left the family of the late hon. Ssentongo headless. It claimed hon. Ssentongo, her husband and her sister as well. It is not only this family but also within that same week, it was reported that a bishop also died plus other members of the community there. That sends a message to all of us on how deadly this virus is. 

Within that week, a group photo was shared, where about five people in that photo all succumbed to COVID-19. It depicted that it was in the group photo that the virus spread because her husband, the bishop that passed on and others were all in that picture. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to appeal to the public to seriously take the messages that have been put out to prevent the spread of this virus. You find three or four people seated on a boda boda without masks. You find taxis carrying more people than what were initially designated. You find a bus – these days, before they reach a roadblock, they first drop off some of the passengers they have carried in excess. 

Having come out of this general election, the worst is out there, unreported. In these circumstances where people are pushing Government to open schools, I do not know what the situation will look like. People are being buried, especially those that are above 60 years old. Information has come out that those who have clocked 60 years and above are the most vulnerable. 

Just a few days ago, we buried a neighbour. Yes, she was an elderly woman but before the family accepted that it was COVID-19, the virus had already spread amongst the family members. Therefore, I would like to appeal to members of the public out there to consider the situation of COVID-19 seriously, because we no longer know who has the virus or which spaces we should not now associate with. We should, therefore, take this message seriously to be able to stay alive until the vaccines arrive in the country.

Madam Speaker, in hon. Ssentongo, we have lost someone who was down to earth. There is no person who gets the mandate of the people and comes to Parliament without a useful background. What the Prime Minister has just enumerated is the little that has been put on record. I was in Kyotera with the National Task Force on COVID-19. The reception that we got with hon. Robinah Ssentongo when we went there to assess the situation on ground showed what kind of human being she was. 

MR ATIKU: We saw her here as a colleague but to the community that sent her here, she was almost everything. We are paying tribute to a nationalist, patriot and somebody who loved her job not so that she could earn a salary but so that she could serve humanity. Hon. Ssentongo, rest in peace, till we meet again - Thank you very much.

1.37
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to at least say a word as we pay tribute to our fallen sister, hon. Robinah Ssentongo. 

The news of her death reached me when I was campaigning, through a text message by one of the students I pay school fees for. The text message read, “Mummy, I am really so sorry that you have lost one of your colleagues to COVID-19 again.” I did not understand the message. As I was still speaking to my people, I kept the message and called the student later in the evening and that is when I learnt that my sister was no more.

Madam Speaker, I felt so bad because the late hon. Ssentongo used to sit next to me. I could not understand that news, and I was deep in the village and in the middle of the campaigns. As you know, because of the pressures of campaigns, I did not do much about it but only prayed that her soul rests in eternal peace.

I am really so grateful to the people of Kyotera because they were able to send us a daughter to this august House. I know that she may not be a replacement for hon. Ssentongo but they were able to show us that they loved the late by sending us her daughter. I would like to pray that her daughter plays this role and emulates her late mother.

All of us as colleagues of hon. Ssentongo know that she was a fighter for the rights of the people of Kyotera. We also know that she was a fighter for the good health of the people of Uganda and not only those in Kyotera. Each time she would rise to Speak on the Floor of Parliament, she brought up a matter on the health of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I also remember that among the last days she spoke in this House, she was concerned about this country’s fight to reduce the spread of COVID-19. I remember when she vividly spoke about the honourable minister gathering people in thousands, and she was expressing concern that this would increase the spread of COVID-19 in the district. Little did we know that she would be a victim.

Honourable colleagues, we would like to pray that this country finds a way of living with this pandemic. It is not an easy thing; today it is hon. Ssentongo, yesterday it was some other colleague going through it. Even though you got COVID-19 and survived, you cannot be sure that you will not get it again. We have to pray for this country and also ask Government not to sit back and wait for Members and all the other people of this country to get it and then fight on their own.

I would like to request the Government to find a way of budgeting handsomely, in order to have funds directed to the cause of COVID-19. This would ensure that we have enough ICUs in this country and we would then try to manage the disease from within the country. From what I see, it is getting out of hand. 

This COVID-19 pandemic has done a lot of damage to this country. Imagine losing hon. Kivejinja and all these honourable colleagues of ours - honourable Members of Parliament! Out there, like hon. Atiku has stated, we are losing Ugandans to COVID-19 unreported and most of us think COVID-19 is just the making of Government. There was a time when I rode on a boda boda here in Kampala and I asked the rider for his mask but he said, “Do you believe there is COVID-19? This COVID is just…”-

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This boda boda rider was boldly telling me that COVID-19 was just made up by Government to “eat” money, so they do not believe that it is there. Even just yesterday, one of the workers in my house was telling me that COVID-19 is not real. 

It is not easy for us Ugandans to understand; at least members of Parliament can easily understand this. It is, therefore, very important that Government steps up sensitization of the public, alongside putting aside a budget to manage the COVID-19 pandemic. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. May the souls of my befallen brother and my sister, hon. Ssentongo, rest in peace.

1.43
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues. On behalf of the people of West Moyo County and my own behalf, our sincere condolences go to the bereaved family members, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Parliament of Uganda and the people of Kyotera. 

Uganda and indeed the people of Africa, as well as East Africa, have lost a great person who was a fighter against the HIV/AIDS pandemic. Hon. Robinah Ssentongo, if I may say so, has been a liberator, liberating people from AIDS, a pan Africanist, patriot, mentor, role model and a teacher of the girl child. 

In the year 1989, I was a young teacher at Christ the King S.S in Kalisizo in Kyotera District. Hon. Ssentongo used to come to our school and talk about issues related to health, particularly HIV/AIDS. She would talk to the students and as a young teacher in 1989, I got all her information and to date, I am a believer in whatever she has been talking about in as far as issues of HIV/AIDS are concerned. 

During that period of 1989, 80 per cent of the people of Rakai or Kyotera were HIV positive. From that period to date, I lost all my contemporaries because of HIV/AIDS. I am the only one that survived. Madam Speaker, no wonder, when we met here in Parliament, we met in the Committee of HIV/AIDS. My request to everybody out there is that, apart from talking about the issues related to COVID-19, let us also see to it that the issue of HIV/AIDS is taken as a priority. 

To the family members, please remain united and in love. Continue fearing God because she was God-fearing. Always dialogue and work as a team. Learn to co-exist and when there are contentious issues in the family, please sit down in the process of dialogue and arrive at a consensus. 

Otherwise, take heart. May the soul of our dear leader rest in peace. Thank you very much. 

1.43
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Bundibugyo and on my own, I condole with the family members that lost our colleague due to COVID-19.

Today we are all here to pay tribute to our own hon. Robinah Ssentongo who was fondly referred to as “Mama Kitovu.” As a member of the Committee on Health and HIV, we shall continue missing her. As a committee, we visited Kyotera and the people are going to miss hon. Robinah Ssentongo. She had done a lot for the community there because we witnessed so many projects that she has left behind. 

Despite our political affiliations, we would crack jokes, as members of Parliament with one common goal. I would like to congratulate her daughter, whom we had earlier met during our visit to Kyotera. Thank you for being strong and having been elected to replace your late mother. We look forward to working with you.

COVID-19 is real but some members of Parliament do not believe that. Others take it to be political. Let us continue observing the SOPs as we visit our constituents. 

Madam Speaker, this reminds me of the way NRM members were handled recently at Kololo when we went to meet the President. We took a COVID-19 test here at Parliament but the way the results were disseminated was a nightmare. Members stood for over five hours in the name of receiving their results and the soldiers handling that exercise were very unprofessional to the extent that they would read a name and tell someone that he was not supposed to be there since he was positive, while other people listened. Someone may even collapse before he/she is taken for medical care! 

My prayer is –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude because I think you had something important to say. 

MS BEBONA: My prayer is that, next time when handling such an exercise, let it be handled in a professional way by health professionals. Even the Army has health professionals! We pray that the Lord Almighty grants hon. Ssentongo eternal rest. Thank you so much.   

1.49
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the entire Parliament to support the motion of paying tribute to our dear beloved sister, the late Robinah Ssentongo. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Robinah Ssentongo was married to Joseph Ssentongo and lived a happy life and marriage. I talked to one of the residents of Kyotera and he had some comments to make. He said when many people join politics, they get problems with their families and marriages but hon. Robinah Ssentongo remained very happy. It is not a surprise that one of the daughters was selected by the Kyotera community to replace her. We are happy that the daughter has come and we pray that she fits properly in her mother’s shoes. 

I am the chairperson of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus and hon. Robinah Ssentongo joined us in 2016. Immediately she arrived here, she requested to know the procedure of joining the Buganda caucus platform. She was very loyal to her kingdom, Buganda, and I am happy the entire family is still loyal to the Buganda Kingdom. 

My prayer is that the young daughter embraces this as she comes to the 11th Parliament. She should be a strong member of the Buganda caucus. That is where you belong and that is where you will always belong. We respected the entire family and I know you will always be strong.

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssentongo and the husband took time to educate their children. They are not going to fight for whatever the father and mother have left behind. That is my appeal to all Ugandans; that when you get a chance, do what hon. Robinah Ssentongo did. She struggled from one certificate to another until she upgraded, as you have heard. 

We the strong supporters of Buganda are going to remain behind you and support you. We pray that the Almighty God gives you comfort and more energy and since you even managed, during that hard time, to stand firm; I know you are going to stand firm. May her soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you. 

1.55
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues to second the motion paying tribute to hon. Ssentongo. 

On behalf of the people of Katakwi, I would like to say I met hon. Ssentongo on the Committee of HIV/AIDS. She was passionate about her work, palliative care in Uganda and she made a good contribution in this line, especially in the establishment of the AIDS Trust Fund for the country. We are going to miss her for that contribution.

Secondly, hon. Ssentongo was a devoted and a dedicated catholic. We always met at the chaplaincy. I remember when I was coordinating Soroti Catholic Diocese, she was also a coordinator for Masaka. She was quite devoted to her God. I want to believe that she has rested in peace. 

We are going to miss her for her contribution, especially the people of Kyotera and Greater Masaka. However, I think there is a big lesson we have to learn as a country. It is no doubt that she died of COVID-19. As a country, how prepared are we? I know we are being tested and some of us are privileged to have free tests but the majority of our people out there have to meet the cost. It is even going to be worse now that we are talking about vaccines - how soon are we going to roll them out? We are losing our own people and I think we have so far lost over 100 people. How prepared is the ministry and the country as a whole?

As a nation, we need to look beyond before we continue losing such devoted, passionate and committed citizens. We need to plan as a country; we need to invest more resources especially in the health sector before we lose more people.

As other colleagues have said, we still have to appeal that the COVID-19 tests should be free of charge. If a Member of Parliament cannot afford it, what about the ordinary wanainchi? Let the vaccines be free, if we are going to roll out. Otherwise, few people will be able to get vaccinated. It will only be for the upscale or those that can get it at no cost and yet, the majority of the people who should be able to get it are those in the rural areas.

May the Almighty God rest her soul in eternal peace.

1.58
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion for paying tribute to our sister hon. Robinah Ssentongo, whom we lost to COVID-19.

I think the entire House will agree with me that we had a lot to share and learn from hon. Ssentongo but death, being natural, we lost her.

She was a representative. One of our roles as members of Parliament is to represent our people. When she stood in Parliament, she talked on behalf of the people of Kyotera. She was passionate about the needs and services of the people of Kyotera. We shall miss her ideas, which she expressed clearly whenever she was given chance to speak in Parliament.

Hon. Ssentongo was very good at sharing her ideas and information. That is how I became close to her. We became panellists on Bukedde FM speaking a language that I did not understand very well but she always corrected me to make sure that we deliver all the ideas and information we had to Ugandans. We are going to miss her because she was a unifying factor.

At her age, every Member of Parliament who was younger than her, looked up to her as a confidant. At any one moment, people would not even remember that she had green and they had yellow or even red. She was just a Member of Parliament and all Members enjoyed her company. We are going to miss hon. Ssentongo and I believe we still have a lot to learn even when she is no longer alive because whatever she shared with us is still in our minds. 

May her soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.01
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I stand here to join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late hon. Robinah Ssentongo who I knew back in Greater Masaka when she was still operating her community-based organisation - the Kitovu Mobile.

I came closer to her while working with her on the Committee on Health as well as on the Parliamentary COVID-19 Taskforce. We have been moving together throughout the country. 

One thing I cannot forget is that she has been a friend to everybody. While in the field, especially on the COVID-19 issues, she would not allow any member of the taskforce to move around without wearing on a mask. Secondly, she would not allow you to sit anywhere without being sanitised. That was hon. Ssentongo; she has been very careful especially with COVID-19 issues. She has been a great friend to everybody.

She has been a member of the Opposition but the one thing that I admired about her is that she appreciated every good thing Government has been doing and would advise accordingly. She has been a friend and was motherly to everybody. I pray to God that the family continues to be united and may her soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a day that we mourn our own. Our condolences to the family; we stand with you at this difficult time.

However, such a moment also helps us as a country. You can see the unity in diversity here. We have all spoken with one voice because we are all candidates of the departure that has befallen our sister.

Secondly, what do we take from here? We are leaders in this country and we are speaking about our colleagues who have fallen asleep as God has ordained. They have left behind a legacy and the challenge is for you and me; what shall we leave behind?

My daughter, I thank God that the people of Kyotera have allowed you to come and replace your mother. This is a national House where ideas can differ but we are not enemies. We need to find time to stand together on issues that unite us. This is the identity of the Parliament of Uganda. 

My sister, Robinah, was a catholic and we shall miss her greatly because she carried the Rosary every day. She acted out her Catholicism every day; she would dress as a catholic. The challenge remains for you and me. 

Madam Speaker, we are talking as a country and we have confirmed that we are all candidates. What are we going to do about this COVID-19? We thank God that many people are now coming to realise that it is a reality; some families will deny even if their people depart, citing things like witchcraft. I associate this with HIV/AIDS when it first came. Now that we are coming to terms with the reality, we as leaders need to prepare this country.

I interacted with one of the senior nurses, Jane Nanfa, who operates in Mulago ICU. We also lost Maj. Santos Lapolo, our Resident District Commissioner (RDC). I was following his case closely. I happened to meet this lady and she said that she also attended to the late Robinah Ssentongo. 

The challenge we have is one - we need to equip our health centres. The beds in the ICU are very few. We need to approve funds necessary for Government to equip these ICUs. Secondly, what kills most of our people in the ICU is the loneliness; you are cut off from your family. 

We need to have more professional people to take care of our people while they are away from their families. We need to facilitate our medical personnel who act on our behalf when we are in the ICU as we cannot talk to our family members. It is quite critical because that is one of the things that sends people into depression and once you go into depression, you cannot easily respond. It is high time, before we depart, that we make good on this so that as candidates – since any time we can be there – we find a changed environment. 

May the soul of my dear sister, Robinah, rest in eternal peace. 

2.08
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The people of Kitagwenda and I join the rest of the Ugandans to deliver our condolences to you, the Speaker, the Government and the family of the late hon. Ssentongo and also the other families who have lost their loved ones to COVID-19.

Hon. Ssentongo was not very close to me but I knew her. Most of the times when I met her here, she was either in the company of hon. Ssewungu or hon. Muyanja. Uniquely, she preferred speaking Luganda while she was here. One time I met her with hon. Ssenyonga and I cracked a joke, which I thought I should mention now that we are seeing her off. 

The Luganda from her belt is different from the Luganda of this side, for those who know Luganda. When I met her, I asked her why she preferred to use a lot of Luganda here yet she knew that most of us are of different tribes. She said, “I did not come here to learn how to speak English but I came to represent my people.” I went on and told her that one time she will be on the Floor of the House and forget that she is supposed to use English and instead speak Luganda. We laughed it off together. It is hon. Ssenyonga who reminded me that even the Batagwenda are part of the Baganda. 

Hon. Robinah Ssentongo was a jolly person. She was warm, likeable and friendly. She was one of those that did not hold extreme opinions, even when it was political. She spent most of her time fighting for her people and airing out their problems.

While we pray that her soul rests in peace, we thank God for her brief life because life can never be complete. Even when we bury old people, we think they have gone too soon. For her, who was in the middle of her life, we grieve with the family but we thank God for her life.

We also thank God for the fairness, that it is her own daughter that has stood in her shoes. Maybe she may help to fulfil some of the aims and aspirations that she had for her people. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

2.11
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, on behalf of the people of Mitooma and on my own behalf, to join my colleagues in supporting the motion and paying glowing tribute to our colleague, the late Robinah Ssentongo. Our deep condolences go out to the family, to the Speaker, this Parliament, the Government of Uganda, the people of Kyotera, the people of Masaka and Ugandans at large.

It was very shocking when we learnt of the demise of Robinah. It was during the campaign period and we were all out there. We could not be together, like we are now, to pay our respects to her and we could not bury her. It was shocking, especially since it followed the demise of our other colleagues like Hajjat and others. 

All one can say is that we would like to thank God that we are through with this period. Yes, Robinah is gone but we all know that none of us knows the time, the hour or the day. Therefore, our duty is to be prepared all the time knowing that death will come any time like a thief, as the word of God says. In that, we are called to love God with all of our hearts and to love and support one another as far as we can. 

We would like to thank the people of Kyotera for giving the vote to Robinah’s daughter. I am sure that in doing this, they are expressing hope that Robinah’s work will continue. 

I would like to say that Robinah was a calm, composed and dignified Member of Parliament. Although she had stayed here for a short time, she had quickly become articulate and would voice the concerns of her people and the people of Uganda. We will miss her but as we all know, life must continue. We hope that the people of Kyotera will give all the support to her daughter to be able to carry out her work diligently. Much as we will miss her, we pray that God will grant her eternal life. 

Madam Speaker, I also would like to take the opportunity to congratulate you on retaining your seat. I am sure the people of Uganda still have hope despite all these challenges we are going through that work continues smoothly. May Robinah’s soul rest in eternal peace.

2.14
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Madam Speaker, allow me to lower my mask. I rise in support of the motion to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Robinah Ssentongo, on behalf of Lwengo District and the entire greater Masaka and particularly, the Catholic Church which groomed the late Robinah Ssentongo through the Kitovu mobile AIDS Clinic.

That is where the Catholic Church took medical care to the people who were sick at their own residences and the late was the one chairing the Kitovu mobile clinic. We have missed a very hard-working person. 

She was not so bent on the Democratic Party where she belonged. I remember when I invited her to my constituency because that time ARVs had changed colour and some people refused them. I invited Robinah to come and educate my people that it was a matter of colour but the content was the same and she came. This was a constituency where people belong to the NRM party and she was a Democratic Party Member of Parliament from Kyotera.

I referred to her as a survivor because the first epidemic of HIV/AIDS which was announced in October 1978 killed people from Mutukula border up to Kyotera town and houses were totally closed. She was a survivor but she has not made it, she succumbed to the COVID-19 pandemic. 

I am sincerely grateful to the family because it has stood together during this trying moment and managed to pull out the daughter to come and contest to replace her mother in this political arena.

On behalf of our people, we shall remain with the family as we have been; we are aware that all the heads of family have gone but we shall always be with you. Our daughter, remember what we talked about during the burial, we shall encourage and - (Member timed out.)

MR MBABALI: Excuse me, Madam Speaker. I drove all the way from Lwengo but I have not paid tribute to my good friend hon. Kirunda Kivejinja. Allow me to say a few things about my big brother, hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja -

THE SPEAKER: That was a separate motion and we already put the question to that.

MR MBABALI: Oh, it is already closed?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MBABALI: Thank you. As I wind up, hon. Robinah Ssentongo, may the Almighty God rest your soul in peace. Amen.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. Honourable members, I would like to add that hon. Robinah Ssentongo was very concerned about access to treatment by especially the HIV/AIDS patients. She was concerned about the failure by Government to implement the trust fund. I hope that in her memory, we should at least be able to do that.

I now put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to hon. Robinah Nakasirye Ssentongo as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall adjourn and the House and we will reconvene at 3.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 2.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 February, 2021 at 3.00 p.m.) 

