Thursday, 5 February 2015

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding.)

PRAYERS

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Leader of Government Business and the members of the House, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just have one small communication; I will be adjusting the Order Paper to permit a motion to honour the late Janani Luwum, our former Archbishop. Celebrations are commencing on the 16th of February on the anniversary of his death. And we thought that before that happens, this House should say something about it. We have never had an opportunity to honour him since he died in 1977. So that is the small adjustment we are going to make. Thank you very much.

3.04
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise two issues that are very critical. The first one is to do with the unfair restructuring process of the NAADS Secretariat. We are all aware that Government took a decision to re-organise the extension services in this country, and the people serving at the headquarters in the NAADS Secretariat were initially advised that they should apply through an internal advertisement to be retained, after which this decision was receded. On 8th December, interviews were halted and this included a whole lot of staff. Some had running contracts up to 2015. 

The board decided to selectively recall some of them and cause others to hand over. I would like the honourable Minister of Agriculture to explain to the nation why his ministry is conducting its restructuring in the most irregular and nepotistic manner - why were some terminated and others re-instated? Why were some interviewed and others just abandoned in the cold! 

Madam Speaker, I think it is important in the interest of fairness to all concerned that the minister tells us what approach is being used to regularize appointments in the NAADS Secretariat. Other people who do not have godparents have been asked to leave and then they are retaining others.

Madam Speaker, the second one has to do with the safety of the people I represent. Some people from -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you know you have very long preambles. Just go straight to the points.

MS ALASO: These people bought land in Abim District. Unfortunately, there rose a group of conmen and women. Some are from Teso and some among the Jabori in Abim District. They want them to buy the land the second time and as result, conflict has arisen. Some people’s homes have been destroyed, especially those in a place called Apeyi popong. Now there are over 40-50 Iteso families displaced and are looking for refuge.

There is also a category of insecurity for those that have remained in the parts of Abim District. I would like to ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to investigate this concern that could actually bring a lot of challenges to the life of a people, especially in Labim, Nyakwai, Morurem, Akobokobot and other sub-counties and help solve the issue of conflict and insecurity. People’s homes have been burnt and the local leaders have not yet acted on this. 

Madam Speaker, those are my two issues, thank you.

3.09 
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to complain to the Minister of Education and Sports. Every time I look at the results of schools - and today, in The New Vision, it is top schools in your district. I looked for my district in vain; I could not see Zombo District. I do not know whether the Minister of Education does not know that Zombo District exists. I see something else called Paidha, and all schools are under it. Paidha is a small town in Zombo District. I see some schools put under Nebbi District. So I would like to know whether the Ministry of Education does not recognise Zombo as a district and therefore has created Paidha District. My People get disappointed because when they look for their district, they do not see it. Can I get that explanation from the ministry?

3.10
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Over a year ago, a contractor called PNC was contracted by the Ministry of Works to do some comprehensive work on Corner Kilak-Adilang Road, which belongs to Central Government. They were supposed to do that work on that road within three years but at least for maintenance. For the first year, we would have expected them to finish work on that road.

Madam Speaker, as I speak now, one year down the road this company has not done even a quarter of their work. They have only done something like eight kilometres and even those are not completely done. I am so worried that my people are going to suffer again. Yet government has already awarded a contract to these contractors to do work.

We are being told that this same contractor has been awarded several contracts in this country. So he does not have time to concentrate on the Agago Road. I therefore would like the Ministry of Works and Transport to explain why they give so many contracts to PNC who is not able to do for us work within the given time?

As I speak, the contractor has withdrawn all the equipment from the road and the month of March is coming when we expect rain. Agago District is not going to access any parts of this country because it is the only access road. Can the ministry explain to us, the people of Agago District, why this road, even after the contract has been awarded, is not being done? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.12
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (FDC, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our concern as the people of Mukono Municipality is the current unbearable traffic on Kampala-Jinja Road. In the past, it would take somebody 15-30 minutes to travel from Kampala to Mukono but these days, it takes between two to three hours for any one moving from Kampala to Mukono and about five hours to move from Jinja to Kampala.

We all know the importance of the Kampala-Jinja Road to this country. Something needs to be done urgently, because the traffic jam on this road is now turning into a tragedy. Recently, there was a big deployment along that road, and when I contacted the Minister for Internal Affairs hon. Aronda Nyakairima, on why police and the army were deploying heavily on that road, he told me it is because of the traffic jam. They fear terrorists can take advantage of this jam to hurt the country, especially since all the fuel coming into the country passes via that road. 

We would have been able to avert temporarily that problem by working on the old Kampala-Jinja Road, which moves from Mukono, through Kirowooza to Jokas Hotel at Namboole. We would also have worked on the road from Seeta-Bukerere and finally to Namugongo.

As we talk now, UNRA has just entered into a contract, with Abubaker Technical Services and General Supplies Limited to work on Seeta-Namugongo Road. That is 7.2 kilometres; Najjanankumbi-Busabala Road is 11 kilometres; Kira-Kasangati-Matugga -Wakiso-Buloba Road 34.5 kilometres; Namboole Industrial Area Road 11.6 kilometres at a cost of Shs 10 billion. This contract is going to run for three years. 

The type of the work procured is for the routine maintenance of this road. This in itself shows that for the next three years, Government is not going to tarmac these roads and given their importance, and knowing that we are going to spend Shs 10 billion just for routine maintenance of these roads, which money would have been used to tarmac a big percentage of these roads, we consider it wastage. I am raising this matter, therefore, to know what the Ministry of Transport and Works is doing to curb the problem of traffic jam on Kampala-Jinja Road. 

Secondly, why are they spending Shs 10 billion just for routine maintenance of these roads, instead of using the same money from the fourth account? We are aware that they have a lot of machinery these days lying idle, instead of using the money to tarmac this road.

Thirdly, what plan do we have as a country? It is His Excellency himself who went out and invited the Pope to visit Uganda; what plans do we have to upgrade the road infrastructure around Namugongo area?

Finally, I want to request, if possible, to recall this contract; we cannot spend Shs 10 billion just for routine maintenance. This would translate in using  Shs 150 million per kilometre of roads in these areas, just for graveling and routine maintenance, which we feel is too much money, because the roads -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to have two minutes but you are moving to the Pope, this and that.

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged. I think my concerns have been captured, only to say that Government is spending Shs 150 million to work on one kilometre of tarmac road in Mukono, whereas the standard fee for such works is Shs 35 million. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kizza, two minutes.

3.17
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. During the recess period, I was moving in the areas of Kasese. Kasese is one of the cotton growing areas of this county. The plight of the cotton farmers in Kasese is much. They want to know whether Government is still interested in the growing of cotton, and if Government is no longer interested in the growing of cotton, the people should be told not to grow it. The prices of cotton compared to the money that the farmers are putting in to growing of cotton for this season - our farmers have made a loss! 

We were making calculations with the farmers in Kasese. I was at pain to see what they are going through. The calculations showed that on average, every farmer spends on an acre of land Shs 450 and then at the end of it all, a farmer harvests only 300 kilos in an acre. Currently, a kilo is at Shs 1,000 an indication that after six months, a farmer earns 300,000 after spending Shs 450,000. This is what the farmer earns without removing the money of the people who assist in picking. The farmers of Uganda and most especially the ones in Kasese are asking, is the government still interested in the cotton growing sector, and if they are not interested, let them be told in advance. 

Secondly, if Government is no longer interested in growing cotton, let the money being appropriated for Cotton Development Authority be used for other activities and the authority be disbanded -(Member timed out.) 

3.20
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, regarding the withholding of last year’s exams by the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). Exams of about 5,000 students both for PLE and UCE have been withheld by UNEB on suspicion that there were malpractices on the part of the students who sat for them. 

Uganda National Examinations Board is in charge of everything regarding examinations: it is in charge of setting, storage, supervision, invigilation, transportation, marking and everything until when the results are out. The point that I would like to make is, examination malpractices is a blame that must be shared between the candidate and UNEB because it is in charge of every step of doing the exams.

The crime being investigated and the penalty are only on one side and that is on the part of the students. How about the officials, the staff of UNEB that failed on their job to the extent that a P.7 Pupil in Adjumani could come to Ntinda and enter into UNEB stores and get the examination paper?

THE SPEAKER: Conclude.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, the practice of withholding exams means the pupil or the student who had sat for the same must wait for the whole year before getting another chance to sit for the same. At the level of higher institutions of learning, even if one has failed the exam, he is made to re-sit the same within the period of his normal stay. 

Madam Speaker, Ugandans are noting; today we have the highest school dropout rates. Basically, they are discouraged because of such practices. Can’t we get alternatives instead of penalising one to wait for a full year to re-sit exams, we let that person re-sit the exam and join another level? Thank you very much.

3.25
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Like my colleagues have said, during the recess period, I went through my district and found farmers, around 500 of them, who sold their tobacco to Continental Tobacco Limited but have not been paid since August. I have some documentation here; I have farmers from Kyanaisoke, these are 120; farmers from Rugashari, farmers from Mabale, these are about 200. I also have two farmers from Mubende, in a sub county called Kiyuni. I have farmers from Matale and all these are demanding for over Shs one billion from Continental Tobacco Ltd, since August.
 
Madam Speaker, my farmers are suffering. When our farmers go for this business, they also want school fees for their children; they also want to survive locally and naturally, they have local needs; they also want to develop themselves. We are talking in terms of household income; these people have been robbed of their money by this big company. I request that relevant ministries and maybe other members help my people get paid by this company. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the ministers concerned should respond to those issues. There was agriculture, the Ministry of Works and the one for Education and Sports is here. Maybe, they will say something; cotton is also under agriculture, tobacco is also under Ministry of Trade. 

Clerk please extract – no, I want to know who should answer, that is all. Ministry of Trade is responsible for hon. Nabbanja’s issue; of the Iteso who are wondering around somewhere, Ministry of Internal Affairs should be able to come and handle that. The minister will answer hon. Kwiyucwiny’s question about where she belongs by way of exams. Thank you; let us go to item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.27
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My role is very simple, to lay these papers. Hon. Gen. Moses Ali was wondering whether I could lay them from the other side but I whispered to him, and I said, “Even the welfare for all members of the Opposition will always be received from the other side”. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion therein of the Auditor-General for: 

    i. Mugiti Sub-County, Budaka District
    ii. Nasanga Sub-County, Budaka District
    iii. Miirya Sub-County, Masindi District
    iv. Bwijanga Sub-County, Masindi District
    v. Masaba Sub-County, Busia District 
    vi. Masafu Sub-County, Busia District 
    vii. Buyanga Sub-County, Busia District 
    viii. Butebo Sub-County, Busia District
    ix. Bulumbi Sub-County, Busia District
    x. Sikuda Sub-County, Busia District
    xi. Lumino Sub-County, Busia District
    xii. Lugusulu Sub-County, Sembabule District
    xiii. Lwebitakuli Sub-County, Sembabule District
    xiv. Lwemiyaga Sub-County, Sembabule District –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the procedural point I am raising is, yesterday similar statements were laid before this House but the presentation made by hon. Akol was to read the introductions that “These are statements from the Auditor-General” and then just mention the districts. I am sympathetic to hon. Reagan for having to read the whole thing.

THE SPEAKER: No but everybody has a format on how they present, so long as he has captured the source, sub county and the district. I do not know what else you want him to do. Wamma you proceed. (Laughter)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think there was an earlier ruling on the same item by the Deputy Speaker at one time that each of these should be laid in their own rights. That is why I am endeavouring to spend all this time. In any case, I will have to mention all the names of the sub counties but if it is in wisdom of the House to save time to do other business -

THE SPEAKER: No, the Hansard must reflect what accounts have been brought. You cannot say these are all from Mbale, what have you brought from Mbale?

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I proceed: 

    i. Ntuusi Sub County, Sembabule District 
    ii. Mateete Sub County, Ssembabule District
    iii. Kawowo Sub County, Kapchorwa District 
    iv. Chema Sub County, Kapchorwa District
    v. Kaserem Sub County, Kapchorwa District
    vi. Gayaza Sub County, Kyankwanzi District
    vii. Batemba Sub County, Kyankwanzi District
    viii. Magale Sub County, Manafwa District
    ix. Bukhaweka Sub County, Manafwa District
    x. Bukokho Sub County, Manafwa District
    xi. Bukhofu Sub County, Manafwa District
    xii. Busukuya Sub County, Manafwa District
    xiii. Bukiabi Sub County, Manafwa District
    xiv. Nalonda Sub County, Manafwa District
    xv. Ssisa Sub County, Wakiso District
    xvi. Busukuma Sub County, Wakiso District
    xvii. Katabi Sub County, Wakiso District
    xviii. Lwamata Sub County, Kiboga District
    xix. Dwaniro Sub County, Kiboga District
    xx. Mulagi Sub County, Kiboga District
    xxi. Bukomero Sub County, Kiboga District
    xxii. Wattuba Sub County, Kiboga District
    xxiii. Muwanga Sub County, Kiboga District and
    xxiv. Kibiga Sub County, Kiboga District. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much commissioner Okumu. These are remitted to the Local Government Accounts Committee for perusal and report back.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 87/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE 

3.41
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, question 87/1/09: 
“Are the media reports that Government will no longer guarantee salary loans for civil servants true?

If so, how are civil servants expected to carry out personal development and solve major financial problems?”

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, my response to the first question is that it is not true. In November 2014, my ministry guided the service with guidelines to accounting officers for managing salary deductions on Government payroll. 
The circular, among others, highlighted the key principles for effective management of payroll deductions and all public officers intending to acquire salary loans must have approvals from the respective accounting officers. 

All deductions must be made within 50 percent of an officer’s gross salary including statutory deductions like PAYE. In other words, any total deduction must be below 50 percent of an officer’s salary. And these guidelines are with the accounting officers who are supposed to support their officers when they go for loans or salary loans.

Madam Speaker, I want to submit, in response to her question.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary?

3.44
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, first of all, before making a supplementary question allow me to inform the minister that this question had two questions - but the supplementary question I want to ask the minister is whether her ministry is in touch with the Ministry of Finance because it is the Ministry of Finance through, their spokesperson, Jim Mugunga, who held a press conference and announced these changes. So, in payment and in coming up with these directives, does the Ministry of Finance work closely with your ministry or are you aware that as far as the Ministry of Finance is concerned this directive was given and it was made effective from 1 July last year?

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we are aware that as the payroll was being decentralised, some accounting officers seemed not to have been aware about the commitment by Government to support salary loans. That is why in November we issued a circular to clarify the position so that our civil servants can be supported for their loans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Supplementary is only for the lady who asked.

QUESTION 11/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE

3.47
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, question 11/1/09: “Would the minister explain to this august House why Government has failed to pay benefits to the Members of the Presidential Commission who served as the Head of Executive Authority in Uganda under Legal Notice No. 5 of 1980?”

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, my response is that it is not true that Government has failed to pay benefits to the Members of the Presidential Commission. All the former leaders who were not covered under the Presidential Emoluments Act, 1998 were granted ex gratia.

Regarding the former presidents, they were granted an ex gratia of Shs 1 billion each. However, for the shared presidency of the Presidential Commission: His Excellency the late Saul Musoke, the late Nyamiconco Polycarp and Wacha Olwol the Shs 1 billion which was granted at that level was shared among them and was paid. Each one of them received Shs 330 million into their credit.

Madam Speaker, hon. Peter Ogwang requested that he has a supplementary question and I will wait for it. But there was also a question which was raised on the former Deputy Speaker of Parliament at one time, the Rt Hon. Ekemu. We actually paid him; it was an omission that he was not paid at that time also, but he has already been paid as I had promised before. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
  
3.50
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank Government and the minister. My supplementary question for record of this Parliament is that would the minister confirm whether the Ministry of Public Service received a copy of a letter dated 19 February 2013, signed by five members of Parliament, alleging that one lawyer in town reportedly received Shs 75 million, claiming he had signed contractual obligations accruing to him for services he rendered that compelled Government to pay the beneficiaries of the ex gratia? Just to confirm and I may request you, Madam Speaker, to allow me lay on Table these documents because all these payments were made through the normal budgetary process of Government but one smart lawyer in town received from Mzee Wacha Olwol Shs 75 million that he had signed a contractual obligation. 

We wrote a letter and I just want the minister to confirm whether the Ministry of Public Service received a copy because it was copied to them and addressed to the President.

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we, as a ministry, consulted the President on the ex gratia which he granted because that is his authority and as a ministry, we work with the Ministry of Finance to get the money. We actually paid individuals of estates account. As for the lawyer, we received your communication but that obligation to the lawyer was not with the Ministry of Public Service. Thank you.

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table three documents for the record of this Parliament: One is a letter dated 19 February 2013, addressed to His Excellency, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, signed by five members of Parliament and we were informing him of the fraudulent action of this lawyer claiming he had signed contractual obligation accruing to him for services he rendered to some of these former leaders – the heads of state, prime ministers, deputy speakers and speakers then and the former vice-president. 

THE SPEAKER: But really, how could that man have found the former deputy speakers, the old men and collected all of them and said he will represent them?

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on Table to confirm the fact that this money went through the normal budgetary process of Government and through this Parliament - (Interruption) 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague is giving this Parliament a very important piece of information, which could be used to further understand the subject matter that is being talked about. But I want to believe that many of us are not in a clear picture and neither is he clear about the letter, the author, the signatory. Who are those five people who have signed? This thing is going to remain on record. It would be good for us to be put in the know so that we really appreciate the seriousness of this matter. Could the honourable colleague, therefore, inform us fully by if possible reading this letter so that we all get out of this Parliament knowing what has been presented to us? I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please inform the House of what is happening.

MR DENIS OBUA: I thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Member. I have with me three documents to support what I am talking about. This letter is dated 19 February 2013, addressed to His Excellency YK Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda:

“Your Excellency, payment of ex gratia retirement benefits to former leaders. We, the undersigned members of Parliament, would wish to thank you for fulfilling your commitment and that of Government of Uganda by paying ex gratia benefits to former leaders of Uganda.

However, Sir, we wish to draw your attention to the following:

1. 	After effecting payments to the beneficiary through the standard budgetary process of Government spearheaded by you, through various correspondences and directives, one Capt. Awich Pola, a lawyer, allegedly claimed (demanded) and was paid money by the families of Mzee Wacha Olwol Shs 75 million; the late Justice Musoke, unspecified sum; the late Justice Nyamuconco, unspecified sum; the late Babiha John, unspecified sum and the late Prime Minister, George Cosmas Adyebo, Shs 10 million among others, claiming he had (signed contractual obligation accruing to him for services he, Awich, rendered that compelled Government to pay the beneficiaries.

In total, the amount of money he received from the above beneficiaries/families approximately amounts to Shs 250 million.
For instance, the Shs 75 million he received from the family of Mzee Wacha Olwol out of the Shs 333 million paid to Mzee as ex gratia was paid to him on 19 December 2012 through account number 0140574752501 and the name of the account is Awich Pola, Stanbic Bank, Garden City branch.

Your Excellency, in the circumstances, we request you to intervene and cause a thorough investigation into this matter in order to ensure justice, fairness and equity to the families of the former leaders of this country and beneficiaries. Granted chance, we can give more details.

Yours sincerely,
Signed by 
Obua Hamson (MP Ajuri)
Tony Ayoo (MP Kwania)
Okwenye Annette (MP Otuke)
Achieng Ruth (MP Kole District)
Engola Sam (MP Erute South/Minister)”

This is the first letter and I beg to lay it on Table.

The second letter I beg to lay is written and dated 27 February 2012 on the headed paper of State House, addressed to Mzee Wacha Olwol, former Presidential Commissioner, P.O Box 73 Kampala, telephone 077246802.

The subject matter is “Payment of ex gratia retirement benefits.” 

“Mzee Wacha Olwol, my former permanent secretary in the Office of the President, when I was a junior officer in 1970 as Assistant Secretary for research. I greet you.

I thank God for having kept us alive for all these years in spite of the chaos that has engulfed our country ever since 1966. However, whenever I am in Lira, I have an idea of calling on you. Next time, I will try to call on you. 
Regarding the insubordinate officials, the Banyankole have a saying; “Ekikamba tikihakana namuhoro” (a climbing plant cannot challenge a panga); in the end, the panga will cut it.

However, I would like to think that their problem has been too many demands on them particularly the electricity subsidy that has taken Shs 1,500 billion in the last five years because of the mistakes of the MPs who delayed Bujagali dam. Nonetheless, they should have told me of what problems they have had.

I will now ensure that the widows of Nyamuchoncho and Musoke as well as yourself, Mzee, will get at least in part retirement benefits by August 2012.” 
This letter is signed by Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President of the Republic of Uganda and copied to the Minister of Public Service, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Attorney-General, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury and the Permanent Secretary, Public Service. I beg to lay the letter on Table.

The third letter to confirm that this money indeed went through the normal budgetary process is a letter from the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Public Service. It is dated 7 November 2011 to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Kampala.
The subject matter is “Payment of ex gratia retirement benefits to the former presidents, vice-presidents, prime ministers, former speakers and deputy speakers of Parliament.”

“I refer to a letter TO/23, dated 16 June 2010, from His Excellency the President to the Rt Hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service copied to you on the above subject. This is to request for a supplementary budget on statutory vote 305; Ministry of Public Service (pension) of Shs 11.4 billion only. The funds are required for payment of retirement benefits to the former political leaders as per the attached annex 1.

I am attaching copies of the relevant letters for your reference.

Signed,
Jimmy R. Rwamafa, Permanent Secretary.” 

The attached annex 1 is “Ex gratia retirement benefits to the former presidents, vice-presidents, prime ministers, former speakers and deputy speakers of Parliament.

Former Presidents

    i. The late Sir Edward Mutesa I - Shs 1 billion. 
    ii. The late Dr Apollo Milton Obote -Shs 1 billion. 
    iii. The late Iddi Amin Dada - Shs 1 billion. 
    iv. The late Yusuf Kironde Lule - Shs 1 billion. 
    v. The late Godfrey Lukwonga Binaisa - Shs 1 billion. 
    vi. The late Justice Saul Musoke - Shs 333 million. 
    vii. Mzee Yoweri Anta Wacha Olwol - Shs 333 million. 
    viii. The late Justice C Nyamuchonco - Shs 333 million – these three shared presidency of the Legal Notice No.5 of 1980. 
    ix. The late Tito Okello Lutwa - Shs 1 billion.

Former Vice-Presidents 

    i. The late WWW Nadiope - Shs 400 million. 
    ii. The late John Babiha - Shs 400 million. 
    iii. The late Wilson Gad Toko -Shs 400 million. 
    iv. The late Dr Samson Kisseka - Shs 400 million.

Former Prime Ministers 

    i. The late Engineer Abraham Waligo - Shs 200 million. 
    ii. The late George Cosmas Adyebo - Shs 200 million. 
    iii. The late Eric Otema Alimadi - Shs 200 million. 
    iv. Mr A. Kintu Musoke - Shs 200 million.

Former Speakers of Parliament 

    i. The late James Wapakhabulo - Shs 350 million. 
    ii. The late Francis Ayume - Shs 350 million.

Former Deputy Speakers of Parliament

    i. The late Betty Okwir - Shs 300 million. 
    ii. Hajji Moses Kigongo – Shs 300 million.

The grand total is Shs 11.4 billion. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay the third letter on Table and thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, honourable members.

4.03
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the content of the document that hon. Hamson Obua has laid on Table and given the fact that these former leaders were paid through normal government budgeting, it is really sad to note that one person can position himself to merely extort the little money, which is not even enough to sustain the families of these former Presidents. Imagine one is given Shs 333 million and Shs 75 million is chopped off leaving only a balance of Shs 258 million. 

Madam Speaker, attempts were made to appeal to the President and the Minister of Public Service is here admitting that they received a copy of the letter but there was nothing much that they could do. These are citizens of Uganda; this is money that was appropriated by this Parliament. I want to seek guidance from you whether it is not possible for this Parliament to institute a committee to investigate and get the details so that this person is brought to book. This is one of the methods that people are defrauding others in Uganda and that is how people are losing a lot of money and it is becoming a common practice. 

We recently passed the Anti-Money Laundering law and even this is serious theft that needs to be investigated and handed over to the Police and the person is taken to prison. So, I want to seek your guidance and advice on how we can proceed because it has already come to the attention of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course I am in shock that one person can pretend to take interest of all these very senior Ugandans. As for a solution, I think I will give you guidance in the next meeting. I need to think about it and see how we are going to move.

4.05
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Madam Speaker, I am made to understand that this is a government which is committed to fighting corruption and if that statement which is always said is to be followed to the letter, so be it. The Ministry of Public Service of late has been a den of thieves because I have got evidence to that effect. Pensioners lost insurmountable amounts of money out of their sweat that they had shed in rendering service to this country. Much as the matter is before court, for which we may not say much, but this is yet a very glaring sign of impunity. 

If this is money, which is supposed to be ex gratia paid directly from Public Service into the accounts of the beneficiaries, how does a person again position himself also to begin taxing, as it were, these meagre resources paid to the families of those who have really toiled for this country? Actually following this matter is not so complicated neither is it so technical. The bank account to which this money was wired has been mentioned, the name of the person is known, save that we may not have known which bank the person holds the account in. This is something which, if Government is really committed, will not take a week or two in order to unearth and impress on whoever is involved to refund. 

This is pure theft and I am very sure, Madam Speaker, this type of theft is through collusion. This person who has positioned himself has got allies in that ministry because there is no way a person can come to fraudulently obtain Shs 75 million without any sweat or contribution, if it is not through the collaboration of the people from the paying end. I think this is something, which as an institution of good governance, we need to stand firm about and bring such kind of people to the books of law so that for the first time we can say yes, something is being done so that it acts as a deterrent measure. Otherwise it is very shameful and pitiful that the efforts of people whose interest this Parliament stood strong in ensuring that they be rewarded for the service they rendered to this country is just laid to waste through fraudulent hands. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you are justifying what is already justified. What we need is: how do we recover that money? Is it through the Police, the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of Justice? That is what instead I want to think about. Who is the right person to bring back that money? 

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, I want to clarify the way ex gratia was paid to the past leaders. We had to demand for the deceased former leaders to get their estates sorted out and that is another arm of Government. When they completed the estates management and we got who the successors are, the money was directly sent to the accounts of the estate managers of the former leaders. When it came to Mr Wacha Olwol and he was my supervisor when I was an officer in Government - and I want to say he is still alive - we sent his Shs 330 million to his account because pension is not taxed. We sent it directly to his account. Now when it emerges that somebody got money from Wacha Olwol, I think it is a police case because for us as a ministry, we paid out to his account and his relatives confirmed that he actually got the money. Since Mr Wacha Olwol is alive, living in Naguru, I think one should find out. 

I tried to hear this story and I asked one of the daughters in-law and they confirmed he got the money. How he came to be defrauded by somebody, I think is beyond my control. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.11
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, I have had the benefit to listen to the former Minister of Public Service about what is taking place and the way she is talking, she is taking this matter very casually. She has alluded to the fact that she talked to the daughter of one of the beneficiaries and in their casual talk, the other one assured her that someone received the money. I am wondering whether it not procedurally correct that the -(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I guess my ears serve me right. I listened attentively to hon. Paul Mwiru referring to the minister as the former minister when he is not the appointing authority and without official information to the fact that she is a former minister, is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. All the ministers are here. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, my honourable colleague was proceeding in a casual way that she talked to one of the daughters of the beneficiary and in their talk, she assured her that they had received money. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for her to lay some documentation on Table for us to be sure that actually that talk became official?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the reasons I said I wanted to think about how to get this money is because we do not know how it got to that man. But in any case, is it the work of this House to recover civil debts? Are we being asked to recover this money? Is it our duty? It is not our duty. I think if the families are complaining, let them go to complain to the court about theft because this happened when the money was beyond us. Yes, isn’t it? I do not think we can do it. Let us go to the next item.

MOTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ARCHBISHOP JANANI LUWUM

4.14
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to seek your indulgence. The motion my honourable colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar, is about to move is an extremely important motion given the stature of the late Archbishop Janani Luwum; very important because of the critical time that he lived in and even more important because in life and in death, he played a very significant role. 

Madam Speaker, I would love to engage actively in this motion but because we are just adjusting the order paper, a number of Members - my colleagues in the House, myself, the Anglican community in this Parliament - find ourselves kind of ill-prepared to do justice to this motion to pay tribute in a very noble way and to honour the late archbishop. 

I would like to ask, and I hope it does not offend my honourable colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar; if she will allow  and Madam Speaker if you will grant it – that please, let this motion be deferred probably either to next week or the week after to allow some of us also to participate. As it is right now, I will just be an observer. That is my prayer to you, Madam Speaker.

4.16
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I strongly agree with hon. Alaso because we, as the Anglican community, have a strong attachment to the late Archbishop Janani Luwum. Particularly, when you look at the geographical area that he covered, it stretches to Rwanda, Burundi, Boga-Zaire and some of us have the benefit to share borders with some of these areas. And it would be pertinent that we do thorough engagement with these neighbours of ours and get to the depth of the critical achievements that the late Janani Luwum had in his lifetime. We would even do further consultations with the archbishops of these various countries and provinces. 

So, I also beg hon. Beatrice Anywar that in the spirit of Christianity and in the spirit of one man one God, it would be pertinent that we handle it at a time when we can fully substantiate and give credence to the late Janani Luwum.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the person we are talking about is a martyr. I think he deserves serious time. He should have his own day; not to compete with other activities in Parliament. So, let us defer this debate. We shall get a new day, invite the family and other friends and probably the Church to be present. Thank you very much. (Applause)

4.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have listened to colleagues. Indeed, as a servant of the people of Kitgum District, where this great man was born, I am raising the flag not only on behalf of Uganda but as my colleague rightly indicated, the late Archbishop Janani Luwum is a great man in the region. I was moving this motion that as Parliament of Uganda, we pay tribute to him. You are aware, Madam Speaker, that this motion was raised last August and I hope that as we finish celebrations of remembering the martyr on the 16th in Kitgum District in Mucwini – where I invite all colleagues to be there – we shall shortly have space on the order paper and we do justice and pay tribute to the late archbishop. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I consent to the request of honourable colleagues. 

As I conclude, I would like to invite Members to two events: On 15th this month, we are celebrating 100 years of faith in Kitgum District and on 16th, we are celebrating the great martyr, the late Janani Luwum, in Kitgum District. I rightly and kindly invite honourable colleagues to come and join us and share with us malakwang and boo. Thank you.

4.20
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am seconding that motion and I appreciate the decision taken by the House that we have a substantive debate on this matter. It is very important that we do not only focus on Christianity because you do realise that even Muslims have been murdered because of their faith. So, we are looking at faith in general although Janani Luwum really died as a Christian leader standing on Christian principles.

However, the reason I am standing here is to appreciate the role that the leadership of Parliament has taken in steering the national organising committee. The national organising committee is co-chaired by the Prime Minister of this country, who is also the Leader of Government Business. It is being co-chaired by the Speaker of Parliament and is being co-chaired by the former Prime Minister, Apolo Nsibambi and Ambassador Olara Otunu as the one co-ordinating with the local team. 

Madam Speaker, the programme is on and I do appreciate that honourable minister Hillary Onek is the one who is steering the committee on security. We hope that he will be vigilant on that matter. And there are quite a number of Members who are involved, including Members from the Frontbench and mainly Members from Acholi and other areas in northern Uganda.

As one who is steering the protocol committee, I am requesting Members to really support that function; it is our function. It is being steered by our Speaker and I want to make sure that when you are there, you will be taken care of because I am the one in charge of protocol. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, there are very many people who are colour blind. I am not a yellow girl. First of all, I am not a girl. Secondly, I am not in yellow but I am just in the right mood. (Laughter)

So, I want to invite all of you. I thank you because you have already confirmed that you are going to be there in person and you have delegated the Deputy Speaker to be co-chairing every time we hold a meeting. I am asking Members, if there is any way you can contribute individually or corporately, we shall appreciate it. This is because right now, we are funding the activities ourselves as Christians and as any other willing person. I am appealing to you to make sure that you help us carry the burden for Christ. I can assure you that if you get involved, who knows! I think there are many saints in our midst but we still do not know who they are. 

Please, let us go together because when we meet in heaven and meet the archbishop, we will say we were there in Mucwini. So, I think that is one of the blessings that we will get for being involved. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Members rose.)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, let us do some other work. Thank you, honourable members. Let us go back to item 5 now.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING LEAVE TO INTRODUCE 
A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL (THE PRESIDENTIAL TRANSITION BILL, 2014)

4.24
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: If you can just use five minutes, please.

DR BAYIGGA: Five minutes will be a lot. I will use fewer or a maximum of five. Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all thank you very much for availing me space after some long time since this was brought to your attention about two years ago. 

This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, “The Presidential Transition Bill, 2014,” moved under rules 110 and 111.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order and development;

AND WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution provides for the office of the President and Articles 103 to 107 of the Constitution provide for the procedure for election of the President, procedure of challenging presidential elections, tenure of office of the President and the procedure of removal of the President on various grounds; 

NOTING THAT the Presidential Elections Act, cap 142, provides for the assumption of office of the President elect, who shall assume office within twenty four hours after the expiration of the term of office of the outgoing President and in any other case within twenty four hours after being declared President;

AWARE THAT there is no legislative framework to promote the orderly transfer of the executive power in connection with the expiration of the term of office of the President and the inauguration of a new President; 

CONVINCED THAT there is need to establish a legislative framework, making provisions for procedures and ceremony for the assumption of the office of President by providing for the requisite arrangements for assumption of the office of the President elect and the procedure for assumption of the office of the President by the President elect and his or her access to all state instruments, national assets and state secrets;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves that:

    1. This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The Presidential Transition Bill” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the Bill in preparation for its first reading.

    2. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is urged to provide a Certificate of Financial Implications in line with Section 10 of the Budget Act.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this motion with the attached Bill on Table. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is it seconded? (Members rose_)- Okay.

4.29
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You will agree with me that in this country, we have never had a hand over of power from one President to another -(Interjections)- if you could lend me your ears for a minute, you would appreciate what we are talking about.

We are looking at a situation where we should transit from one President to another. But in Africa, people always do not look at a bigger picture when they are looking at a country. We envisaged a situation where someone loses an election and he makes a lot of appointments and changes within Government at that time. 

So, for us to be in position to manage such a situation, we do not want to end up in a crisis. A Bill of this nature, since it is going to come to you as Parliament, we shall have a debate on the matter.
For now, we are only seeking for leave of this House to enable us have a certificate so that we can be in position to facilitate the debate.

I have heard my colleagues wondering whether they should support this motion or not. I want to allay your fears that any issues you have will be dealt with at the committee and during the debate. By you supporting this motion, you are doing the obvious. As a Member of Parliament, you are supposed to ensure that there is legislation of laws and the only way this can be done is when you lend support to our colleagues, and any doubt, like hon. Ogwang’s, will be solved at the time of the committee. By that time, you will have appreciated more what is contained in the Bill because I have also not looked at it. I also need to make more consultation on this Bill.

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, and implore you that what you are required of at the moment is not to support the Bill but to support the process of initiating the Bill. I want to assure you that we shall take care of any worries at the levels of the committee and debate. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, as you have heard, the two Members have come to request for authority of this House to allow them go and produce a Bill and then come back later, bring it for first reading and then it will be sent to the committee and later to be debated. So, all they are saying is that can you give them the authority to go and organise themselves with the Bill and then come back?

Honourable members, I put the question that this House gives authority to the Members to proceed as requested. (Interjections)(Laughter)

(Question put and consensus not achieved.)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, mine is to seek your guidance on the way we are proceeding, by way of calling on Members of Parliament. If there is any harm in any Bill, let us look at it. It is not plausible to throw the baby with bath water at this stage. So, to that extent, let us not fear each other. It is important that we allow the question to be put and we vote on the same without one voice making a pitch to cover the rest of the voices and voters in this House, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us take a vote again; seriously now. Okay, honourable members, I put the question that this House do give authority to the two Members to go and produce a Bill.
(Question put and consensus not achieved.) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, it is possible that our colleagues have may be not read the - we understand the question very clearly. But, this is just setting a process of transition of power from one president to another unless we say it already exists. If it does not exist, it does not harm our country; it simply brings a smart way of transition of power from one person to another. That is all we are trying to do -(Interruption)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am just giving the Leader of the Opposition some information. One of the duties about legislation - and we are creating ourselves business because we must legislate whether the process of achieving the goal of having a law or not has been achieved. What is important is to allow Members of Parliament to engage to create legislative frameworks where those frameworks do not exist. Thank you very much.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. What we are seeking is simply that a Bill is prepared and that Bill can be defeated. I do not think there is a problem with that – (Interruption) 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for allowing me say or provide information, which should be quite obvious to all of us.  

It is the mandate of this House, the Parliament of Uganda, according to Article 79 of our Constitution, to make laws on any matter for the good order, development and the governance of this country. That is our mandate, first of all. 

Secondly, I also wanted to tell the Leader of Opposition and indeed tell the House that even our rules took cognisance of that. It says that it is a right of a member to move a Private Members’ Bill. It may be defeated. That is okay but it is a right. It is your right to breathe. It is his right to try to move. 

Madam Speaker, that is the information I wanted to give to this House and actually to ask our colleagues and implore those who are very knowledgeable and respected legislators seated on the other side of the House to allow, to enhance the legislative process by supporting this motion.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. When this Bill is passed, it will also guide how we can transit from Museveni to Museveni. It is still the same. There is no problem about that -(Mr Ruhindi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, speak if you want. 

4.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, from your expression, you would think that certainly, maybe, I may spoil this debate but I will not. I will do my best not to spoil it. 

I am explaining the debate in the sense that I might be prejudiced; either way, I want to be open. We had a meeting in Zanzibar of Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD). I normally do not attend IPOD meetings on behalf of our party but this time, I was favoured with an invitation to that meeting. The different parties were represented: CP was represented, DP by hon. Norbert Mao, FDC by hon. Mugisha Muntu, JEEMA by hon. Basalirwa and our NRM party was represented by hon. Migereko, who has just excused himself out of the House.

We had many stakeholders that we interfaced with - Chama Cha Mapenduzi and its officials up to the Secretary-General of Chama Cha Mapenduzi; and we had leaders of the different parties in Ghana and some other places. 

There were many things we shared. One of which was a possibility of coming up with a legislation on this matter that is the Presidential Transition Bill. When we considered it at that level, we said let us interact more on this matter because from the discussion that came from our colleagues in Ghana, it was a good idea. You never know it could have contributed one way or another to the apparent stability.

In view of that, Madam Speaker, since that dialogue is going on at that level and we are all involved as stakeholders, why do we pre-empt it? Why don’t we first wait for their joint position on the matter and then we proceed? That is my view. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I would like to give the Attorney- General information. The meeting the Attorney-General is referring to took place last year. This Bill’s proposal, was brought here in 2013. The Bill preceded the meeting of last year. I do not think we want to use that meeting where we have not even shared the final report to curtail the Members’ right to move this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that this is just part of a process. The actual Bill can be defeated or it can be carried here on debate. Therefore, if we say, “Do not even try”, I think we will be undemocratic. I want to propose that we give them authority; they can go and print their Bill. When they come back, we can have a vibrant debate on the Floor of this House. (Applause) 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion of our colleague was very straight forward. Unless we are here to bend our own rules, a motion was simply seeking leave of Parliament and our Rules of Procedure define leave of Parliament as permission or agreement given by the majority of the members of the House.

Madam Speaker, I respect your guidance. But I find this really - in the terms of the procedures of House - simply asking what the majority of Members say; and we took a vote. If by the “ayes” or “nays” you could not take the ruling, then we go for the head count. The motion simply requests for leave and leave means the permission by the majority. Now, if the majority have said, “no”, then the Member has to go back and lobby. Otherwise, for us to say that the majority have not agreed to grant the leave and then we proceed, I find that irregular. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us take a vote by a show of hands. Those in favour of the request by the Members, raise your hands. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, it would appear - and I as a shadow minister, I had restrained myself from participating in the debate. However, I realise that as we were still struggling with an agreement or disagreement, we seem not to have the requisite numbers to take the vote. Procedurally, is it not correct that you ascertain a quorum before we proceed? I beg to seek your procedural guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, how many are they? Are you counting? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We would like to appeal to our colleagues. We are setting a terrible precedent. We have neither debated the motion nor had our colleagues told us whether they are objecting to the motion or not. But we are voting. I would be glad if some reasons were advanced by our colleagues as to why they are taking that position. As of now, we have a presentation from the Opposition side and no word has come from the other side and we are voting. It is terrible for us to legislate using the majority; to stop people from having a right to move a motion in this House. It is actually unconstitutional, although we have our rules, that you do not allow anybody to move a motion because you have the numbers. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Is it in order for the former Leader of the Opposition to engage the front bench (Interjections) and to sit in a position – (Laughter)- when the Leader of Opposition is submitting on serious issues? The former Leader of the Opposition is engaging the members of this side who should be absorbing what the Leader of the Opposition is submitting, as if he has turned it into a round “malwa” pot. Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, they were consulting each other -(Laughter)- are you addressing the proposal? 

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for opportunity given to me to speak on this issue. I want to be very open because at this material moment of time of politics, I may stand to be misunderstood.

(Part of the contribution by Ms Ann Maria Nankabirwa expunged.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want party issues on the Floor of this House -(Applause)- and what has been said should be expunged from the record. So, answer to the motion moved here. Hon. Businge Victoria was here. 

MS BUSINGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you because when you gave us a question, you were following the Rules of Procedure for a Private Member’s Bill, Rule 111, which says that “A Private Member’s Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion”, which he did, followed by the decision that “if the motion is carried...” – and you put a question, Madam Speaker. Now, it is your role to tell us the results of the motion, whether it was carried or not.

Everything is in order according to the rules, which govern both sides; just balance and everything will be in order. We just need the results. If they are not clear, we vote by a show of hands. But everything is in order according to the laws that govern the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, Rules 111(1) and (2).

THE SPEAKER: Okay, now you can complete.

MS ANN MARIA NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to complete my submission. With due respect, I do agree with our rules but I have got an opinion to present to honourable colleagues. 

I do agree that we have got the numbers but I also agree that we are in a growing democracy. I would request the Members that we accept and listen to one another; this Parliament should never try to involve itself in pre-empting before somebody has completed a statement. 

In my view, I may not agree with the details of what they are trying to lay on Table because I even do not know what is here. But for the future of this country, for democracy, growing good governance, listening and being patient to one another is very important.

I would pray that my dear colleagues, do not misunderstand me but the moment we allow - if we do allow a request of the colleague - allowing the process does not mean that we are going to accept what they are presenting. We may say, “no” when they present the issues and the details, which we do not know now. It would really be a very serious harm to the democracy of this country. It is because we fear being misinterpreted.  I thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the spirit in which the Member has moved a motion. I listened to the Attorney-General- in the first place, he knows that there is absence of the law on how the president leaves office or how he comes to office. The Constitution is very elaborate on how to remove the President. 

Having listened to the Attorney-General, two parties had agreed that they reach a consensus - (Interjections)- he was very clear and mentioned the leaders who were present in that meeting. [Ms Anywar: “Order.”] they have  started again. 

Now, my considered opinion is that it seems there has not been any consensus generated and therefore, we would wait for the parties to meet so that we can pronounce ourselves from the position of information. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I listened to the Attorney-General and it is true he mentioned parties that were involved with IPOD. But I would like to urge my colleagues in Parliament, that whereas there was discussion between leaders of political parties in this country, Parliament is now having the opportunity to look at what if, indeed, you discussed this, then this forms this subject, very important and it is the duty of Parliament to debate not to tie ourselves to the parties because this is not meant to serve parties, but to serve the people of Uganda. To that extent, there are even Members of Parliament here, who are independent, who are not represented by any of those parties.

Lastly, I am proud to have belonged to the Ninth Parliament and the Parliament which is legislating for the good, development; security of this country. And to that extent, I appeal to Members and I have been here relatively for some time; I have seen it and Members have seen it, I can assure you. 

At this point in time, we are talking about matters of public importance not of FDC, NRM or any other party but this is in the interest of the people of this country. Please, it is important for legislators to be open minded. Now you are moving to block, what you are blocking, for instance? It is within our rules not to debate in anticipation. 

So, it is important we allow opportunity please, and this should be a precursor to the very difficult situations we are going have in the Constitutional amendments, and if we start in this manner you are  polarising this House and this is not time for polarizing the House; we are all Ugandans first, before you belong to NRM or FDC. For that matter, I would urge Members that there is still a long way to go; why do we fear?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, stop grabbing the microphones. Let us hear from Hon. Obua

4.59
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find two fundamental questions that we must resolve before we proceed. The issue raised by hon. Sseggona on whether we have quorum and the question raised by hon. Magyezi on the procedure and the definition, the fact that, this permission - because this is motion seeking leave of Parliament. This leave can either be granted or not. So, these are the two fundamental issues that we must settle, if there is no quorum, can we defer to an opportune moment where there is quorum and we vote to either grant them leave or not.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, the matter before hand is extremely important for Uganda because we are talking about the future stability of Uganda. The stability means guarantee because the history of Uganda over the years, we have not had a chance where a President leaves power peacefully. 

So, I am really trying to look at the intent of the proposed Bill. I feel it would be very unfortunate at this point in time to begin rejecting something before we have gone to the details. 

The Attorney-General highlighted on the importance at the continent level; I have just been at the Africa Union meeting and one of the fundamental objectives of the African Union, is to see how African countries can continue to overcome the challenges of transition of leadership. So, this is not a very big problem and we should be honest and face the reality. We need to create security for our President. If the President at a given time is leaving power, he should feel comfortable and secure. 

So, I do not see the problem why, we cannot introduce a Bill that should guarantee the stability of holding such sensitive offices and that is why I would urge you Members that much as we do not know what is in the content, let us listen and see what happens; it is still upon us to make the decision. (Applause) Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The third fundamental issue in addition to honourable Obua’s is that this motion has got two main seconders; hon. Mwiru and hon. Oboth-Oboth. However, if you try to replay the video recording, you will realise that hon. Oboth-Oboth did not put up his hand when you asked for those who are in support this motion.  Therefore, the procedural point I am raising -(Laughter)- yes, if you replay the video, he did not support it. 

So, are we procedurally moving in the right way if the main seconder is not in support of the motion, Madam Speaker?

MR OBOTH-OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know which copy of the motion my brother hon. Majegere has, but the official copy, which I have, I verified with the office of the Clerk, has one seconder and that is hon. Paul Mwiru. If you looked at the seconder Jacob Oboth-Oboth, does not represent West Budama North and whereas I have seen the text of the Bill, I have not been able to append my signature as a supporter. Therefore, that should not spoil the spirit of the motion here, but I believe that hon. Mwiru ably spoke to the Bill.  I have no useful information now on the motion.  Therefore, I do not want my name to be dragged in at this stage.

5.06
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Madam Speaker, I would like to assure the Members that the details of the Private Member’s Bill has not yet been brought to us; what the Member is requesting is just to be allowed to go and organise the Bill and bring it to the House.  This is what we are trying to defend. There are things that we have got to fight for as Members of Parliament.  As the Ninth Parliament, we all rise together as one Parliament, not NRM, not UPC, not FDC; we rise together or fall together as one Parliament. 

What I want to remind the Members is that we should give the honourable member bringing the Private Member’s Bill time so that we look at it objectively without having these lenses of parties. You know very well that I am a very objective person and I would not fear to even refuse the Bill if it is causing problems to the nation. 

Therefore, I feel at this material time, that we should give him a chance to organise the Bill and bring it in the House so that we vote on the matter when the time for debate comes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Members for the contribution. We have been having discussions and this Bill is one of those that we have been discussing at the Inter-Party Organisation for Dialogue (IPOD).  

At the moment, the parties are seated at the Royal Suites in Bugolobi and we are trying to finalise the proposals that IPOD is going to table here for consideration so that we generate consensus as political parties on the proposals that we should be discussing. The Bill, which is being tabled right now featured very strongly in our discussions in Zanzibar. (Interjections) Madam Speaker –(Ms Franca Akello rose_)- the yellow girl on the other side.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable Minister of Lands whom we respect so much in this land to lie to this Parliament that there is a meeting of IPOD taking place in Bugolobi, discussing matters regarding the motion moved by hon. Bayigga, when I do know that that meeting which is taking place now is discussing issues to do with financing parties. 

Secondly, is he in order to relate that meeting with the motion that is being moved by a Member in this House, which does not have any relationship; is he in order and also calling me a yellow girl -(Laughter) is he in order when he is wearing a blue shirt. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I want to suggest a compromise; would it do any harm if this proposal was sent to you officially, as a constitutional proposal? 

MR RUHINDI: Even now, Madam Speaker, you remember the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs came here; he sought for an extension of time in which to receive proposals from the public or any other person who may have not put in one. You recall, for instance, that the Leader of the Opposition stood here, agreed with the Minister then and even asked for an extra week within which to do so. We have been receiving proposals and proposals are still welcome. (Applause)

All we were saying here is that let these proposals come; those which are already in the process of a consultative nature, like the one under discussion- because it would be more meaningful and let me be frank with you. When you have harmony and consensus on a matter, it becomes even easier on the Floor of this House. Why do we pre-empt that process when it was because it was doing well? I attended one meeting, let the Ministry of Justice receive a proposal from IPOD -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In my other capacity as a Minister responsible for Justice and Constitutional Affairs in the government on your left and also as a legislator, I speak here with a heavy heart and my heart bleeds.

In light of the submission by the hon. Alice Alaso that our principle obligation is to make laws. One of the ways of bringing and making laws in this Parliament is by a private member’s Bill irrespective of where that Bill or proposal is coming from. 

Why I bleed is when I see Members telling the country that either we do not want to receive work or we do not want to receive work from that side; and you reject it before you even look at the content. If this motion was allowed by the House - and I believe this House has got the power to say yes or no - but that one is in the rules and is simply procedural issue - the substantive issue is to allow a smooth flow of debate by looking at what the members are proposing. You may reject the proposals when you receive them. Now if you tell a Member not to bring about their proposal, surely how will you ever determine whether the proposal is sound or not? Colleagues, let us send a message to this country as the top cream of the political class. At least receive the proposals, whichever way. 

Hon. Fred Ruhindi, the minister on the other side asked a question: Why don’t you want to wait? He has ably informed us that they sat last year and said the process is on-going. For how long will this country and this Parliament wait for processes outside Parliament?

Secondly, even those processes of IPOD, for which I have great respect, will come and find the parliamentary process on. Honourable colleagues, this is the year when we are supposed to kick off nominations for Presidential, Parliamentary and other lower level elections. If this Parliament is going to wait for the processes outside Parliament, surely are we doing a good job for this country? 

Madam speaker, I want to end my contribution today by appealing to members, never to shut out information. One great writer once said “Information is good however bad it may appear.” Receive the information, equip your knowledge and strengthen yourself. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today’s motion is unusual in that this the first time we even people attempted to vote. Normally we proceed by consensus; this is what we have been doing in all the other situations. It became difficult to decide which side is taking which direction because we were almost equal – yes, from my ears. So -

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, it is not that either side is against it but it is a procedural matter. The fact is that political parties are consulting each other and those consultations are still going on -(Interjections)– yes. The problem is that you do not want to listen and we are saying –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I have hesitantly risen on point of order. This matter has received view from the two sides. We are all aware that IPOD exists, but this Parliament cannot operate at the wheels of whatever organisations out there.

The reason there are two sides in this Parliament is because we are in a multi-party dispensation and political parties are here. There can be no any other entity other than the Parliament to take decision and in this case; we are guided by the Rules of Procedure and the motherland law called the Constitution. Therefore, is the member in order to begin derailing this Parliament from performing its noble duty by citing what even is not binding to this Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us do our duty. No more debate.

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, the IPOD report is coming here. Last time when we debated Electoral reforms, the work of IPOD helped us immensely and whatever was agreed in IPOD, just passed. So, I see no reason - we shall give total support to hon. Paul Mwiru; let this report come out.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have been influenced by fear of the unknown. This matter came long time ago. Actually it precedes what the Attorney-General is talking about. It was just because of the lengthy processes that today I was told that we would be on the Order Paper.

We would have lobbied prior enough so that people know what exactly the spirit or what is involved in this proposal so that people do not bear heavy hearts to fear what is not known. It is on that basis, Madam Speaker, that I ask for a chance to lobby my friends on the other side because, first of all, if we have to take a decision now, the issues of quorum will be raised, which will be unnecessary. But we would simply say that we can continue to engage the other side so that we do not lose this noble research that has been done. We have input a lot of brain - actually the Parliamentary Legal Office has done a lot research on this to establish that there lacunar that needs to be covered. All that work will have been lost because people are taking a decision on the basis of fear of the unknown.

Madam Speaker, can we grant ourselves chance so that we continue to engage with our friends on other side for them to know that there is no harm in this Bill. That is my plea.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us postpone decision on this matter for you to dialogue further. Let us handle next item on the Order Paper.

	MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KABEHO LC I, KINOONI B LC I, BOOMA LC1, 
KYATUBA B LC I AND BIGAAGA LC I IN BULONGO PARISH, 
NTUUSI SUB-COUNTY, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Biraaro and his team?

5.24
MR EPHRAHIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni B LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-County, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on petition by the above petitioners over the alleged eviction from their land on Plot 5, Block 11 (LRV 995 Folio 6) by the Uganda Investment Authority, Ms Hellen Kayonga, Ms Jovia Akandwanaho and the Uganda Police Force.

The petition was tabled by the hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, MP for Lwemiyaga County and referred to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for consideration as per Article 90 of the Constitution of Republic Uganda, 1995 and Rules 147 and 177 of the Rules of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, because the report is long, I am going to be skipping some parts and focusing on the major areas and let me now go straight to page 3 of the report.

Allegation by the Petitioners

The allegations, Madam Speaker and Members, are clearly written from 1, 2 to 7.

Background

The land under dispute is owned by Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd who purchased it from Uganda Investment Authority. It is situated in Sembabule District at Plot 5, Block 11 (LRV 995 Folio 6) Mawogola, and Land at Kinooni, Ntuusi Sub-County.

The committee established that on the 4 November, 2013, a formal sale agreement was executed between Uganda Investment Authority, as vendors and Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd, as the purchases after the final instalment of Shs 200 million had been remitted to Uganda Investment Authority referred to as annexes ix and xviii.

There had been a number of changes regarding the ownership and settlement on the land under dispute. Information dating as far back as 1977, takes into account cognisance of the fact that there have always been some bona fide occupants and squatters on the said land.

Under the sale agreement between G.W. Katongole and Faustine Ntambara (vendors) and Uganda Investment Authority (purchasers), one of the conditions was for the purchaser to receive the land free of any encumbrances, but this was never fulfilled as Uganda Investment Authority failed to carry out due diligence before transfer of the land into its name, hence inheritance of squatters.

This notwithstanding, minutes of the meeting held on 18 July 2007, under Minute 11/03/LIC/07, Uganda Investment Authority acknowledged that about 1.5 square miles of the land under dispute had already been occupied, leaving three square miles of the said land.

The meeting then resolved that the land would be sold and that any future buyer would take the responsibility of compensating the bona fide occupants and squatters. (See annex xv) Consequently, the land was sold to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd.

The committee established that when the occupants of the land learnt that Uganda Investment Authority had sold it under dispute to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd contrary to their wish to be granted the first option to purchase it, they petitioned the Minister of State for Lands challenging the sale because they were not given the opportunity of the first option buyer. 

Consequently, on 7 December, 2007, the then Minister of State for Lands, hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, wrote to the Executive Director of the Uganda Investment Authority requesting for the details surrounding the matter.

Madam Speaker, at the bottom of that paragraph of the said minutes - though the minutes were never availed, the committee got them after a long protracted search.

Methodology

Committee reviewed and analysed the following documents: the sale agreement between G.W. Katongole and Faustine Ntambara and the Uganda Investment Authority; the sale agreement between Uganda Investment Authority and Abeki Farm Enterprises Limited; the Certificate of Titles for the Land under dispute; the bid invitation by Uganda Investment Authority to purchase the said land in Sembabule District; the valuation report by the Chief Government Valuer; the advice of the Solicitor-General on the sale of land under contention by Uganda Investment Authority; and the various correspondences between Uganda Investment Authority, Abeki Farm Enterprises Limited and other stakeholders.

The Law

Under section 29 (1) of the Land Act, Chapter 227 of the Laws of Uganda, a lawful occupant means;
“a) a person occupying land by virtue of the repealed Busuulu and Envunyo Law of 1928; Toro Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937; and Ankole Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937; 
b) 	a person who entered the land with the consent of the registered owner, and includes a purchaser; or  
c)	a person who had occupied land as customary tenant but whose tenancy was not disclosed or compensated for by the registered owner at the time of acquiring the leasehold certificate of title.”

Under section 29 (2) of the Land Act Charter 227, “a bona fide occupant means a person who before the coming into force of the 1995 Constitution; 

a) 	had occupied and utilised or developed any land unchallenged by the registered owner or agent of the registered owner for 12 years or more; and/or 
b) 	had settled on the Land by the government or an agent of Government, which may include a local authority.”

In addition section 30(1) of the Land Act provides thus: “Where a person has occupied and utilised or developed any land unchallenged by the registered owner for less than 12 years and therefore does not qualify to be a bona fide occupant under section 29 that person shall take all reasonable steps, seek and identify the registered owner of the land for the purpose of undertaking negotiations with that owner concerning his or her occupation of the land.”

Specific Prayers 

1. 	Parliament ascertains the manner and circumstances under which UIA acquired and disposed of the land under dispute. We have annex ii with that narration. 

On 15 December 1997, G.W. Katongole and Faustine Ntambara sold the land to UIA, which was subsequently transferred and registered in the names of UIA on 16 December 1997, vide instrument No. 291277. That can be seen in annexures xiii and iii. 

The Uganda Investment Authority then duly placed an advert in the New Vision newspaper dated Thursday, 13 September 2007, inviting bids for the purchase of UIA land in Sembabule. It clearly stated that, “there are no registered encumbrances on the title but there are some bona fide occupants on the land.”

In addition, a review of the UIA disposal evaluation report, which is annex v, indicated that among the considerations for the award to the successful bidder were the following: 

    • bidder’s willingness to buy the land on an as is basis; 
    • willingness to compensate squatters; 
    • proof of availability of funds to compensate squatters; and
    • viable investment plan or business proposal.

Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd. emerged as the best evaluated bidder at Shs 405 million, contrary to the Chief Government Valuer’s valuation of Shs 450 million. See annexes v and vi. This anomaly was due to the highly advertised presence of squatters on the land hence making it unattractive to potential investors at such a price, whereupon the evaluation committee of UIA presumed the price at Shs 400 million.

The committee further observed that though it was alleged by the petitioners that Ms Jovia Akandwanaho was a director in Abeki Farm Enterprises, the owners of the land under dispute, it was not true. Ms Jovia Akandwanaho is not a director in Abeki Farm Enterprises as evidenced in a communication from the Registrar General of URBS. The directors of Abeki Farm Enterprises are listed in annex xi. On the other hand it was established that she is a director in Rift Valley Investments Ltd, a company that extended a line of credit to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd to enable them complete their final instalment of Shs 200 million to UIA.

Observations and Recommendations

The committee observed that UIA did not carry out any due diligence before purchasing the land under dispute as evidenced in its purchase of land encumbered with squatters. This is contrary to the sales agreement (annex i) between UIA, the purchasers and G.W. Katongole and Faustine Katimbo Ntambara (vendors).

The committee established that despite UIA acquiring the land in 1997 it was not until 2003 that a survey was carried out in which it was established that about 652 acres of the land under dispute was beyond redemption as it had been encroached upon. See annex xiii. 

The committee condemns the laxity with which UIA handled this whole transaction. First issue to note is that the delay to carry out due diligence by UIA on the land under dispute, a time span of about six years, from 1997 to 2003, cost Government money. Instead of the land being sold at Shs 450 million as per the valuation report by the Chief Government valuer, it was sold at Shs 400 million due to the heavy encroachment. Worse still, UIA ended up paying for less acreage than it expected as 652 acres were deemed to be beyond redemption due to the fact that some of the land had already been sold off to GW Katongole and Faustine Katimbo Ntambara in 1995. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the responsible officer be brought to book.

The committee further recommends that the responsible accounting officer for the duration between 2008, when the Solicitor-General advised for the enforcement of specific performance, and 2013, when the last instalment was received, be held accountable for negligence. 

The committee further reiterates its recommendation that in future UIA carries out due diligence before concluding any transactions in order to avoid any situations that may cost Government huge amounts of money –(Interruptions)

MS KAMATEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairman of the committee continues to refer to the responsible officer to be brought to book. Would it not be procedurally correct to give us the names of the officers who are responsible so that we know who to go after?

THE SPEAKER: What was the problem?

MS KAMATEKA: My issue is: wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the chairman of the committee to give us the names of the officers who are referred to in the report? Is he procedurally right to just mention “the officer responsible”?

THE SPEAKER: Are there names in the main report?

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, the names are in the attachments we are talking about but I can still mention those names. The first accounting officer was Dr Maggie Kigozi, who was the first Executive Director of UIA. The second is Mr Tom Buringuriza, who was an acting ED. The names are clearly stated in the attachments if members could read them. I am trying to save time because the report is long and I have to give a summary, but everything is there.

2. 	Prayer two is that the committee establishes the circumstances under which Mr Kamihingo Emmanuel, the Managing Director of Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd, who also doubles as the area chairperson for LC III, acquired the land under dispute.

Observations

The committee observed that according to the sales agreement and other supporting documents like the bid notification and payslips, the land in question was duly acquired by Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd.

The committee further learnt that Ms Merab Kemikufu and Ms Kekitenderezo, who had settled and lived on this land before 1980, negotiated and purchased approximately 450 acres from GW Katongole and Faustine Ntambara by 1995. They privately surveyed the land and demarcated it with mark stones as seen in annex xiii.

The committee further noted that by declaring a total of approximately 2,930 acres as available land for sale to UIA, GW Katongole and Faustine Ntambara acted fraudulently since they knew that they had already sold part of this land, the 450 acres.

The committee also observed that no evidence was presented to the effect that UIA or any other preceding proprietors of the land under dispute ever challenged the occupants regarding their status of occupancy, neither was there proof of any other prior lawful attempt to evict them.

Recommendations

The committee, therefore, recommends that Abeki Farm Enterprises, being the rightful owners of the land in question and with a title, honour the terms of the sales agreement between them and UIA and compensate or relocate the affected persons as per the comprehensive name list aforementioned in the survey report of 22 October 2013. See annex xiii.

The committee further recommends that since Uganda Investment Authority purchased the land without carrying out due diligence, only to establish that they had paid for less than 2,900 acres indicated on the title, the bona fide residents whose land was wrongfully indicated on the title should be identified and their interests duly addressed as per section 35 of the Land Act of 1998.

3. 	The Committee establishes the circumstances under which Ms Kellen Kayonga forcefully drove her cattle onto the disputed land and destroyed crops and water wells. 

The committee was informed that in July 2013, when the Police together with Ms Kellen Kayonga allegedly attempted to arbitrarily evict about 2,553 residents from the land under dispute, the residents then petitioned Parliament through their area Member of Parliament, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, challenging that eviction from the said land. However, from the testimonies received from the occupants, the committee learnt that the act of driving 150 heads of cattle on the land under dispute was to them a step towards eviction. The committee, however, did not get any proof of this when it visited the area.

4. 	The committee establishes the circumstances under which the Inspector General of Police made excessive deployment for a forceful takeover of the land under dispute by Ms Kellen Kayonga without a court order.

The committee notes that though the occupants alleged that the IGP excessively deployed police to aid Ms Kellen Kayonga in evicting them from the land under dispute, there was no evidence to this effect.

The committee observed that though there was no evidence of heavy police deployment as alleged, there was only sufficient deployment of police to keep law and order in fulfilment of their mandate as per Article 212 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

5. 	Another prayer was to ensure that Uganda Investment Authority adheres to and respects the resolutions reached by all the stakeholders on 31 January 2008 therein allowing the lawful bona fide occupants to enjoy their constitutional rights. 

The committee notes that the notification of award for purchase of land to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd, dated 13 November 2007, by Uganda Investment Authority clearly stated that the land was being sold on an as is basis and that M/s Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd was responsible for resettling/compensating the bona fide occupants on this land. This was further re-echoed in the sales agreement between the two parties as well as their recognition of squatters on the land under dispute. See annexure xiv and xii.
 
The committee further observes that the land under dispute was sold off legally to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd as evidenced by the advice of the Solicitor-General to the MD of the Uganda Investment Authority. This renders whatever resolutions reached at in the said meeting of 31 January 2008 null and void.

The committee therefore recommends and urges Abeki Farm Enterprises Limited to compensate the bona fide occupants and squatters as per the sales agreement and surveyors’ report. See annex xiii.

Conclusion

The committee notes that most of the issues raised in this petition mainly accrue from lack of sensitisation of the population on the relevant laws. Critical to note is the Land Act that has been amended twice in 2004 and 2010 respectively, but most of the populace is still ignorant of its content. 

Further to note are the various petitions in Parliament accruing from land disputes and land conflicts countrywide. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should take the lead in sensitising the masses on the proper interpretation of the terms “lawful” and “bona fide occupants” of land.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee therefore recommends that the House adopts the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on a petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinoni B LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-County, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, before I take leave of the Floor, allow me to lay on the Table a number of documents which I have included in this file; the list is very long but they are:

a) 	The agreement of sale and purchase between G.W. Katongole and Faustine Katimbo Ntambara; 
b) 	The certificate of title; 
c) 	Minutes of the 5th board meeting held on 26 July 2007; 
d) 	The bid invitation for purchase of Uganda Investment Authority land in Sembabule District; 
e) 	An internal memo and the evaluation report on the sale of Sembabule land; 
f) 	Notification of award for purchase of Sembabule land; 
g) 	A Uganda Investment Authority cash receipt of Shs 205 million; 
h) 	A Uganda Investment Authority cash receipt of Shs 200 million; 
i) 	The loan agreement between Rift Valley Investment Ltd and Abeki Enterprises; 
j) 	Communication from the Uganda Registration Services Bureau on the company profile of Abeki Farm Enterprises; 
k) 	The agreement of sale and purchase of land between Uganda Investment Authority and Abeki Enterprises;
l) 	The Masaka District administration report on opening land boundaries of Uganda Investment Authority at Bulongo in Ntuusi; and 
m) 	The press release by Uganda Investment Authority on its land in Sembabule District. 

The others are: 

    a) minutes of the third land issues committee meeting held on 18 July 2007; 
    b) minutes of the Committee of Physical Infrastructure during its deliberations; 
    c) communication to the Minister of State for Lands from Mr Tom Buringuriza, the then acting ED of Uganda Investment Authority; 
    d) the Registration of Titles Act transfer document from Uganda Investment Authority to Abeki Farm Enterprises; and 
    e) minutes of the contracts committee meeting held at the Uganda Investment Authority boardroom on 8 November 2007.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair of the committee and your committee, for the great work done. Are there any contributions or we adopt the resolution? Okay, there is a minority report.

MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry for not having mentioned it, but it came in at the last minute and that is why it skipped my mind. Otherwise, I acknowledge its existence because I saw it although at last minute.

5.51
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minority report is actually signed by three members: hon. Gilbert Olanya, MP for Kilak County; hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba, the MP for Kawempe South; and me, the MP for Busongora County North and member of the Physical Infrastructure Committee. 

Under rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure, we, the undersigned, disagree with the main report and I wish to first of all give some bit of background, Madam Speaker. 

Whereas the main committee report made a finding that on 4 November 2013 a formal sales agreement was executed between Uganda Investment Authority, as vendors, and Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd, as the purchasers, after the final instalment of Shs 200 million had been remitted to a UIA bank account (refer to annexes x and xviii), with due respect we beg to differ under the following circumstances:

a) 	In the New vision newspaper of Thursday, 13 September 2007, Uganda Investment Authority placed an advert inviting bids for purchase of UIA land in Ssembabule. Further, according to UIA self-executing notice of award to Abeki dated 13 November 2007, (annex xviii, line 1 of the main report) Abeki was to pay a total of Shs 405 million, payable in two instalments. The first instalment was of Shs 205 million to be paid within one calendar month on receipt of the notification of the award letter. The last installment, Shs 200 million, was supposed to be paid within three months - February 2008. A copy of the notification is appended as annex xviii, Rt Hon. Speaker.

Observations

1. 	Abeki breached the terms and conditions of the offer letter of contract when it failed to pay the full purchase price within the stipulated three months (February 2008).

2. 	The purported sales agreement of 4 November 2013 was executed six years way outside the contract period, when Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd had long extinguished its purchase rights under a contract, hence it is a nullity.

3. 	It was only after the commencement of the probe by Parliament in July 2013 that Abeki Farm Enterprises rushed to purportedly complete the payment in November 2013 for purposes of regularising the transaction.

4. 	Further, the purported payment of Shs 200 million by Abeki Farm Enterprises to UIA on 4 November 2013 was in total contempt of Parliament and standard procedures. As a committee, we had written to the relevant parties that were participating in this transaction to halt all the processes, which the chairman himself endorsed.

5. 	It is an agreed finding that on 28 January 2008, the then Minister of State for Lands, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, convened and chaired an all stakeholders’ meeting between Abeki, UIA, the area MPs, district local leadership and residents. It was agreed that UIA adheres to Article 237 of the Constitution and particularly Section 35(2) of the Land Act, to give the first option of buying the land to the tenants since they had expressed willingness to buy the land.

Later, rather than implementing the agreed position, UIA instead wrote to the Solicitor-General to clear the transaction as per the response on 12 June 2008. With due respect, whereas Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution is clear on drawing and perusing of agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, it does not provide for retrospective clearance.

Part IV, Section 44-54 of the PPDA Act 2003 and regulations provide that in the procurement or disposal cycle, clearance by the Attorney-General or Solicitor-General, as the case may be, is secured and granted prior to taking of procurement or disposal decisions and not retrospectively. In the instant case, UIA only sought the opinion of the Solicitor-General to frustrate the minister in the performance of his rightful duties and thus defeat the petition of the occupants of this disputed land.

6. 	Rt hon. Speaker, the successful bidder never purchased while the purchaser never bid. That is the issue, which I expected that the main report to highlight. 

The successful bidder, Mr Kamihingo Emmanuel of Abeki Farm Enterprises, also happens to be the area LCIII chairperson of Ntuusi Sub-County in Ssembabule District. According to the said notice of award dated 13 November 2007, Abeki was to pay a total of Shs 404 million with a down payment of Shs 205 million and the balance of Shs 200 million to be paid within three months. 

However, on 28 November 2007, Abeki wrote to UIA accepting the award with terms and conditions. Surprisingly, even before making any payment for the said land, Abeki transferred the offer to M/s Askar Security Company without any ownership or possessionary rights (annex viii). This was fraud, in the opinion of the presenters of this minority report.

On 4 December 2007, Askar Security Services of Ms Kellen Kayonga purportedly made a payment of Shs 205 million to UIA and a receipt was issued in the names of Askar and not Abeki, the purchaser. See a copy of the receipt, dated 4 December 2007, in annex ix.

After more than six years since the award was made, on-payments were never concluded. This was a clear breach of the terms and conditions of the offer. It was only during the course of Parliament’s investigation that on 24 October 2013, another payment of Shs 200 million was deposited on UIA’s account from Rift Valley Investments Ltd of Ms Kellen Kayonga and Ms Jovia Saleh (annex x).

To perfect the fraud, on 14 September 2011 Abeki purported to have entered into a bogus loan agreement with Rift Valley Investments (annex xi). Abeki was purportedly advanced a loan of exactly Shs 205 million, which was the exact amount of UIA’s first instalment that Askar Security Services had paid to UIA on behalf of Abeki. On the same day, 14 September 2011, Abeki converted the purported loan into a sale and transfer agreement and transferred the whole disputed land on Plot 5, Block II LRU 995 Folio to Rift Valley Investments in consideration of the said loan of Shs 205 million (annex xii). It is therefore not tenable for Abeki to purport to transact, let alone transfer, what they did not own in the first place.

Curiously, the above mentioned company resolution by Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd is dated 14 September 2011. It was filed with the Registrar of Companies only on 16 July 2013 when Parliament’s investigations into the matter were already on-going.

In 2013, UIA conducted a rather belated inquiry with Uganda Registration Services Bureau about the status and shareholding of Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd. The results are that the company was incorporated on 19 July 2005. The certificate, No. 74532, is highlighted in this report. To date, its shareholding status has not changed: Kamihingo Emmanuel owns 80 per cent; Amanya Amos owns 10 per cent; Niwenyine Enid owns 10 per cent. This is from the Abeki shareholding status, annex xiii.

There is no evidence that by way of transfer of shares and powers of attorney or any such instruments between Ms Kellen Kayonga, Askar Security Services, Rift Valley Investments, Ms Jovia Saleh and Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd were ever registered with Uganda Registration Services Bureau. 

Legally, there is no locus standing between Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd, the successful bidder for the purchase of UIA land, and Askar Security Services and Rift Valley Investments that made the financial payments. In the circumstances, Abeki has never paid for the land and the financial deposits on UIA’s bank account were from strangers, entities not party to the contract. Therefore, such a purported transaction cannot stand under the PPDA Act, 2003, as amended, and the regulations.

7. 	The illegal transfer of the caveated title. As rightly observed in the main report, in a bid to protect their own interests as occupants of this disputed land, on 23 May 2013, Mr Sam Tumwine, Mr Tibesigwa John, Ms Merabu Kemikufu, Ms Jovanis Kekitenderezo, Mr Bangirana Alex and Mr Kagundu Charles, on behalf of all petitioners, lodged a caveat on the land in dispute vide instrument No. MSK 00000172. A copy of the caveat is in annexure xxii, Madam Speaker.

Caveats are provided for under Part VII of the Registration of Titles Act, Cap. 230. Section 139(1) provides that, “Any beneficiary or other person claiming any estate or interest in land under the operation of this Act or in any lease or mortgage under any unregistered interest or by devolution in law or otherwise, may lodge a caveat with the registrar in the form in the Fifteenth Schedule to this Act or as near that as circumstances permit, forbidding the registration of any person or transfer or proprietor of land or any instrument affecting that estate or interest until that notice of intended registration or dealing is given to the caveator, or unless the caveator consents in writing to the Registrar.”

Further, Section 141 provides that, “So long as any caveat remains in force prohibiting any registration or dealing, the registrar shall not, except in accordance with some provisions of the caveat or with consent in writing of the caveator, enter in the registration book any change in proprietorship of or any transfer or other instrument purporting to transfer or otherwise deal with or affect the estate or interest in respect to which that caveat is lodged.”

Madam Speaker, in this instance, the provisions of this particular caveat are prohibitive and mandatory - “caveat forbidding registration of change in proprietorship or dealing with estate or interest (RTA 15th Schedule)”. In addition, there is no evidence of consent to change in proprietorship by the caveator. On 30 May 2014 at 9.59 a.m. under instrument No. MSK 000003171 the Registrar of Titles entered a change in proprietorship and title transfer of this disputed land from Uganda Investment Authority (P. O. Box 7418, Kampala) to Abeki Farm Enterprises Limited of P.O. Box 1388, Masaka. 

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, these are the observations: The transfer of the title, in total disregard of a subsisting protected title, is illegal and sets a very dangerous precedent in the land acquisition and tenure system in Uganda with far reaching implications. If such impunity and arbitrariness could be exhibited in a matter under probe by Parliament, the dispossession must be alarming to other ordinary and humble citizens of this country.

The resolutions that we, the movers of this minority report have, are: Parliament therefore finds the Registrar of Titles culpable for gross abuse of office and refers the matter to the IGG for further investigation with a view to prosecution, and recommends to the Head of Civil Service/Secretary to Cabinet for appropriate disciplinary action.

The Executive Director be held responsible for the contempt of Parliament and referred to the Head of Public Service for the appropriate disciplinary action.

8. 	We specifically address the contempt of Parliament. Under Ref. AB 287/508/01, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, following complaints from the residents on the disputed land, for emphasis issued a directive to the Executive Director of UIA and all stakeholders dated 19 September 2013. This directive was to the effect that while the committee’s investigations were on going, all parties are directed to preserve the status quo until Parliament pronounces itself on the matter. 

Uganda Investment Authority was specifically directed to halt such activities, which may affect the current status quo. However, UIA and Abeki ignored Parliament and rushed the said payments so that they can render the petition and investigation vain. It is a constitutional command for members, agencies and institutions of Government to defend the institution of Parliament, the third arm of Government.

On the above premises, the purported sale agreement of 4 November 2013 is in contempt of Parliament and must not be legitimised by this very Parliament. Uganda Investment Authority should be directed by Parliament to reverse that particular transaction and refund the money to Abeki.

Recommendations

In view of the stated findings and observations, the process, sale and transfer of land comprised in Plot 5, Block II LRU 995 Folio 6, measuring 4.57 square miles, by Uganda Investment Authority, a government agency, to Abeki Farm Enterprises Ltd belonging to the area LC III Chairperson, Mr Emmanuel Kamihingo, is shrouded in illegalities and irregularities. These include disregard for the relevant provisions of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, as amended; the Land Act, Cap 237; the Registration of Titles Act, Cap 270; the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act 2003, as amended, and renders the sale of this land null and void. This is coupled with the flagrant disregard of the due process and contempt of Parliament. 

On those premises, it is recommended that:

1. 	The Registrar of Titles invokes sections 73 and 90 of the Registration of Titles Act, Cap 230, to restore the title back to the original status quo, that is, to UIA. This would then allow a transparent disposal process to begin.

2. 	Money irregularly deposited on the UIA account by Askar, Shs 205 million, and Rift Valley Investments, Shs 200 million, by EFT and RTGS respectively, be reversed.

3. 	Parliament upholds the January 31st 2008 resolution of the stakeholders’ meeting chaired by the then Minister of State for Lands, hon. Kasirivu Atwooki, which resolved that UIA adheres to the law and gives the sitting tenants/bona fide occupants in this case the first option of buying their interests in the land under dispute.

4. 	Finally, Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is to recommend that the honourable House adopts this minority report. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The majority and minority have reported; your report is now complete. 

6.12
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the minority report for one reason. Yesterday, I was in this House and I was highlighting the plight of the sitting tenants. This is actually being seen when you look at bona fide occupants of a piece of land. It is now becoming apparent in this country that the poor are not looked at as people who have a right.

Madam Speaker, from the look of things, you will see that Uganda Investment Authority first entered into a transaction with no due diligence. One would wonder, if any of those officers involved were buying their personal land, would they buy a piece of land without even a survey or ascertaining what is on the ground? I do not think any of the people, including my good friend, hon. Ruhindi, would buy a piece of land without carrying out a survey to know the demarcation and encumbrances on the piece of land.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, when you look at the circumstances under which this property moved from Uganda Investment Authority to another party, it was clear that by that time, Uganda Investment Authority knew that the land to which it was the registered proprietor had encumbrances. This is a government entity; they ought to have known that if you hand over these poor people on the land to a land dealer of some sort, we will have no kind words for these people. 

From the agreement that was executed first with the vendors - the people who sold to Uganda Investment Authority - they had undertaken to deal with all encumbrances on the land. I have had the benefit to look at the agreement. They actually knew at that moment that if there was any obligation, which may arise as a result of that transaction, they would undertake to make good that contract.

Madam Speaker, this smacks of impunity. Despite the fact that both the main report and the minority report recognised the rights of the bona fide occupants, here a transaction is actually concluded. I also looked at the caveat by these bona fide occupants. I have looked at the records and I have seen the letter by the registrar of land registration in that area. He was communicating to these people that there is a caveat, which was lodged in 2013. My good friend, hon. Migereko, may explain under what circumstances a land title may be transferred when there is a caveat. 

I have read the affidavits in the caveat, which clearly shows what these people are saying. They are not objecting to the title but they are only saying that whoever buys should be aware that they have interests in that piece of land. Here a government department says that you have a caveat on the land but we have transferred the land to another party –(Member timed out.)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for tabling this report. I also thank those who have given us the minority report for carrying out such detailed research.

Madam Speaker, these are very grave matters and from the look of things, even the honourable who has just contributed says so. Is it possible that we can give ourselves a chance to go and study these matters in detail and then come and be able to discuss them? This is because it really needs thorough study and we will need to make recommendations. I beg to propose, Madam Speaker.

6.17
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you, members, and the committee that made efforts to establish the facts. 

I agree with hon. Jovah Kamateeka that this is not an easy matter to jigsaw through; it is a very complicated matter and she is right. However, one party is continuing aggressively to try and dispose the bona fide occupants. Fictitious charges are being levied against them and they spend days at the Police at Ssembabule while their cows invade people’s homes. 

One may not carry out an eviction order but there is aggressiveness. They open your gardens, graze their cattle and then they say “no, you are very violent” and they call in the Police. Instead of standing between these people, the Police carry them off and they are now in court and the cases are on-going. 

I would also agree with hon. Kamateeka that indeed members may need to read through the nitty-gritty issues. However, I would also like to draw your attention, Madam Speaker and members, to the need to take action. 

You may also realise that as the committee of Parliament was investigating the matter, the other party went ahead to dig dams and make their possession and occupation known. Therefore, the petitioners came back to Parliament complaining. 

Parliament wrote to the Executive Director, to Abeki and to all those concerned: “The purpose of this  communication is that while the committee’s investigations are on-going, all parties are directed to preserve the status quo until Parliament pronounced itself on the matter. Uganda Investment Authority is specifically directed to halt all such activities, which may affect the current status by altering the current land use.” This letter was signed by the chairman of the committee. They ignored this. 

That is why I was hurt that the chairman can stand on the Floor of Parliament and say “Yes, Abeki are now the registered owners”. Yes, they were registered but after defying a directive from Parliament. You cannot uphold this and say “Yes, they are now the rightful owners”. 

The people ran and placed a caveat and thought that maybe as these are powerful people, let us be protected by Government. The caveat is very clear, forbidding any transaction, change or transfer. The caveat is still standing on the title but –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to decide; are we debating or adjourning? The reports are big and there are areas where they differ and where they agree. We shall have to take a decision between the minority report and the majority report. I think let members go and internalise them and then when we come back, we will debate. Okay, so we defer this.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I totally agree with your ruling that this is a very important and useful report and it is so technical.

Madam Speaker, I have also heard the minority report and it is very important and informative. However, I have tried to look through my iPad but I cannot get it. I was wondering if he could once again provide it so that we access both reports concurrently.

MR KENNETH KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information to my honourable colleague is that it can be hard to find but it is part of the main report. Maybe I can help you with your iPad. 

THE SPEAKER: That is dot com. Support is allowed in the Chamber.

MR KASAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a proposal. Considering that the report has been forwarded to Parliament and the Minister for Lands holds the docket under which the transactions have been taking place, wouldn’t it be good for the minister to give a response to issues raised in the report? We can then debate from a position of knowledge about what the minister has done as far as the issues raised in both the main and minority report are concerned? This will help us debate effectively and minimise the haggling that could take place.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do you want to find time to speak to the House earlier than the general debate?

THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, as per the proposal of hon. Kamateeka, which you have carried, I also need time. I need the technical backup of my people in order to be in a position to come up with an authoritative position on what is contained in the two reports. Thank you.

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We totally agree with your decision to allow us go and internalise the two reports. However, hon. Ssekikubo raised a pertinent issue; he said that those people who are on that land are continuously being evicted and harassed. Can we get an intervention before we come back to look at the reports and see how best they can be assisted? Thank you.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, probably what hon. Ssekikubo is saying could be true, but the situation in Sembabule is far worse than what he is saying. Amidst our investigation, we got reports, by coincidence from the two parties, Abeki Farm Enterprises and also from the occupants of the land. We sent another team from the committee which came with photographs showing that those residents had put up more permanent buildings and they have also dug fresh dams. 

Although we had stopped Abeki Enterprises and told them not to go on in the interim, they have also re-opened their existing dams. So, there is a lot of conflict -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, that is what is on the ground and we have got photographs to that effect and they are also attached to the report.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I am amazed that the chairman who was defied - it was you who was defied and a transaction was entered into - is the chairman who is now saying that the other group purchased. You ought to be sensitive, Mr Chairman.

These are people who have been on that land. Can you show us the new dam? In fact, it is the other party, which has taken excavators and earth movers to dig dams. Be fair, Mr Chairman. You are really hurting us when we see you having an opportunity to guide this country and you are not doing so because powerful people are taking care of you. This is unacceptable. Now you are trying to balance the two and it is not fair. 

I will tell you that there is one group, which is down, and another group, which is arresting others. That is what the member is saying. In the meantime, I am forced to go and bail out people on trumped up charges. Those are the facts pertaining on the ground. Do not say that the two parties are busy doing this; no! Some of them are weak and that is why we speak for them. The powerful are so powerful and that is why they can even bull-doze the ministry and the land registry and do anything they please. 

As a matter of fact, Mr Chairman, at this historical moment when you can do something, make a difference for your country.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall not go into that. Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done during this time. We had a Business Committee meeting today to discuss how to manage this coming week. We realised that even if we were to come ourselves, the Cabinet members will not be here, the bulk of the backbenchers will not be here; there will be a few members of this House alone with the Speaker. Therefore, we think that it will not be fair to ask people to come when we will not be able to do anything. As such, I want to adjourn the House to 17th February at 2.00 p.m. 

I also appeal to Government to bring the proposals. You know, people think that I have the proposals but I do not have them. I need proposals for the constitutional amendments. The country is really waiting and we urge you that when you come back on Tuesday, please, this is what we need urgently. Thank you very much. House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 17 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)
